Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday 19 February 2009 .
Statement by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , I have chosen to speak in the language of the country in which this terrible occurrence took place .
Mr President , on Saturday night in Northern Ireland we were all - I think , like everyone - very shocked : two young soldiers brutally murdered in cold blood .
It is Northern Ireland 's worst nightmare .
I have been a Member of this Parliament for almost 20 years , and I had hoped that I would never again have to stand in this Parliament and offer sympathy to the families of people who have lost their lives in Northern Ireland .
I am very saddened that I have to do this again today .
These young men did what many young men would do : they ordered a pizza from the local pizzeria , for three hours after that they were to board an aeroplane and fly to Afghanistan .
They did not make it .
Our thoughts can only go out to them today as they were cut down in the prime of life .
Now is not the time to say anything other than words of sympathy to their families .
But it is now a time when those families need that support .
Those who carried out that deed will probably not listen to any words of condemnation that I say .
But I have to say this : they can never succeed - they cannot win - because it is the democratic process in Northern Ireland that has spoken , and that must win .
Though it may at times have faults , it has brought a different life to my people in Northern Ireland : they have found a better life , they have experienced that better life , and I want to see them continue with that better life .
I add my words of sympathy to the families to your own .
( Applause )
Mr President , I too condemn unreservedly the killing of two British soldiers and the injuring of four others outside the Massereene barracks in the town of Antrim last Saturday .
The Real IRA , a fringe republican group in Northern Ireland , has claimed responsibility for this horrific attack , which is the first deadly attack on Northern Ireland security forces for 12 years .
Those who perpetrated these terrorist acts must be brought to justice and made to account for their horrific crimes .
Their attacks do not command political support from the people of Northern Ireland .
The Good Friday Peace Agreement of 1998 clearly lays out the framework for political and economic development in Northern Ireland .
The structures laid out in that Agreement are working well in support of democracy , the rule of law , human rights , and peace and reconciliation .
We cannot , and will not , allow these individuals to destroy the peace that we have worked so long and hard to achieve in Northern Ireland .
Mr President , thank you for your words of condolence on behalf of our British soldiers who lost their lives on Saturday evening .
It is appreciated in Northern Ireland that you should , at this time , think of those who mourn in that regard .
Those who murdered the two soldiers seek political advance through the path of violence .
I wish I could say that they will not succeed but , sadly , in Northern Ireland it seems that violence does pay - so much so that today we have three convicted IRA terrorists as government ministers , and our joint first minister McGuinness is someone who Peter Robinson - at a time when he opposed terrorists in government - said had personally murdered at least 12 soldiers .
He is no better than or different to the Antrim terrorists who stood over the dying soldiers and pumped more bullets into their bodies .
Now that vile trigger-man , McGuinness - once described by Mr Robinson as ' the Bogside butcher ' - shamefully shares the highest office in my land .
Such is what happens when you treat with terrorists .
I trust that the terrorists who have returned to our streets will never be treated with and that the lessons of the past will be learnt and rectified .
Ladies and gentlemen , we cannot invite all Irish Members to speak .
I have spoken on behalf of us all , and that should be sufficient .
Do you agree that this has been a worthy tribute to those who lost their lives ?
Thank you .
I also have a brief statement to make on yesterday 's International Women 's Day .
To mark the occasion , I wish today to extend a particular welcome to all the female Members of this House and give them an emphatic vote of thanks for their commitment .
I also wish to advocate that we do our utmost to make the principle of gender equality a reality at both European and international level .
A hundred years ago , 15 000 women demonstrated in New York for the recognition of their dignity and rights .
We pay tribute to their legacy today .
There is no doubt that a great deal has been accomplished since then in terms of the recognition and protection of women 's rights and the promotion of equal opportunities for men and women in all areas of society .
We must not let up in our endeavours ; a great deal more must be done to realise gender equality within the European Union and also to increase the participation of women in work , civil society and politics .
In the opinion of the European Parliament , there is scope for further increasing the present degree of participation by women in decision-making at local , national and European Union level .
Our Member States must find ways of encouraging and supporting women 's participation in the decision-making process and in politics at both national and international level .
We are only a few months away from the European elections .
I wish to emphasise today that the participation of women in these elections and balanced gender representation in the European Parliament are particularly important both to the democratic development of the European Union and to our society as a whole .
In conclusion , I should like to remind the House that many wars on this earth hit many women particularly hard , and we are working to prevent the use of harassment and rape of women as weapons of war .
We must defend the dignity of all the people of this earth and must never let up in our commitment .
Thank you for your attention .
( Applause )
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Composition of Parliament : see Minutes
Request for the defence of parliamentary immunity : see Minutes
Follow-up to a request for the defence of immunity : see Minutes
Composition of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Signature of acts adopted under codecision : see Minutes
Request for urgent procedure : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( submission ) : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Order of business
The final version of the draft agenda for this part-session as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday 5 February pursuant to Rules 130 and 131 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed .
Monday :
Firstly , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament has requested that the vote on the report by Mrs Kósáné Kovács on the social situation of the Roma be held tomorrow instead of on Thursday as scheduled .
Secondly , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats has also requested that the vote on Mr Reul 's report on possible solutions to the challenges in relation to oil supply be held tomorrow .
In both cases , the deadline for alternative joint motions for resolutions is this evening , which means that it is technically impossible to vote on these texts tomorrow .
However , the votes could be held on Wednesday instead of tomorrow . Are there any objections to this ?
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I regret that it is not possible to hold the vote tomorrow , as several representatives of the Roma have planned to attend , thinking the vote was scheduled for then .
If this is absolutely impossible , it must of course be held on Wednesday , but I wish to reiterate that , in view of the visit by the Roma representatives , and with the agreement of the political groups , it should surely be possible to make an exception .
This political will has been noted .
I have been told that , in accordance with our Rules of Procedure , it is only possible to vote on Wednesday .
However , we can let the representatives of the Roma know that this is the case , so as to express our political will .
Then we would be able to vote on both requests on Wednesday .
( Parliament approved the request )
Tuesday :
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance has requested that a Commission statement on MON810 genetically modified maize be included on the agenda and that the debate be wound up with the tabling of a motion for a resolution .
Who wishes to justify this request ?
Mr Cohn-Bendit ?
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as you know , there was a clear qualified majority against the Commission 's request at the last Environment Council meeting .
The Commission made such requests back in 2006 and 2007 , and each time the Council opposed them .
Now , this request will probably be repeated at the next Environment Council meeting , this time directed against France and Greece .
Parliament should simply take a clear position , to put an end to this debate once and for all .
It is not the Commission 's job to constantly attempt to buy countries because of an initiative that has been rejected by various political camps .
That is why we want to see , at long last , a debate with the Council and Commission and a motion for a resolution , so as to put an end to the matter once and for all - and this before the elections so that voters know who stands for what .
Is that not right , Mr Ferber ?
Thank you very much .
That was the justification .
Who speaks against the request ?


on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , as Mr Swoboda has just pointed out , I support one part of Mr Cohn-Bendit 's request and oppose the other .
I think he is right ; the Commission 's behaviour is certainly remarkable , to put it politely .
Secondly , it is true that the situation in the Council is confusing : some Member States share the Commission 's opinion and others do not .
We have a similar situation in this House .
It is true that we need a discussion with the Commission - even though it has already pressed ahead with this many times before against the recommendations of Parliament and even of some members of the Council - and we support the call for a Commission statement to this end .
The second part is the resolution .
I have read the request by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance very carefully , and Mr Cohn-Bendit 's justification related more to the election campaign than to GM maize , which was very interesting .
The Verts / ALE Group also requests a procedure to vote out the Commission - a vote of no confidence in the Commission .
Yet so far-reaching is this step that we believe the matter must first be carefully examined , which is why we support the debate - indeed !
In addition , there is a specialist committee that should be dealing with the resolution ; it should present us with a motion for a resolution at one of the coming plenary sittings that is properly prepared rather than cobbled together quickly this week .
Thank you very much .
I now give the floor to Mr Fjellner , who may present a different position again .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , I oppose both parts of Mr Cohn-Bendit 's proposals because less than a month ago we debated this topic and voted on it in the Committee on the Environment , as we heard was suggested earlier .
So I would say it has been done , and especially at this time , at the end of the legislative period , when we hardly have time for important legislative talks , then I think it would be wrong to give this specific topic priority .
We cannot give priority to debates , at this time , which have already been dealt with and especially to do that just because the Greens feel that they are not getting enough attention in the run-up to the election would be really irresponsible .
On the one hand , a request has been made to place the topic of a resolution on the agenda ; on the other , Mr Fjellner says that neither a statement nor a resolution should be placed on the agenda .
I would suggest first voting on the procedure , and then we can discuss whether we have just the statement .
In addition , I have received a request for a roll call vote .
This roll call vote is to determine who supports the request by Mr Cohn-Bendit and the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance .
The vote is opened .
( DE ) Mr President , this should not be made any more complicated .
I am sure you are right on a formal level ; you are a president with such a firm grasp of things that I do not doubt it .
Yet I got the impression that Mrs Frassoni agrees with our proposal .
We are holding a discussion with the Commission this week , and I would also request that this be placed on the agenda .
At the same time , I request that we ask the specialist committee responsible to prepare a resolution .
I believe that would be a further-reaching request on which you could hold an initial vote .
We could spend another half hour discussing this .
The correct procedure is that we vote on whether or not to meet the request by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance .
I have tried to help out with my proposal that we hold another discussion afterwards as to whether we want a Commission statement , but things cannot be done in any other order .
( Parliament rejected the request )
Wednesday :
I wish to inform you that 113 amendments have been tabled to the report by Mrs Elisa Ferreira on a European Economic Recovery Plan .
This exceeds the threshold of 50 amendments laid down in Rule 156 , and so I have referred these texts for consideration by the committee responsible .
The committee meets this evening , and the debate on the report remains on the agenda for Wednesday .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats has requested that the oral questions to the Council and the Commission on SIS II be dealt with at 3 p.m. , as the first item of the afternoon sitting .
Since all the political groups have given their agreement , the agenda will be amended accordingly .
I have just been informed that I have overlooked something relating to Tuesday : the Socialist Group in the European Parliament has requested that the afternoon debates be extended by half an hour and consequently Question Time with the Commission be held from 6.30 p.m. to 8 p.m.
Is that all right ?
( Parliament approved the request )
Thursday :
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe have requested that the debate on the oral question to the Commission on the 50th anniversary of the Tibetan uprising be wound up with the tabling of a motion for a resolution .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we believe that on this highly significant occasion - the 50th anniversary of the uprising of the Tibetan people and the flight of the Dalai Lama - it is very important that our Parliament should express its views in a resolution and not just in a debate .
This is not the first time : this Parliament has always stood by the Dalai Lama and the cause of the freedom of the Tibetan people and we cannot draw back now , not least because the situation is not getting any better .
The situation is constantly deteriorating and even very recently we have been subject to intimidation by the Chinese Government regarding Tibetan freedom .
I therefore feel it is crucial that we not only talk but also take decisions .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a year ago we passed a resolution supporting the position taken by the Dalai Lama in negotiations with China , that is to say non-violence and autonomy - not independence - for Tibet .
China broke up these talks , accusing the Dalai Lama of being violent , causing violence and seeking independence rather than autonomy .
So , today , on the 50th anniversary of the Lhasa uprising , it would be completely incomprehensible if this Parliament did not intervene , not only to defend the Dalai Lama and non-violence , but also to defend the position and reputation of Parliament .
We are not asking for other items to be taken off the agenda ; we are simply asking Parliament to have the courage to express an opinion .
For this reason we are requesting that a resolution be put to the vote in addition to the debate .
Mr President , I had not expected to speak , but , given the fact that this is a very important Parliament and this is a time of global credit crisis , and that we ought to be taken seriously by our interlocutors across the world , we should not really be focusing on issues like this when we have to build bridges and partnerships for our trade and economic activities right now .
I appreciate what you are saying , but that was not in accordance with our Rules of Procedure .
( Parliament approved the request )
Regarding the debate on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament has requested that the sub-item on Sierra Leone be replaced by a new sub-item entitled ' Expulsions of aid agencies from Darfur ' .
Mr President , I shall make it brief .
The situation in Darfur has become extremely critical and is made even more desperate by the expulsion of the various aid agencies in particular .
That is why we want to give priority to this now .
I would ask for your support . Thank you .
Darfur is now an item on the agenda .
( The order of business was adopted )
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
The next item is the one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
( EL ) Mr President , the adverse impact of the global financial crisis can now be seen in international trade .
One need only note that the rate of growth in global trade fell from 8.5 % in 2006 to 5.5 % in 2007 and was in the order of just 4 % in 2008 .
A special mechanism has been introduced within the framework of the World Trade Organisation to monitor the measures that have been and are being adopted by the Member States of the organisation in order to support the sectors of the economy that have been hit .
Given the particular importance of external trade to the economy , growth and employment in the European Union , the Commission is called upon , within the framework of the application of the economic recovery plan , to immediately assume a leading role in a multilateral initiative to support trade .
It is also called upon to correlate any such initiative with the work of the World Bank group and other multilateral development organisations .
Mr President , the international , political , military , economic and financial architecture is under pressure due to the current crisis .
The EU is a central part of this architecture .
It appeared as the only formula for Europe to preserve its role in the bipolar world .
It enlarged successfully to reunite the continent at the end of the Cold War , and now it is called upon to preserve previous achievements and continue integration once better times come again .
It is not an easy task , particularly for the current presidency , but also for the coming ones , which will have to deal with the continuing institutional impasse over the Lisbon Treaty and transition to a new Parliament and Commission , while fighting protectionist tendencies , threats to renationalise common policies and potential international crises in our neighbourhood .
The EU is therefore at a crucial moment .
It can either make it or break it .
Our success will depend on complete understanding that solidarity is the only way in which we can face off all these great challenges and continue our odyssey in world affairs .
( RO ) Following the parliamentary elections in Romania , the political parties representing the opposition are in a difficult situation at the moment .
In fact , the parties in power are attempting to isolate and even exclude them from local political and administrative life .
Replacing , on political grounds , local administration policy-makers during the current economic crisis highlights a lack of responsibility on the government 's part .
This entails , as a result , the risk that the pace of completion of projects specifically aimed at local communities will slow down .
The democratic credibility of the current government may be cast in doubt in the case of the two councillors from Braşov 's local municipal council , Vasile Bran and Iulian Mara , who were elected by local citizens and whose position has not been formalised eight months after the local elections .
Vasile Bran 's election was unjustifiably invalidated by the decision of the local council , while Iulian Mara could not take the oath as the decision which validated his position was contested through administrative legal proceedings by the Prefect 's Institution for Braşov County .
As a result of the preoccupation of the representatives of those in power with usurping local administration functions , without respecting the citizens ' wishes , the law was broken and the two councillors were replaced by two other people at the majority 's discretion .
I feel the current government must be aware that winning a majority does not assume that you can flout the law .
Abuses of this kind must be stopped and the law must be enforced .
In fact , the citizens ' vote must not be invalidated by the dictatorship of the majority .
( PL ) Mr President , last week an informal delegation of MEPs visited Palestine and Israel .
We also visited the Gaza Strip .
What we saw there has aroused in me a great feeling of outrage and strong feelings of sympathy towards the occupied Palestinian nation .
The outrage I feel is shared by United Nations agencies which are active in that region .
Mr President , I can see only one way out of this situation : a Palestinian State should be established very quickly and unconditionally .
In 1948 , when their country was founded , the Jewish people did not ask the Palestinians for their consent .
Today , Israel must not obstruct the will of the Palestinian people .
I repeat : unconditional and urgent assistance should be provided to an oppressed nation , thus putting an end to this old conflict .
I believe that such measures would strengthen peace in the whole world , but , above all , we should do it simply because the Palestinians deserve their own State .
( EL ) Mr President , it would appear that the suggestions which the US Secretary of State made to the Israelis during her visit included that they stop building and extending settlements on the West Bank , open the road blocks , and stop building the wall and expelling Palestinians from East Jerusalem and , for Gaza , that they allow the cement and construction materials needed to rebuild the area to be imported .
These are good suggestions , but it would appear that they have fallen on deaf ears because , while the Israelis are not allowing these materials to pass into Gaza , they have had no hesitation in illegally quarrying three-quarters of the materials supplied to the Israeli construction industry from the West Bank , mercilessly destroying the natural environment , while the legal owners of the land have derived no financial advantage whatsoever .
It is time the United States and the European Union lifted Israel 's impunity and went beyond words and suggestions .
( Applause )
( DE ) Mr President , I wish to draw attention to something that particularly besmirches this House : the pension fund .
According to recent reports in the magazine Stern , at least 76 German MEPs were members of this fund .
This relates only to the association 's list , however , not to the fund .
I hereby call on you , Mr Pöttering , as President of Parliament , to send the complete list of fund members to the administration of the lower house of the German Parliament as , under the relevant regulations in your home country , the suspicion of serious fraud would automatically arise if it were to turn out that duplicate payments had been made .
This must then be followed by the relevant investigations , and the German authorities have a right to learn of this from you .
In the same way , we all have a right to know this fund 's deficit .
Something is being kept quiet here , and there is the risk of speculators being bailed out once again to the tune of many millions at taxpayers ' expense at the end of the parliamentary term .
That cannot be allowed to happen !
Parliament 's Bureau will deal with this matter in a legally correct , politically sound manner - you can rest assured of that .
Mr President , the International Atomic Energy Agency 's latest report concludes that Iran has produced enough low-enriched uranium to make an atomic bomb .
Most alarming is the speed of Iran 's progress .
According to the Agency 's estimates , Tehran has increased the number of uranium-enriching centrifuges by 34 times in less than three years .
In the next five years , however , Iran plans to add 45 000 centrifuges to the existing 5 600 .
That will mean an ability to manufacture nuclear weapons on an industrial scale .
That also means deliverable atomic bombs , considering developing missile capacity and the launching of Iran 's first satellite .
That means that the policy of containing Iran only by half-hearted sanctions and diplomacy has failed .
It has only provided Tehran with the necessary time to complete its nuclear programme .
Therefore it is high time to abandon the de facto policy of appeasement and concentrate on a joint EU response to possible nuclear blackmail or an ultimatum by Iran .
If then , too , negotiations ' as usual ' are our only option , this will mean political surrender .
( DE ) Madam President , we are going to be dealing with - though unfortunately not debating - the report by Mrs Kósáné Kovács concerning the Roma issue .
I should like to take this opportunity to highlight the issue given the very difficult situation at present .
There have been a number of incidents in Hungary , but the problem is not limited to that country , where the economic crisis and the social problems perhaps explain the renewed increase in attacks on Roma .
This is something that is particularly reprehensible .
Several Roma - including Austrian Roma - have approached me and asked me to bring this up , as fear has gripped the Roma community in Europe once again .
I should like to urge the Commission , too , to monitor the situation very closely and to do all it can to ensure that the Roma - and other minorities too , but here we are particularly talking about the Roma - do not need to live in fear again in Europe : they should not have to do so in this day and age .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in Italy , the Communications Regulatory Authority , an independent body , has issued its 43rd resolution against the state television authority for breaching the rights of Italian citizens to be informed about initiatives by the Radicals - its 43rd resolution .
In Italy , since the elections - ten months ago now - there have been no electoral debates broadcast ; they have been illegally suspended .
The Italian parliament 's supervisory committee on radio and television is not meeting , which is also against the law .
This problem is not just about Mr Berlusconi : it is about a system of the Right , Centre and Left that is infringing the civil and political rights of Italian citizens .
Mr Pannella and I must leave our work tomorrow and hasten to Italy to try and create forms of non-violent resistance against this new form of denial of democracy .
We shall send a message to all our fellow Members to explain in detail the nature of these infringements and to ask for your support and assistance .
( PL ) Madam President , once again in this Chamber I am forced to speak up for the rights of national minorities in Lithuania , which are being ruthlessly broken and violated by the Lithuanian authorities and judicial system .
In the region around Vilnius over 70 % of the population are Polish .
Until now , the names of streets and towns were bilingual , as they are in many countries of the European Union with national minorities .
Not long ago , the Supreme Administrative Court of Lithuania judged the placing of street name signs in Polish alongside signs with Lithuanian names to be illegal , and ordered their removal .
The local government in Vilnius has implemented this decision - the Polish street names in the region where most residents are from the Polish minority have been removed .
This is not acceptable in a country which has been a member of the European Union for five years .
It is a symptom of extreme nationalism , shows a lack of respect for the rights of national minorities and is a violation of the fundamental principles on which the European Union is built .
I call upon the Lithuanian authorities to restore the Polish names of streets and towns in regions where most residents are part of the Polish minority .
( EL ) Madam President , terrorism against workers with the support of repressive state mechanisms is now a standard approach in the slave workplace .
Thousands of workers are being made redundant and workers ' fundamental labour and social rights are being cut to fit to the Procrustean bed .
One typical example is in the United Kingdom , where it has been discovered that a private company is collecting information about workers ' trade union , social and political activities and selling it to companies .
In Greece the labour disputes to have laid-off workers reinstated has been labelled illegal and abusive .
The workers are obviously determined to defend their rights and have adopted as their standard the words of the 22-year-old worker Nikos Nikopoulos in his open letter to the public prosecutor to the Supreme Court of Appeal in Greece , in which he says , among other things :
' There are certain things in this life for me which cannot be bought or sold .
I prefer my wage to be my inalienable right , to claim the riches which I produce and which belong to me .
My intransigent refusal to be bribed or terrorised has caused me to be dismissed for a second time .
I received direct threats against my life and the life of my family . '
This statement truly illustrates the will of and the path being taken by the workers .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( HU ) In recent days , perhaps partly on account of the crisis , popular opinion in the Member States that acceded in the last five years has responded with increasing sensitivity to any step that might call into question or discredit the equal status and identical standards of their membership within the Union .
As regards my own electoral district , we have heard accusations on Swedish television and then on the internet that , in the village of Harkakötöny , the way geese are plucked constitutes cruelty to animals , whereas , in fact , no geese have been bred there or in the place mentioned for years .
I am glad that a charge of libel has been filed regarding this matter .
Similar libellous statements were made recently against breeders in my country concerning force-feeding of geese .
These statements called for a boycott against the processors that has caused economic damages .
Interestingly , no such accusations have been levelled against the old Member States .
These are actions taken out of economic interest , but another , uniquely political form of defamation consists of statements alleging ethnically-based attacks against the Roma population in Hungary as if these were matters of fact , although to date it has for the most part been impossible to provide proof that such attacks have indeed taken place .
I ask the Commission to monitor such polemics closely and especially not to spread them , since such statements could seriously discredit the European Union 's prestige in my country in the run-up to the elections .
( FR ) Madam President , as our Parliament 's permanent rapporteur for humanitarian action , I have just returned from Kivu in the Democratic Republic of Congo and I had hoped to give you an optimistic message about the resolution of this situation and the return of displaced persons to their homes .
Unfortunately , my optimism has been dampened by the decision taken by President El Béchir concerning the biggest humanitarian crisis , that of Darfur .
True , President El Béchir , it is correct to postpone it as it is in fact a fight against impunity , and it is right to ensure respect for international humanitarian law .
However , President El Béchir has just increased the evidence against him by taking a decision which is ill-conceived on two counts : first , because it adds to the grievances already lodged against him and , secondly , because this on its own could be brought before the International Criminal Court as the consequences for Darfur are extraordinarily serious on a humanitarian level .
The world then will not forget , but mere words will have little effect , Madam President .
I realise that we were changing the issue , but we must go beyond mere words and turn to action .
( PL ) Madam President , the fact that EU citizens have to migrate in order to find work , the fact that they have to be mobile because there is no work to be found where they live , and the poverty associated with being out of work , often mean that children are less well cared for , and sometimes even neglected .
The developing economic crisis threatens to cause a serious rise in unemployment levels .
This may lead to an increase in the problem of street children .
Such children lack suitable nutrition and health care , their education is interrupted and they sometimes come into contact with criminal elements .
At a time of demographic collapse , this is not only squandering the development opportunities of individual children , but also poses a social threat for the next generation .
It is essential for us to address this problem .
( PT ) Yesterday was International Women 's Day .
It was marked at a time when the situation of women , particularly working women , is getting much worse as they continue to suffer from inequality and discrimination .
Millions of women and young girls are currently having to deal with a serious deterioration in their living and working conditions , pitiful pensions , redundancies , unemployment , precarious and poorly paid work , and widespread poverty and social exclusion .
These problems have a particularly serious impact on female workers and pensioners and on women with disabilities , who are denied the right to have rights on such crucial issues for a dignified life .
As a result , in addition to saluting all the women in the European Union and the world , I want to call here for urgent measures and new policies to ensure that women can enjoy their rights as full citizens in work , family life , society and politics .
We must create the conditions so that working women have rights , so that they can be mothers and workers without penalty , and so that they can earn fair wages and pensions allowing them to live with dignity .
- ( SK ) Once again we have a problem involving respect for ethnic minority rights in Slovakia and it is the fault of the education minister , a member of the extreme nationalist governing party .
He has issued a decision under which schools where teaching takes place in ethnic minority languages may henceforth use only history text books that are literal translations of the Slovak ones .
It follows from this that history will be taught according to the dictates of the governing party rather than being based on the facts .
This conflicts with the practice to date and also with internationally guaranteed minority rights .
In the EU every minority community has the natural right to learn its own history .
Hungarian teachers , and indeed the entire Hungarian community in Slovakia , are justifiably outraged .
It is unacceptable for an extremist party to be constantly putting pressure on minorities in this way .
It is irresponsible during a global economic crisis for someone to feel the need to provoke ethnic minorities .
It is playing with fire to behave like this in times of such uncertainty .
( SV ) Madam President , many , like me , are concerned about the growing anti-Semitism in Europe .
Over the weekend , a Davis Cup tennis match between Sweden and Israel was played in my home town of Malmö .
It was no ordinary match .
It was played without spectators because the local political leadership felt it could not guarantee security , a view that many of us have criticised .
There were demonstrations in connection with the match , one of which was very violent .
Certainly , it is legitimate to criticise the policies of the state of Israel , but this criticism must not turn into hatred towards Jews in general , in other words into anti-Semitism .
Survivors of the holocaust should not need to hear that people in Europe are chanting ' murderers , murderers ' when there is a gathering to show support for the state of Israel .
In the aftermath of the war in Gaza , there were a number of attacks on Jewish property and Jewish interests , including in my home town .
All democratic forces must be extremely clear on this matter .
Europe has a terrible history and this must never happen again .
( PL ) Madam President , as someone for whom the ideals on which the European Union is based are more than just a slogan , I am glad that the European Parliament is going to provide the venue for a debate associated with the 50th anniversary of the Tibetan uprising .
At the same time , I am surprised and saddened by the fact that the date of the debate has been set for 12 March .
I would like to remind those who have forgotten that the Tibetan uprising began on 10 March .
However , on that day , Parliament will be attending to such subjects as type-approval requirements for the general safety of motor vehicles and the charging of heavy goods vehicles .
They are important subjects .
Nevertheless , the people and institutions concerned with type-approval requirements for heavy goods vehicles would not be offended if the dates for these debates were changed round .
Perhaps 10 March marks an anniversary , related to this subject , which I do not know about .
Perhaps it is ' World Type-Approval for Heavy Goods Vehicles Day ' or ' Type-Approval Inspectors Day ' .
It would reflect very badly on Parliament if it turned out that this choice of date for the debate stemmed from a desire to reduce its significance .
( EL ) Madam President , the Commission proposal for a directive to abolish discrimination has come up against the opposition of many European citizens and , as a result , they are in the difficult position of doubting the validity of such a proposal , which touches on their right to decide on matters for which the European Union is not competent through their own state .
As we approach the European elections , I think that we should not raise such issues .
The abolition of symbols , the abolition of the right to decide on life belongs to each state .
At a time when the European Parliament is abolishing structures through which its MEPs can express themselves freely , such as cross-party groups , we cannot talk about abolishing discrimination .
Madam President , a month ago you and I paid our second visit of the year to Gaza .
Others have trod in our footsteps - Javier Solana has been there , Tony Blair has finally made it , and the President of Parliament has been there to see for himself the circumstances in which Palestinians are now living .
This Parliament asked for the economic blockade to be lifted , but , to a very large extent , it continues .
Week after week , the collective punishment of Palestinian people is maintained by the Israelis .
Our words are fine , but they have little value while Israel refuses to listen .
Madam Vice-President , I ask you to ask the President to call a meeting of the group leaders and his cabinet to consider how our words can be turned into deeds .
I face the question all the time from my constituents : ' You have an Association Agreement with Israel .
How is it that we maintain this relationship with one side , while that party ignores our interests and treats our words with such contempt ? '
Thank you , Mr Davies , I shall pass on your request .
( RO ) European values are especially important to the education system in Romania .
The election speeches from our fellow Members , László Tőkés , Csaba Sógor and Iulius Winkler , sometimes lose touch with reality .
Romania offers ethnic minorities wide-ranging instruction in their mother tongue .
I would like to highlight the important role that the state Babeş-Bolyai University in Cluj-Napoca plays in the provision of Hungarian-medium education .
The multi-cultural organisational system set up through Babeş-Bolyai University 's Charter in 1995 ensures complete , independent instruction in Romanian , Hungarian and German , as well as Jewish studies , at every level of academic qualification .
A number of signs and inscriptions in Hungarian and German are on display at Babeş-Bolyai University .
Seventeen faculties currently offer programmes of study in Romanian and Hungarian , with 11 faculties offering courses in Romanian and German .
There are also two faculties , Reformed Theology and Roman Catholic Theology , where the programmes of study are taught exclusively in Hungarian .
( SL ) I warmly welcome today 's decision by the Croatian government to respond positively , in principle , to the European Commission 's initiative for mediation between Slovenia and Croatia .
Unfortunately , the positive response also includes an unnecessary rider , a condition which significantly reduces the possibility of mediation .
However , it is important that we work together to create the conditions which will allow mediation to commence as soon as possible , which will defuse the political climate in both countries and enable dialogue to take place on better terms .
We must further promote the process of enlargement of the European Union and this is why we need the Lisbon Treaty .
Time is of the essence and I therefore hope that a framework mediation agreement will be drawn up shortly .
( GA ) Madam President , dairy farmers are in a very difficult situation .
The price of a litre of milk has fallen to between 22 and 24 cent , and there has been a sudden drop in worldwide demand for dairy products , particularly in Asia and in China as a result of the melamine scandal .
There are around twenty thousand dairy farmers in Ireland and thirty thousand people directly employed as a result of this .
There has also been a 3 % increase in production in the United States alone , as well as an increase in production in Brazil .
Another problem is the exchange rate between the euro and the pound sterling .
It is clear that short term aid must be provided to the farmers to help them survive .
One thing that should be done is that an intervention scheme should be brought in , as has proven very successful in the past .
( BG ) Thank you , Madam President .
International Women 's Day is an occasion for us to take stock of our gender equality policy .
Many people believe that this policy is aimed only at women in the pursuit of the same opportunities as men in terms of employment , salary and free time .
Such objectives are just as relevant in an economic crisis , but equality policy should focus on men as well .
The crisis has an impact on the labour market .
There are expectations that many of them will lose their jobs because of their higher salary and the reduction in labour-intensive activities in the finance sector .
There is a growing likelihood that men will have greater involvement in family life and a breakthrough is occurring among traditional social roles .
To what extent they are ready for this and whether the social adjustments can facilitate such a change are questions which will need to be answered .
The possible solutions vary between Member States , regions and communities .
This is why I am calling for the national equality plans to be updated and for flexible rules that meet the needs of men and women to the same degree .
( RO ) According to the statistics , a quarter of children in the European Union lead a sedentary lifestyle and have an unhealthy diet .
This results in an increased risk of having not only high blood pressure and diabetes , but other illnesses too .
In 2007 the European Parliament adopted the report on the role of sport in education .
In fact , it made compulsory the introduction of at least three hours of sport a week as part of educational programmes .
We know that physical education prepares children for a healthy lifestyle , passing on important social values such as self-discipline , solidarity , team spirit and fair play .
This is precisely why I am calling on the European Commission to monitor more closely the transposition into national legislation of and compliance with the compulsory requirement for a minimum of three hours of physical education a week in schools , as well as the increase in the number of sports halls and improvement in their basic equipment .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in the book by Albert Camus , the plague is announced futilely by a rat who comes and dies at our feet .
We do not want to be like useless rats that arrive to announce the anti-democratic , violent , anti-European plague that is now causing new catastrophes in Rome , Brussels , Jerusalem and Paris .
Mr Cappato has already said why tomorrow we will leave our work here , to rush to an activist fight of European and democratic resistance in our country .
The European Parliament is celebrating its 30th birthday .
If we think back to 30 years ago , there is much to be concerned about .
We are fighting , we are not troubled .
- ( SK ) In my speech I would like to focus the attention of the European Parliament on 15 March , which has been declared International Consumer Rights Day on the initiative of the organisation Consumers International .
This day presents an excellent opportunity for bringing the EU closer to its citizens through policies connected with consumer protection .
As a member of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection I have worked hard on this issue .
I am delighted about the enormous interest shown by young people who are getting actively involved in various consumer activities .
For example , in the Consumption for Life international competition for young consumers which is organised by the Slovak Association of Consumers , more and more young consumers are getting involved every year , with interesting tales about their first experiences concerning choice and consumer decisions .
I would like to encourage the EU Member State governments to strengthen and support consumer organisations .
Only strong , representative and effective non-governmental organisations can succeed in increasing consumers ' awareness of their rights .
Madam President , I , too , want to add my voice to those who have condemned the murderous , vicious and cowardly attack on the British Army barracks in Northern Ireland and I want to send my heartfelt sympathies to the families of all those who were injured or killed .
The particular issue I want to raise this evening is that on Wednesday night the Commission will issue a statement on its Green Paper on the EU workforce for health .
According to the Green Paper , the key to maintaining a sufficient workforce is to educate , recruit and retain young practitioners .
Yet in Ireland we have the very opposite situation , with a 16.5 % cut in undergraduate nursing places .
In my own region at St Angela 's College we have a cut of 25 % for general nursing and 40 % for intellectual-disability nursing .
The Commission must put pressure on Member States to ensure each country takes responsibility for training its own health-care workforce and that we also have an ethical requirement whereby we do not seek to recruit health-care workers from developing countries and damage their already vulnerable health-care systems .
( HU ) I have spoken up several times on behalf of the traditional national minorities .
Some of my colleagues have accused me of nationalism .
It is strange that the majority often tries to disguise its fear and anti-minority sentiment with accusations of nationalism or hate speech against minorities .
I hope my colleagues will not mind if I now speak up on behalf of a religious minority .
The Romanian Greek Catholic Church was banned during the Communist era .
After 1990 , it was reorganised and , similarly to other historical churches , it is trying to this day to recover its confiscated immovable property .
In Romania , a law is being drafted that , if adopted , would in effect take away this church 's real estate , currently in the process of being reclaimed .
I would like to call attention from this microphone to the twisted nature of this situation , to the way rights are being trampled on and to this disguised attempt at nationalisation .
It is unacceptable for the state to interfere detrimentally in the life of a church .
( BG ) Thank you , Madam President .
I would like to raise an issue which is a cause of deep distress .
Over the last two weeks we have been hearing reports from the Republic of Macedonia where certain church authorities expressed a desire to exhume the bodies of Bulgarian soldiers who died on that country 's territory in all wars throughout the 20th century .
The Bulgarian general public , and I am sure the same is true of the European general public , regard such calls as absolutely unacceptable .
No one has the right to make a mockery of the memory of those who have perished in wars .
What we must do is pay them honour and respect , observe the basic European principle of honouring the dead and keep to the best traditions of tolerance that we have .
I call on the European Parliament to bring it to the attention of the authorities in the Republic of Macedonia that such calls must not go unanswered by the government .
Let us hear clear , categorical assurances that no one in Macedonia will carry out such threats .
This would be a violation of basic cultural and national conventions for any civilised country .
( FR ) Madam President , we have just learned of the incredible sentence of six years imprisonment for two German lawyers , Horst Mahler and Sylvia Stolz .
This terrible verdict is motivated by the fact that these two express points of view which differ from the official version of the reality and extent of the history of the concentration camps in the Second World War .
Whatever one thinks of their opinions , it is extremely serious that , in the European Union today , citizens , and lawyers to boot , should be given such sentences for having disputed an historic fact .
It would appear that in today 's so-called democratic Germany there are still judges who would muzzle freedom of expression with the same zeal as those in National-Socialist Germany or in Communist Germany .
This is also the case , unfortunately , in other States in the Union , including France .
It is intolerable and very serious .
( PL ) Madam President , today I do not want to raise a question of a political nature .
Recently , one of my constituents , an enthusiastic supporter of standardisation , contacted me regarding the matter of standardising the plugs for mobile telephone charger units .
This matter only seems trivial .
I am convinced that if regulations were to be introduced in this field , they would be welcomed by all mobile phone owners .
From a technical point of view , the matter is very simple .
Such solutions were successful , for example , in the case of standards for compact discs - they can be used in all computers .
Perhaps it is worth reviewing such minor matters , in order to help our citizens .
They expect it of us .
The debate is closed .
2010 budget - Section III , Commission : ' Guidelines for Budget 2010 ' - Guidelines for the 2010 budget procedure - Sections I , II , IV , V , VI , VII , VIII and IX ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
by Mr Surján , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the Guidelines for the Budget 2010 procedure - Section III - Commission ;
by Mr Maňka , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the guidelines for the 2010 budget procedure - Sections I , II , IV , V , VI , VII , VIII and IX .
The European Parliament expects the draft 2010 budget to help Member States and citizens overcome the current crisis .
This is now our greatest concern .
In other words , the budget should lessen the apprehensions of European citizens and restore their confidence that they will have jobs and be able to make a living , and that they will be able to live in peace and security .
We are talking about those citizens whose money we are spending and to whom we are responsible .
Because of the financial crisis , Europeans are not sure whether their money is safe with the banks , and they do not know whether they will still have a job tomorrow . But they have other sorts of concerns and problems as well : how long will they be able to heat their homes , or whether there are any harmful chemicals or other causative agents in their food , and the list goes on .
Therefore , we would like a budget that restores citizens ' confidence not only in financial institutions , but in each other , and in solidarity on a European scale as well .
We know that not every problem can be solved with 1 % of GNI , but it matters whether small and medium-sized enterprises receive encouragement and support .
Is a harmonised , common energy policy being developed ?
Are we doing everything we can to combat climate change and encourage renewable energy sources ?
Will the protection of our common borders be more effective ?
Will the policy of cohesion be more fruitful , the process of catching up faster , and our food safer ?
Parliament sees that the budget is small in relation to these objectives , but it is also aware that Member States are not making full use even of the current budgetary framework .
Therefore we expect the European Commission to take decisive action to remove bureaucratic obstacles , concentrate expenditure on areas where utilisation was effective , and withdraw support from areas where there are regular surpluses .
Parliament is prepared to cooperate in monitoring whether the programmes launched are truly successful , and whether they fulfil the objective for which they were established .
We cannot be satisfied simply with determining that expenditures are lawful .
We ask for guarantees that they fulfil their purpose .
We ask for value , for results in exchange for the contributions of European citizens , and expect Member States to implement the programmes quickly and efficiently .
We ask the European Commission to take our requests seriously .
The European Parliament is the only EU institution in which citizens can exercise direct influence .
We stand closest to them and , in the report that has been submitted , it is their opinions that we have summarised .
There is still more than a month left before the submission of the preliminary budget .
There is time , therefore , for the Commission to consider Parliament 's opinion and include it in the proposals .
Furthermore , I would be very pleased if , contrary to custom , the Council and the Parliament did not amend the Commission 's proposal at cross-purposes , but if the three institutions could work together to overcome the crisis .
Ladies and gentlemen , I will end my remarks by thanking everyone who has contributed to this report for their work , including the secretariat of the Committee on Budgets , the members of the Commission , my political group 's experts and those who have submitted amendments .
I ask that you debate the proposals and then support them with your votes .
Let us offer hope and security to the citizens of Europe !
Thank you , Madam President .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , when putting together the budget of the European Parliament , we must focus on our core mission and make optimal use of resources for improving the legislative work of Parliament .
We must exclude matters unconnected with our mission from the budget as much as possible .
If we want MEPs to work effectively they must have the option of carrying out their duties in their own language if they so decide .
In many instances we could prevent difficulties and avoid wasting money if we could switch languages rapidly according to actual rather than planned attendance in debates .
Many of you are surely aware that in some committees documents have not been available even in the basic languages in time for them to be approved .
If there has to be an extraordinary meeting of the committee because of this or if there are other unnecessary delays we lose time and money .
As with translating we also need to increase the flexibility of interpreting services .
In my conversations with representatives of the various general secretariats of the European Parliament I have collected some very useful suggestions and information .
The representatives of the directorates themselves propose eliminating some of the reserves .
However , in some cases they will need our assistance .
There are numerous examples .
Ladies and gentlemen , surely none of you would consider that it would make Parliament less secure if both entrances to the Strasbourg Parliament building were not kept open in periods outside the plenary sessions .
Neither do we need to have guards physically present in some places , especially in Strasbourg and Luxembourg .
On the other hand the current security system has its defects .
We saw this ourselves in the recent raid on the branch of the ING Bank in the European Parliament building in Brussels and also in the threat to the lives of the two MEPs in Mumbai .
I believe that the proposals being drawn up by the directorate will bring improvements and also a better use of resources and surprising financial savings .
We can achieve further savings running into millions if we improve cooperation between the institutions .
The spare capacity of every institution must be made available to the other institutions .
A lack of planning together with insufficient or non-existent communications concerning the availability of translation resources prevents the efficient use of these resources .
The body which is supposed to provide translations often automatically gives orders to external translators without even checking the availability of internal resources .
In the area of translations alone we can save over EUR 10 million annually within the framework of the institutions .
And therefore , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that you will support the proposal for us to make the greatest possible use of independent studies into the use of resources and the organisation of work .
MEPs need to have comprehensive information about the resources and materials available to them in order to perform their work responsibly and efficiently .
We have therefore asked the administration to create a knowledge management system , allowing us to work efficiently with all documents .
We will have the first concrete proposals in this area over the course of the next few weeks .
A further priority is to provide citizens with better information about the work of their representatives in the European Parliament and about how Parliament 's work benefits EU citizens .
Here we need to finalise , consolidate and make effective use of European Parliamentary television , the visitors ' centre and the new audiovisual centre .
The administrative expense items of EU institutions include expenses for purchasing and leasing buildings .
In various cases previously institutions have purchased or leased property at prices above the market rate .
According to the findings of the Court of Auditors , institutions have not even evaluated policies on buildings jointly but rather on an individual basis .
We therefore need to develop a joint policy on buildings in order to achieve better cooperation in this area .
We are expecting a strategic document as soon as possible dealing with policy on buildings in the medium to long term so that we can adopt an appropriate decision at first reading . Thank you .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , thank you very much for making it possible for me to exchange views with Parliament at an unusually early stage this year .
I am very thankful for the Committee on Budgetary Affairs ' initiative to do this .
The Commission has already examined very seriously Parliament 's guidelines for the 2010 budget , and agrees with most of the points .
The Commission also appreciates Parliament 's examination of the 2010 Annual Policy Strategy - already reflected in your resolution - and shares with you many of the policy priorities identified .
Unexpected challenges , such as the financial , economic and social recovery , will need to be addressed .
However , long-lasting solutions to other issues , such as tackling climate change and achieving a sustainable Europe , are essential as well .
On this basis , the Commission will , on 29 April , adopt its preliminary draft budget for 2010 .
The Commission has already indicated that financial efforts in 2010 will be needed , in particular , for the Economic Recovery Plan .
The Commission has also noted Parliament 's support for more efficient levels of administrative expenditure , and will continue to act in that direction .
As for the pilot projects and preparatory actions , I am sure we will be able to build on last year 's excellent cooperation between institutions .
The preliminary draft budget will be based on sound estimates of the needs for achieving our shared priorities and taking up the challenges ahead of us .
I am confident that a satisfactory agreement on the 2010 budget will , once again , be achieved through good cooperation and collaboration between all the institutions , and especially with Parliament .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( EL ) Madam President , the European Parliament budget for the coming year will have three new elements .
It will be a year in which this Chamber will have a new secretary general , it will be a year in which it will probably operate with the Treaty of Lisbon and it will be a year in which it will operate with two new statutes , one for MEPs and one for parliamentary assistants .
My political group has tried to reflect these new developments in the Maňka report through numerous amendments and we are delighted to see that the Commission has been able to reflect these new dynamics in four basic priorities .
These four basic priorities of my group are :
Firstly , the emphasis on lawmaking .
Parliament is particularly effective when it exercises its lawmaking activities and the administration must prove to us that it can channel Parliament 's resources to where we make a difference .
The second priority - and here we agree with the Socialist Group in the European Parliament - is the absolute safeguarding of multilingualism and members ' access to translation and interpreting services to and from their mother tongue .
The third priority is that we must be able to evaluate progress in the implementation of the major plans which we have already approved , such as Europarl TV or the Visitors ' Centre , which we would have liked to be ready before the European elections and which unfortunately is not , and the House of European History .
We want these multiannual plans to operate smoothly and to be duly evaluated .
Finally , I believe that we in the European Parliament should strengthen every effort which shows the European taxpayer in times of crisis that this House is spending what it needs rationally so that it can do a better job .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , the debate on the Surján report , for which I have the honour of acting as shadow rapporteur , is a political debate with a great many crucial points , especially this year .
Its importance starts with the fact that it will be the only clear political debate on political priorities because , as you know , in an election year we shall not have the opportunity for another one ; afterwards we shall be going straight into the new phase of the procedure , into critical technical differentiations and debates .
However , it is also a debate in a year in which - as everyone has said and as we all know as politicians and as citizens - Europe will have entered a very deep crisis , and unfortunately everything indicates that 2010 , to which our report and our debate refer , will also be a year of crisis .
My first comment therefore is that it may , at the present moment in time , suffice for the report we are debating and which we will be voting on to be passed by a simple majority , but it will need to be a report which expresses the entire European Parliament and not just one political faction .
It will need to be a report which expresses the anxiety of citizens and politicians , but - and here there is political disagreement between us and the rapporteur and his faction - not only with the emphasis solely on fears and anxieties , but also with prospects for the future .
We must use the budget to give citizens to understand that the budget is a political tool with which we not only reply to fears but also provide political prospects for the future .
That is , I think , extremely important and the efforts of our group , both during the stage of discussion in committee and during this phase of debate in plenary , are aimed at striking a balance between this text and this political dynamic which will be emitted , so that we do not impart an image of the Apocalypse - just fear and anxiety - but open up prospects for the European Union .
I will say it again : today a simple majority may suffice and it may be that one faction can impose its line , but it is crucial , in light of the debate which will close with a reinforced majority , for the opinion of Parliament , in the final analysis , in other words , for the opinion of the citizens to be heard .
In a period of crisis , we socialists believe that Europe should respond through its budget with very specific characteristics .
The response from our budget and from political Europe must , firstly , be coordinated : we must not create the impression that we are leaving each of the Member States to face this difficult situation on their own .
Secondly , priority must be given to the citizens ' social protection ; this social indicator , which is peculiar to the European Union , must be nurtured come what may .
That is why we are trying to say certain things in the report in a different way .
Finally , this response to the crisis must be such that the citizens understand it , so that it echoes the priorities of environment and energy , and says yes to an energy-independent European Union , but with all roads open , with all possibilities open , so that we can achieve precisely what we want .
There are many points on which we agree with the general feeling of this report , with the feeling of urgency , with the feeling of political necessity .
However , we would stress that the response which we want to give through the budget must be a response with these characteristics .
So until we meet in September and with the hope that the Commission will take serious account of Parliament 's views .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DA ) Madam President , Mr Surján has chosen ' security ' as the heading for the 2010 budget , the word being interpreted in its broadest sense : alleviation of the financial and economic crisis , its importance for jobs and economic security , the security of energy supplies , safe transport , the safety and security of citizens in relation to the problems caused by immigration and the problems arising as a result of demographic changes , with fewer young people to care for an increasing number of elderly people , the need for better environmental protection , the need to fight against terrorism and the need to promote safety and security through the EU 's role in the world .
The heading ' security ' indicates the many areas where the EU budget is important and how vital it is for the budget to reflect our needs .
In many ways , 2010 will be an exciting year for the EU budget .
For the structural funds , 2010 is the first year in which the ' n + 3 rule ' comes into play .
Those appropriations that have not been committed over the last three years according to the programme will lapse .
Now we will see whether the Member States have been able to utilise the appropriations in time .
I certainly hope that the sunset clause , the n + 3 rule , will not come into play , but , if it does , there is certainly reason to look again at whether the rules for the structural funds are sufficiently flexible and unbureaucratic .
In 2010 , foreign policy will , as in previous years , be a tricky issue .
I would urge the Commission to find the necessary appropriations , even though the ceiling for this category of expenditure is very low . In the Committee on Budgets we had a number of discussions about our position with the regard to the EU 's subsidising of the Nabucco gas pipeline .
I would like to emphasise that this is a point to which we in the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe attach a great deal of importance .
Energy security must be ensured by means of many different initiatives , but we would in particular like to see support for Nabucco , a project which , at the end of the day , is independent of Gazprom .
The budget procedure will be quite difficult this year .
This is , of course , election year .
The reports by Mr Maňka and Mr Surján represent the only opportunity that Parliament will get to express its opinion on the budget .
It will be the newly-elected Parliament that will have to do the actual negotiating with regard to the budget .
It is not easy to maintain the procedure we implemented last year with Mrs Haug as rapporteur and with the substantial involvement of the specialist committees .
We must , of course , do our best to ensure that the procedure is as open and structured as possible , and I am pleased to hear , Commissioner , that this is also something that you are going to do .
I think that both Mr Surján and Mr Maňka have provided a good proposal for doing this .
Madam President , preparing the budget for 2010 requires a lot of courage .
We still do not know the full extent of the the economic crisis which unfolded last year .
Unfortunately , in spite of the significant efforts of individual countries to control it , the crisis continues to develop - workplaces are closing down , unemployment is rising and entire families , as well as sections of society , towns and villages , are becoming poorer .
The implementation of the tasks adopted in the multiannual financial frameworks for the years 2007-2013 is presenting an increasing number of difficulties .
Last year , when the budget for 2009 was being drawn up , the estimated level of funding was achieved with great difficulty .
Will it be possible to sustain this level in 2010 ?
I hope so .
This will be our greatest challenge next year .
We should remember that solidarity is most important during hard times .
We must not give up the noble objectives adopted in the Lisbon Strategy .
We should bear in mind the economic diversity of EU Member States - not all of them will be able to overcome the crisis , but joint action can provide a great deal of assistance .
We still have the chance , at the mid-term review stage , to alter our policies and focus on combating the negative effects of the crisis , making it our number one priority .
Finally I would like to sincerely thank my fellow Members of the Committee on Budgets , László Surján and Vladimír Maňka , for their contributions at such a difficult time .

Faced with the worsening crisis in the European Union and the lack of any objective and effective measures at Community level to deal with it , the European Parliament , having agreed last December to a budget for 2009 which is around EUR 8 billion less than that set in the Multiannual Financial Framework ( MFF ) for 2007-2013 , now wants the final budget for 2010 to be closer to these upper limits .
However , in our opinion , the very least that the European Parliament could have called for is actually too little .
The budgetary limits imposed in the current MFF , which restricts the Community budget to 1 % of EU gross national income , are clearly inadequate to achieve the proclaimed policy of economic and social cohesion .
What is more , these inadequate limits are not fully used for this purpose , or even observed , and they are certainly not fully implemented .
The constant under-budgeting and under-implementation of the Structural and Cohesion Funds , which are two years ' late in their implementation , require the adoption of a series of measures to ensure that these funds are implemented , particularly when the European Union and its neoliberal policies are one of the root causes of the current economic crisis .
Faced with the rise in unemployment , social inequalities and poverty , we would reassert the urgent need , among other measures , to boost the financial resources of the Structural and Cohesion Funds , to speed up and ensure their full implementation , to increase the rate of Community cofinancing and to cancel the application of the n + 2 and n + 3 rules in these funds .
These funds must also be used to defend employment with rights and increase the purchasing power of workers , effectively support small-scale and family farming and fisheries , defend and develop the productive sectors of each Member State , particularly of the cohesion countries , and effectively support micro- , small and medium-sized enterprises and the cooperative sector .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) Madam President , the EU is confronting the global financial crisis with a budget that was formulated half a century ago .
According to the rapporteur , the EU should face the modern , globalised world with a budget in which nearly all of the money is pledged to a lunatic agricultural policy and an ineffective regional policy .
It is like using the cavalry to attack a modern , mechanised army with guided missiles .
The difference in magnitude is absurd .
The cost of resolving the financial crisis is impossible to estimate now , but one calculation that has been put forward suggests a figure in the region of USD 50 000 billion .
The total EU budget is only a couple of per cent of that amount and is already pledged to agriculture and regional policy .
The EU has required each Member State to implement a stimulus package corresponding to just over 1 % of its GNP .
This is already more than the entire EU budget , which , of course , only amounts to around 1 % .
It is also pathetic to read the wording in both these reports with regard to the funding of climate policy and energy policy .
In these areas , too , the EU 's budget is thoroughly negligible .
The EU 's task is to obtain cooperation and commitments , the costs of which must be borne in the Member States after being anchored there in a democratic process .
The same applies to energy policy .
Gas pipelines are cheaper to lay on land than on the seabed .
Now when Russia and Germany nevertheless construct a gas pipeline on the seabed directly between their two countries , they do this to isolate themselves .
It is a new Rapallo , and the EU does not say a word .
' My words fly up , my thoughts remain below ' , says the king in Hamlet .
- ( SK ) The basic logic of the European Parliament 's budget structure , as proposed by the Budget Committee rapporteur Vladimír Maňka , is sound .
It includes provision for those points which have proven to be weaker and not fully thought out or not implemented to a sufficient extent in previous years .
First and foremost this involves finally sorting out the translation and interpreting resources used in the European Parliament .
Despite expectations we have fallen well short here of securing full implementation of one of the basic axioms of the European Union , which is equality of access and freedom from linguistic discrimination .
And I am not thinking only of equal access and freedom from discrimination in relation to the activities of MEPs , but especially the possibility for EU citizens , regardless of their mother tongue , to access information on activities and outcomes of debates at the institution citizens send their representatives to through direct elections .
Although we have had a massive expansion of the European Union , a delay of five years really does look like an absurd play for time .
This undermines faith in European institutions , especially in the smaller countries , and creates fertile ground for nationalist political groups .
( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , this is the last budget of this parliamentary term and , with luck , it will also be the last budget before the Treaty of Lisbon is implemented together with the new budgetary provisions .
Today , the debate with which we are concerned is the debate on the budgetary guidelines , because that is what they are , and it is very clear that we must approve these budgetary guidelines here in sufficient time to have an influence on the drafting of the preliminary draft budget prepared by the Commissioner , as she has just told us .
They are guidelines in that they include this Parliament 's political priorities , to which budget content and allocations must be given .
The European Union 's budget is a battle for scarce resources , particularly at this time of financial and economic crisis .
The decision we are making now , regarding what the European Parliament 's political priorities will be , is therefore of the greatest importance , particularly since this budget will form a bridge between two terms of the European Parliament , and also between two mandates of the European Commission .
Those who are starting this procedure off now are not the same people that will be completing it in December , and we may even have three commissioners responsible for budgetary matters between now and December - and I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the Commissioner on her appointment .
Therefore , achieving a consensus within this House on our priorities is extremely important .
Obviously , similarly to last year , we are going to budget for the greatest security for our citizens .
This security involves a huge number of separate headings , such as social cohesion , job seeking and cohesion , and - unfortunately as was mentioned at the start of this sitting - it is also necessary to step up security and the fight against terrorism .
We must not forget that the fight against terrorism is still , regrettably , a priority for the European Union .
Of course , another of the priorities will be to combat the economic crisis .
The economic recovery plan has demonstrated the limitations and inadequacies of the annual budget , the multiannual financial framework and even interinstitutional cooperation .
What is lacking is a real dialogue to examine , for example , the role of the European Investment Bank , and the use of surpluses in the expenditure categories to finance the European Commission 's plans .
What is lacking is consensus , and also dialogue .
These guidelines will involve political decisions which will be reflected in the July conciliation , and will then form part of the first reading .
I would like the rapporteur , Mr Surján , to receive sufficient support to bring the guidelines to successful completion , since he has the ability to do so , and I hope that by December he will have a very positive outcome .
( DE ) Many thanks , Madam President , many thanks , Commissioner .
As Mr Surján said , the available budget is tight - 1 % of gross national product .
Thus we must be all the more careful with the funds , particularly in view of the crisis weighing on people 's minds .
We should also attempt to come to decisions together .
There is one part of this report on which no joint decisions are possible .
This concerns energy supply and energy security .
I ask myself whether , at a time when we have to account for every single euro , we should really be investing money in fields where there are market players making billions in profits .
Support is being proposed for gas pipelines such as the South Stream project of the Italian group Eni , which made a profit of EUR 10 billion .
Nord Stream is a project of E.ON , a German group making a profit of EUR 5 billion , and Nabucco brings together a German , an Austrian and a Turkish company with total profits in excess of EUR 6 billion .
Should we really be putting taxpayers ' money into fields in which profits are made ?
Should conglomerates perhaps be making the relevant investments themselves , and should we perhaps be involving ourselves in only those fields in which support from taxpayers is really desirable ?
We should not be throwing more money at those who are earning enough as it is .
Hence the question : is this really what we want ?
My second question is as follows . If we do support companies , why Nabucco ?
Why do we want to create imbalances in this regard ?
Why do we want to favour a Hungarian company over an Italian one , for example ?
What is your justification for this ?
Competitive neutrality is a must , but it is infringed by what you are hoping to adopt .
My third point is that the money must be spent in Europe .
What is the use of our investing in Azerbaijan ?
In the face of the crisis , our European citizens want us to provide solution mechanisms .
They expect us to provide assistance .
We cannot support the Surján report as it stands , as this would mean promoting competition-distorting measures and throwing more money at high-earning institutions and industries .
The European Union , with its scant resources , absolutely cannot afford this .
( FI ) Madam President , it will be a challenging task to draft next year 's budget .
The European Parliament elections next spring will result in a long pause in the drafting process , and the possible entry-into-force of the Lisbon Treaty means that the budget would have been drafted under rules that are different from those under which it would be implemented .
I therefore wish every success to Mr Surján and Mr Maňka , as the general rapporteurs for the budget , in this mammoth task .
The EU 's structural policy is caught up in a massive vicious circle of bureaucracy .
The cause is its hopelessly complex system of administration and monitoring , which is only geared up to cater for 20 % of the Social Fund programmes and just 7 % of the Regional Development Fund programmes .
There is funding in place for only 2 % of major projects .
Moreover , more than two years of the new programming period have passed .
For example , last year more than EUR 2.8 billion were withdrawn or postponed in commitments and more than EUR 4 billion withdrawn in payment appropriations .
( PL ) Madam President , the budgets adopted each year total significantly less than the amounts adopted in the multiannual financial frameworks .
What is more , the budgets are implemented at a still lower level , which results in a significant amount of outstanding budgetary commitments ( RELs ) .
This phenomenon , in particular , stems from a system of complicated rules and requirements imposed by the European Commission , as well as the detailed regulations , pertaining to beneficiaries , introduced by the Member States .
To improve the implementation of the budget , it is essential for both the Commission and the individual Member States to significantly reduce the bureaucratic burden .
Secondly , in view of the deepening economic crisis in the EU , it is essential to make even wider use of both EU budgetary resources and funding , in the form of loans and credits , from the European institutions to support development in the Member States , and the SME sector in particular .
Thirdly , and finally , it is also essential to make even greater use of EU budgetary resources and also funding provided by banks to ensure genuine diversity in terms of our energy supply , and the Nabucco project in particular .
If we do not diversify our supplies of raw materials for energy production , especially natural gas , crises like the one in January will be repeated .
( DE ) Madam President , we are right to talk about the financial crisis , but we are not right to say that the European Union does not have any money in its budget to fund the relevant measures to combat it .
We have EUR 144 billion in our annual budget , from which EUR 5 billion has somehow been extracted .
My specific proposal is as follows : let us turn this EUR 5 billion into EUR 50 billion without increasing the budget .
How is that possible ?
Taking the administrative part , if we include all the EU administrative expenditure hidden in the operational programmes , that gives us EUR 15 billion .

I say we could manage on EUR 5 billion , which leaves EUR 10 billion for combating the financial crisis .
Then we do what we are always demanding of everyone else , namely submit our programmes and activities to independent examination .
I am convinced that , if the specific policies of the European Union of today were to be examined at long last , we could easily achieve a further EUR 30 billion in potential savings per year , without losing sight of our objectives .
There are also some small matters in this House .
We have a budget of EUR 1.5 billion .
Starting sittings on time would introduce efficiency into our work - which would be worth EUR 700 million - and the remaining 300 could be obtained from the Council , which works at least as wastefully as this Parliament .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , with these guidelines for the 2010 budget , Parliament in plenary will be not only determining the guidelines for budgetary policy but also , in the absence of a motion for a resolution of the political groups on the subject , reacting to the Commission 's Annual Policy Strategy .
The reason the budget is such a complex entity is , of course , that it primarily comprises two stages .
This House and its Committee on Budgets will still be responsible for the July conciliation , and we cannot foresee today what new challenges and complementary measures will result , for example , from the possible entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon or from new requirements arising from international and European cyclical trends .
At the same time , the 2010 budget will subsequently form a bridge to the budget review and to the mid-term review of the multi-annual programmes , both of which are to take place in 2010 .
I am very glad to see that the rapporteur , Mr Surján , when discussing aspects of European budgetary policy , emphasises that Europe can stand for opportunities and protection ; that is , guaranteeing both internal and external security , offering European citizens protection , and helping to deal with the current problems by giving new momentum to growth , innovation and jobs .
We are not just talking about new money here ; we are also talking , in particular , about simplifying and accelerating the existing measures , so that we are not constantly having to return the agreed payments to our solidarity programmes , which already form part of the budget , year after year by means of supplementary budgets .
I also welcome the priorities Mr Maňka has presented for Parliament in his report .
In addition to the need to improve the language arrangements , when it comes to improving the internal structures of Parliament there is a need to continue the screening exercise we have begun rather than always just calling for new positions .
If we are going to pass more laws , we need to concentrate more elsewhere ; we cannot always be calling for new positions and posts when we feel like it .
We have a great deal more work ahead of us in this regard .
( HU ) Madam President , Commissioner , I welcome the fact that the report takes an unambiguous stance in favour of Community support for the Nabucco project .
The Russian-Ukrainian gas crisis has pointed to Europe 's dependency in terms of gas supply .
The Nabucco project is the only realistic , feasible plan that is capable of mitigating Europe 's unilateral dependency on Russian gas supplies .
You may be tired of hearing me draw attention each year during the budget debate to the inadequate financing of the foreign affairs chapter .
The European Union can only respond in a timely manner to new challenges if its budget allows for real flexibility and reallocation within and between chapters ; otherwise we can continue to support our most important objectives with budgetary tricks and opaque budgetary manipulations .
I call upon the Commission to offer a solution to the serious financing problems of the foreign relations chapter in the context of a true midterm review , and to ensure greater budgetary flexibility .
Madam President , as we come to the first stage of the 2010 budget , I would like to congratulate both rapporteurs .
It is clear - and other speakers have mentioned it - that we will be having a different type of debate this autumn because we now have the context of a European election set in the worst economic conditions for the last 60 years .
I suspect , therefore , Mr Surján , that when it comes to looking at the budget this autumn - and you have set out traditional challenges in this document - that these will be much changed by the debates we are going to have , focusing on where we are going to be , creating new jobs for the future rather than looking backwards .
The emphasis will be on the things in your document , such as green technologies , zero carbon technologies , and , above all , on seeing how ICT , can foster innovation and be able to get the new growth that the European economy will need .
Mr Maňka , in the budget for the European Parliament , when we are thinking about the screening process which has just been mentioned , please do not forget the role of technologies and the way in which everything can be done in a much simpler way .
We do not need traditional ways of doing things : we need to be thinking of the new ways in which we can communicate with our citizens .
I suspect that by the end of the next Parliament every parliamentarian bar one or two will have a blog .
There are over 100 million blogs in the global system today ; there were no blogs when this Parliamentary term started in 2004 .
We have to keep our minds tuned to the future rather than trampling along the normal ways we are used to in so many contexts .
Lastly , I very strongly support Mr Surján 's proposal because it refers in both budgets to what I call ' value for money ' and which others call ' qualitative improvement ' of the way in which we spend it .
The economic recession will be very tough on us and we will have to be able to justify the monies we are spending .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for everything that she has done during her term of office with regard to being able to monitor how spending is done .
If , for the new incoming Parliament , there could be an analysis of those lines which are strong and those which are weak , then that would be very welcome .
( RO ) I would first of all like to thank my fellow Member , Mr Surján , for his efforts .
Specifically because we are debating the guidelines for the 2010 budget procedure , which is practically a political debate , I would like to highlight a couple of things .
In my view and in Romania 's view , there is one vital element required to ensure the European Union 's efficient operation , which must be integrated without fail into the 2010 budget lines : the Nabucco project .
We all know that the European Union had a fairly unpleasant experience this winter , finding itself to a large extent without any gas supply .
Moreover , this matter not only concerns gas , but all the energy resources which the European Union uses .
The EU is dependent on its suppliers in terms not only of price , but also of supply .
This is why it is absolutely essential for us to diversify our energy suppliers and energy resources and the methods of transporting those resources in order to guarantee our citizens a constant supply and protect them against disruptions , especially during freezing winters .
On the other hand , I feel that we need to invest in and encourage research and development in new technologies which will enable industries to use as little energy as possible .
We must step up our energy-saving campaigns , along with Europe 's citizens .
Both diversifying resources and saving them are solutions intended to anticipate and respond to the energy crises threatening the European Union .

( FI ) Mr President , a challenging year lies ahead : there are the elections and economic crisis on top of everything .
This means we have a very great responsibility , but , fortunately , Mr Surján and Mr Maňka are dealing with it .
I know that both men take their responsibility seriously and are very capable of discharging their duties .
This obviously means that we will have to consider Parliament 's own projects in particular and that we should set an example to the general public and acquire its confidence as a result .
We really need to get the magnifying glass out and take a close look at what projects we can implement in this period .
They should be nothing very grand .
I wanted to focus on one detail in my speech .
It is that this year 's budget acquired a new heading , the ' Baltic Sea Strategy ' , and I hope that this year both the Commission and Parliament will together hit on the right projects and find the right money for the right sort of measures .
The people who live in the Baltic Sea region are expecting a little meat around the bones of this Baltic Sea Strategy , and if we think things through , we might well succeed in this .
rapporteur . - ( HU ) I welcome the comments and feel that most of the criticisms made , and the majority of the amendments submitted , stem from a common source .
I mean that these are mainly questions of terminology rather than of true opposition .
There is one major source of debate , the support for the Nabucco issue .
I would like to make it clear that it is not companies that we want to support , and that there is no question of billion-euro projects ; however , we expect the European Commission to take steps towards Europe 's energy independence , and one symbol of this - among others - is the Nabucco project .
Mr President , please allow me to draw attention to one more thought .
This budget points beyond itself .
Today , Europe 's citizens no longer have that sense of excellence of the European Union that the founding fathers had , namely , that it would create peace , that it would no longer be possible to start a war .
Today there is something else at stake .
We do not have to fear war , but yet we see attacks such as this crisis .
If we can solve this , and if we can prove to ourselves and to Europe 's citizens that the European Union can deal with these concerns together , jointly , then the EU will send a clear message to its citizens that it is worth making a sacrifice , it is worth collaborating .
We need the Union .
I expect Euro-scepticism to decline if we adopt a successful budget for 2010 , and I ask for support now and later on in the autumn . Thank you for your respectful attention .
rapporteur . - ( SK ) I would like to thank everyone taking part for the inspiring discussion and also the shadow rapporteurs for their constructive cooperation .
Thanks to their amendment proposal the entire draft is of a higher quality .
I would also like to thank Secretary General Rømer for his cooperation and I am already looking forward to working together with the next Secretary General .
I would like to thank all representatives of the general secretariats of the European Parliament with whom I met and held discussions .
I would like to say to the representatives of the other general secretariats that I am also interested in meeting them and working together to find effective solutions so that we can use the financial resources of Europe 's citizens to better effect .
The Committee on Budgets has also cooperated constructively with other institutions in the past and during the previous budget process .
I believe that the budget requirements currently being submitted by these institutions are realistic .
I would like to express my appreciation for the way that budgets are created in these institutions , as budget creation not only takes account of the inflation coefficient automatically but is also based on actual needs , which in the current period is really very challenging .
In the coming days I will meet with representatives of the institutions in order to listen to their views before we discuss these estimates in the Committee on Budgets .
I would like once again to thank all of my colleagues .
I look forward to our continuing cooperation .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 10 March 2009 .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( LT ) In the financial and economic crisis small and medium-sized enterprises are facing increasing difficulties as they try to obtain funding for scientific research , technological development and innovation ; according to the general Competitiveness and Innovation Programme , it would be possible to provide effective support for innovation-related SME activities , therefore it emphasises the importance of allocating sufficient funds for financing the CIP .

Information and communication technologies provide great opportunities to encourage growth and innovation , thus helping to implement the goals of the Lisbon Strategy and to overcome the current economic crisis ; more than ever before , the European Research Area is the foundation of Europe 's information society and is essential for removing inconsistencies in scientific research activities , programmes and policies in Europe ; adequate funding is important to ensure the flow of qualified scientists able to move freely and to support global scientific research infrastructure , accessible to all teams of researchers across Europe .
Safeguarding security of energy supply in the European Union and also the principle of energy solidarity are the most important priorities on the EU agenda and this should be taken into consideration accordingly in the EU Budget .
The EP 's responsibility in preparation for the 2010 budget is greater compared to previous budgets .
The reason for this is the financial and economic crisis , along with the unstable energy situation , which has affected EU Member States .
The utmost precision is required in the budgeting process , along with flexible options , as the dynamics of the crisis require it to be managed in a dynamic manner .
We need to be more successful at implementing the regional and social cohesion policy across the whole EU .
This must be reflected in every priority , which is an even greater challenge in the context of an economic crisis , so that we do not allow divisions to be created between Member States and we help new Member States to cope .
I believe that by using the budgetary instruments we will be more accountable in 2010 for energy and transport networks , and the EU 's internal energy networks will be well planned so that they guarantee an alternative to the countries most affected by the energy shortage .
Other particularly important considerations are flexibility and efficiency in terms of financing transport corridors with a view to easing traffic and expanding communication links between countries .
Particular attention must be given to North-South networks .
A great deal more intensity is required in the expansion of research and development projects .
Innovation policy must be targeted at sectors which are appropriate to the relevant countries in order to achieve maximum efficiency from the use of the funds .
in writing .
( HU ) As the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety regarding the EU budget for 2010 , I wish to express my satisfaction with the material before us .
I particularly welcome the Commission 's intention to contribute to economic and social recovery , reinforce energy efficiency and combat climate change .
I fully agree that the European Union must take more far-reaching financial and budgetary decisions which make it possible for the EU to play a role primarily in the areas of economic growth and job creation .
Environmental protection - that is , the green New Deal - can , by finding solutions to the current economic crisis , provide an excellent opportunity to increase green technology infrastructure .
The problems of gas supply at the beginning of the year have shown once again the lack of alternative energy sources , alternative energy supply routes , energy source storage capacity and energy transport interconnections among the Member States .
For this reason , it is important that the EU budget duly reflect the need to enhance the security of the energy supply and transport , and for us to invest significant sums in these areas .
As the report has clearly indicated , climate change and environmental protection , as well as the issue of energy security , are closely related to each other .
At the same time , it is unfortunate that the measures to mitigate climate change are still not satisfactorily included in the EU budget .
I therefore see the task of the Parliament primarily as putting pressure in this regard on the Commission and seeing to it that the aforesaid resources are increased .
Statute for a European private company - Cross-borders transfers of companies ' registered offices - Small Business Act - Workers ' participation in companies with a European Statute ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report by Mr Lehne , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , on the proposal for a Council regulation on the Statute for a European private company - C6-0283 / 2008 - .
the report by Mr Lehne , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , with recommendations to the Commission on the cross-border transfer of the registered office of a company .
the report by Mrs Herczog , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the Small Business Act .
the Commission statement on workers ' participation in companies with a European Statute .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have two reports to advocate here , both of which originate from Parliament 's Committee on Legal Affairs .
I should like to start with the one that is more important at this time , as it concerns a specific legislative procedure initiated by the Commission : the European private company ( EPC ) .
Indeed , this is the legislative core element , if one may describe it thus , of the Small Business Act .
I wish to say a few words about the background .
The idea for the European private company was already contained in Commissioner Bolkestein 's Action Plan on Company Law .
For reasons that never made sense to me , the idea of the European private company was then erased , so to speak , from the action plan over the years , in the course of this Commission 's term of office , and was not pursued further by the Commission at that time .
The European Parliament disagreed , however , and this was the background to its legislative own-initiative report under Rule 39 of the Rules of Procedure and Article 192 of the Treaty , which this House adopted by an overwhelming majority some time ago .
Under these circumstances , the Commission felt compelled to reconsider the idea of the European private company , and has now proposed it within the framework of the Small Business Act - which is very much appreciated .
This offer of a separate company form is particularly directed at Europe 's small and medium-sized enterprises .
Up to now , only large companies have had their own company form , namely the European company .
I believe that such a proposal was long overdue .
As this is aimed at SMEs , and start-ups - that is , companies that arise from the idea of starting up a company rather than as a result of the transformation , division or merger of existing or other companies - must also be provided for , we also welcome the European Commission 's restraint with regard to the requirements imposed on the cross-border component .
This has , I believe , also been expressed by Parliament in this report .
We also think it right that all the issues concerning , in particular , capital and liability , have to be clarified in legislative terms at European level , as these are particular problems for SMEs .
The present need for them to work with very disparate national legal forms means that they are in great need of advice , which is obviated by this new legal form .
We also believe that we are in line with the case law of the European Court of Justice in the matter of whether the company 's seat must be identical to its registered office or seat of administration ; that is , that only one company seat can be envisaged .
I know that there is a minority opinion on the subject in this House , but the majority opinion in Parliament 's Committee on Legal Affairs - from which I assume plenary will take its lead tomorrow - is that there must definitely be the possibility of a separation and that a European company form cannot be disadvantaged in relation to national company forms , which have this possibility under the case law of the European Court of Justice .
A major problem , which required lengthy negotiations , was the situation with regard to employee participation .
We have had considerable difficulties with this in the past when dealing with other legal acts under company law .
I need only mention the European company and the Directive on cross-border mergers .
I believe that , thanks to the compromise amendments signed by the three largest political groups in this House , we have succeeded in finding a real solution to this problem ; a solution which draws on the successful elements of previous legal acts in the European Union , which represents a compromise between the different legal situations in the Member States , and which also makes a contribution to protecting employees ' rights .
My final comment concerns the 14th Directive , for which I am also rapporteur .
The story is similar to that of the European company .
Our aim is to use this legislative motion for a resolution to compel the Commission to make a tangible proposal , as we did in the case of the EPC , and indeed we expect the Commission to do so , so as to close one of the last gaps in company law and guarantee freedom of establishment for undertakings . My sincere thanks for your attention .
rapporteur . - ( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are reaching the end of a long process , a long and successful process through which we have been able to move small and medium-sized enterprises from the periphery to the centre .
It has been a long process for us to reach the point where this internal market , although unified , is not homogeneous .
A long road , at the end of which we see that the 23 million small and medium-sized enterprises operate with the same administrative burdens and rules as the 41 thousand large European companies , even though the former are unable to enter the market under anything like the same conditions .
It seems to us that the Commission , under Commissioner Verheugen 's leadership , has come a long way over the past five years , and thus we welcome the change in philosophy within the European Union , intended to eliminate the hurdles facing SMEs both at EU level and in the Member States .
One possibility for increasing the turnover of SMEs is to enable more and more of them to enter the European internal market , since at present only 8 % of enterprises do so , and only 15 % of their turnover is generated on that market .
Their turnover could increase if they were able to participate much more extensively in innovative research and development programmes and projects .
It would help the market activities of small businesses if sources of funding and financing were made much more readily accessible than at present .
Their turnover could increase if we were at last to create a Community patent , thus preventing cheap counterfeit products from squeezing out intellectual property produced by small businesses .
I believe that the most sensitive challenge from the perspective of the success of the entire Lisbon Strategy is certainly to help SMEs move from their own Member State to the EU internal market .
In the current economic situation , however , we need to point out , over and above what has been said , that there are problems with the major source of financing for small and medium-sized enterprises .
For that source continues to be credit .
The increased risk sensitivity of financial institutions has meant , however , that more and more companies have difficulty accessing credit .
Invoking the uncertainty of the economic situation , the banks are holding back on making loans in these circles .
Directors of SMEs complain that thousands of companies and tens of thousands of workplaces may be endangered .
It is fundamentally in our interest to ensure that the funds intended to inject liquidity into the system reach the economy rather than remain in bank safes .
One of the most important steps is for banks to begin to stimulate the economy and SMEs as soon as possible .
The other challenge is to create European solidarity .
This is the only way to offer more effective protection than what nation states can provide to SMEs that are in difficulty because of the crisis .
In saying this , I want to point out that the situation of SMEs and the way this is handled is also a test of European solidarity .
It shows that Europe is capable of assuming shared risk with Member States beyond the euro zone as well .
The measures aimed principally at stabilising the euro area can easily give rise - and have already given rise - to a financial vacuum in the non-euro zone .
In the current situation , therefore , I must ask European decision-makers and the representatives of the banking sector not to allow for the creation of a two-speed Europe , since the collapse of a region where SMEs play a decisive role - constituting more than 90 % of all businesses - would bring with it catastrophic economic consequences .
I request the support of the Commission and of my fellow Members to this end .
I thank my fellow rapporteur , Nicole Fontaine , and the other shadow rapporteurs for their work , and once again congratulate Commissioner Verheugen for the achievements to date .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all I should like to thank the two rapporteurs .
Ladies first , and not only these days , I will start by thanking Ms Herczog for the quality of her report on the Small Business Act ( SBA ) and the strong support it provides for the Commission 's initiative to establish a comprehensive policy on small- and medium-sized enterprises .
I would also like to pay tribute to Mr Lehne , not only for his efficiency and work in steering the Private Company Statute through the consultation procedure , but also for the interesting and creative solutions presented in the report .
We are now really in a critical phase .
We listen every day to the messages , such as the need to boost and renew confidence in the functioning of the global economy .
The financial and economic crisis has hit European businesses really hard , and I believe that it is now more important than ever to exploit to the full the potential of small- and medium-sized enterprises .
This is the very lifeline of the European economy .
The Small Business Act , which the Commission adopted in June 2008 , provides a comprehensive framework of short- , medium- and long-term actions for SME growth and competitiveness within the Lisbon Strategy .
It proposes 10 policy principles and a number of concrete initiatives to make sure that the concerns of SMEs are placed at the centre of decision-making - as Ms Herczog said , mainstreaming SMEs into the centre of attention and strategies .
The SBA includes a set of legislative initiatives , including the proposal for a European private company statute .
The SBA is designed to ensure that the ' think small first ' principle and priority for small businesses are lastingly and irreversibly anchored in policy-making across the Union .
The SBA also calls for greater recognition of entrepreneurship and entrepreneurs .
We need people who are prepared to take initiatives , draft projects and take risks more than ever at times like this .
We also believe , therefore , that honest entrepreneurs who suffer business failure deserve a second chance .
In the current economic crisis , we need to establish priorities and focus on delivering quickly on those actions which have the strongest potential to contribute to recovery .
The SBA action plan and the European economic recovery plan propose ambitious measures in three key areas : first , loosening the supply of much-needed credit ; secondly , reducing the administrative burden ; and , thirdly , helping SMEs do business abroad .
Making a success of the Small Business Act depends on the seamless cooperation of all stakeholders .
We are grateful for your support .
The resolution that Parliament adopted in early December was a timely and strongly welcomed initiative .
As you know , at the summit later in December , the Heads of State and Government unanimously endorsed the Small Business Act , under the French Presidency .
It is , therefore , important that this House gives its full support today to Ms Herczog 's report , to establish a solid and legitimate basis for further action .
I would like to invite you to promote the Small Business Act in your respective countries and your constituencies to help make sure that this ambitious policy programme becomes reality and that it really helps SMEs in their daily business .
Let me turn now to Mr Lehne 's two reports .
Parliament has always been a strong supporter of the European Private Company Statute .
Your own-initiative report of 2006 and your swift handling of the Commission 's proposal are important contributions to the success of the new European Company Statute .
The Private Company Statute is a key element of the Small Business Act .
It is designed for SMEs .
Therefore , the Commission proposed that a European private company may be set up just like any domestic company , without the requirement for doing business in different Member States or having shareholders from more than one country - just like at home .
There are those who consider such a cross-border requirement essential for a European company forum .
Parliament 's resolution , which allows companies a choice between a variety of cross-border elements , is flexible .
European private companies could comply with this requirement , for example by setting up a foreign subsidiary or by simply recording their intention to do cross-border business .
You have also suggested a flexible solution for the minimum capital requirement .
As you know , the Commission 's proposal required a minimum capital of just EUR 1 , and beyond that left it to the shareholders to decide on how much capital their European private company needs .
This provision has been questioned by those who consider that capital requirements have a role in protecting the creditors of small companies .
The European Parliament report has put forward alternative solutions to improve creditor protection .
It means companies would be able to choose between a solvency-based or capital-maintenance-based creditor protection regime .
The Commission agrees with those elements of the report that aim to increase the uniformity of the statute and thus promote the legal certainty of its application .
These include prescribing the registration of the company 's business object , clarifying that the ban on offering shares to the public does not preclude offers to the employees of the company , or improving the rules on directors ' duties and liabilities .
All of these make a helpful contribution which will facilitate the application of this statute .
I also welcome your useful suggestion of an arbitration clause which encourages the shareholders to use alternative means of dispute resolution .
Finally , I should like to mention the subject that has been the most debated in Parliament and elsewhere , which is workers ' participation on the board of European private companies .
As I have already mentioned , the Commission designed a statute for smaller businesses .
Employee participation in SMEs exists only in a few Member States , and this is why a solution based on national laws , which would allow for the coexistence of different models , seemed the most appropriate and reasonable approach .
Parliament 's amendments introduce additional and complex provisions that are not applicable to SMEs formed under national law in most Member States .
This is likely to make the European Private Company Statute unattractive in those Member States and a much less viable option for SMEs .
To conclude , there are a number of useful solutions in your report .
Some of them could very well pave the way for a swifter compromise among the Member States .
The Commission , therefore , welcomes the adoption of this report .
Finally , regarding the cross-border transfer of the seat of companies : the Commission has informed Parliament on previous occasions of its reasons for not proposing the 14th Company Law Directive .
These reasons are still valid .
We agree with the rapporteur that companies should enjoy freedom of establishment within the single market and be able to move their seats from one country to another .
However , we are not convinced that proposing new legislation now is the best solution to achieve this objective .
Court of Justice case-law clearly allows for company mobility .
In addition , existing legislation - the Cross-Border Mergers Directive - provides a framework for the transfer , including the necessary safeguards for third parties .
In particular , the Cross-Border Mergers Directive allows a company to set up a new subsidiary in another country and then merge its existing company with that subsidiary .
The transfer procedure and safeguards suggested by the Committee on Legal Affairs are very similar to those put forward by the Directive .
Our economic analyses show that the level of complexity of the cross-border transfer procedure would be comparable to that of the cross-border merger procedure .
The Cross-Border Mergers Directive was due to be transposed by Member States by December 2007 .
It is too early to assess its full application .
Before embarking on any new legislation , the Commission should first evaluate how this new existing regulatory framework operates in practice .
We are also not convinced that the Directive would improve the existing situation under national law and the jurisprudence of the European Court of Justice in this area .
Finally , in the light of the above and with the current legislature about to end , it would be more appropriate for the next Commission to decide on how to proceed on this issue of the transfer of a company 's registered office .
By then it will also become clearer how the issue of seat transfer was solved in the SPE Statute .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . - ( SV ) Mr President , the conditions for small businesses today are crucial for the growth of tomorrow 's jobs .
They are vital for our ability to emerge from this crisis into a better and more highly skilled and competitive economy .
It is the small businesses that drive innovation forward , but it is also the small businesses that currently have the greatest credit problems in the various Member States and in the Union as such .
What we are intending to do here with the Statute for a European private company - and I would like to thank the Commission for the proposal and the rapporteur for her work - is to open up the internal market for small businesses to the same extent as for large companies .
It is in this regard that new ground needs to be broken .
As we discussed in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , it is a matter of carrying out a thorough simplification of the rules , which will open up doors for small businesses .
It is about ensuring that small businesses can be involved in public procurement to the same extent as large companies as a result of the way that public procurement is carried out .
It is about making it easier for small businesses to operate across borders , including with regard to matters such as paying VAT , and about combating the bureaucracy that is currently proving prohibitive .
It is also about providing European financial markets with better conditions for expansion and growth by providing a better credit market for small businesses through the efforts of the European Investment Bank and others .
Finally , I would like to say that
Small is beautiful .
Small will be bigger tomorrow and give new jobs and more prosperity .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . - ( DE ) Many thanks , Mr President .
Currently , the transfer of a company 's seat involves administrative obstacles , costs and social consequences and fails to offer the necessary legal certainty to shareholders , creditors or workers .
A public consultation back in 2004 made it clear how important it was to adopt a 14th Directive .
For this reason , I would call on the Commission to present a legislative proposal on this - as soon as possible - with the dual purpose of simplifying the mobility of companies and ensuring that the matter of participation in relation to the transfer of a company 's seat is not left up to the European Court of Justice .
A future 14th Directive must not provide an escape route from strong participation systems .
On no account must existing rights be curtailed .
In order to guarantee the coherence and substantive nature of employee participation procedures , reference should be made to the European Directive on works councils , the 10th Directive and the Directive on worker consultation and information .
It is absolutely vital that information be provided in good time and that a transfer plan be issued prior to any transfer of a company 's seat .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the regulation on European private companies that we are about to adopt completes the framework of the types of companies that are to be regulated at European level .
In certain parts , the final text bears the mark of the text passed by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
I regret that we did not take the opportunity to ask the Commission to be more daring , to take further action to set out a specific system of taxation , a suitable accounting system and homogeneous rules for cases of settlement , insolvency , conversions , mergers , divisions , dissolutions and nullity .
There are still too many areas that remain under national company law , resulting in overlapping levels and multiplication of costs .
If we agree on the importance of creating a common European system and if we want to avoid opportunistic relocating , then now that the framework is complete , following the European Company and the European Cooperative Society , it would be a good idea to plan to reopen the issue and take it to the next level .

draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs . - ( DE ) Mr President , the proposal presented by the Commission for the European private company within the framework of the Small Business Act had serious weaknesses .
It paid scant regard to the interests of creditors , employees , consumers and small suppliers .
To mention a few of its provisions , it envisaged minimum capital of EUR 1 and , in addition , inadequate registration procedures , no requirement for cross-border activity , and the separation of the articles of association , the seat and the actual place of business .
The latter would have led to the circumvention of employee participation .
Every new European company law directive should help achieve the aim of harmonising employees ' rights and the idea of the European standard of participation , based on the new EU Reform Treaty , including the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Employees ' rights are core rights for a social Europe .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , small and medium-sized enterprises are the backbone of our society and provide 67 % of European private sector jobs .
Therefore , I very much welcome the ' Think Small First ' initiative and am committed to ensuring that this principle is taken into account in policymaking at all political and administrative levels .
Particularly at this time of financial crisis it is important to create a genuine , tangible added value for SMEs , in order to strengthen these enterprises as a stabilising factor in the crisis .
As draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I was involved in formulating the ideas that are now to be voted on .
Numerous proposals of mine have been incorporated into the text , including the importance of the principle of flexicurity .
This concept should create flexible labour markets that are also in line with a high level of employment security .
My call for labour law to provide a reliable basis for SMEs has also been incorporated .
SMEs often cannot afford their own legal or human resources departments and are therefore dependent on simple , clear regulations .
One of my most important demands - the ' SME test ' for legislative initiatives - also gained the support of the committee responsible .
Bureaucracy must be nipped in the bud .
Impact assessments are to be carried out systematically in the case of new laws .
Before their adoption , all EU provisions must be examined in terms of their impact on SMEs .
It is important to me that the results of this SME test be subject to an independent evaluation by an independent body , and this idea has been incorporated into the text .
SMEs face particular challenges in the context of the global financial crisis , and so I particularly welcome the report 's call for the proposals of Mr Stoiber 's High-Level Group of Independent Stakeholders on Administrative Burdens to be implemented as quickly as possible .
We must act quickly to take advantage of this potential .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs . - ( DE ) Mr President , we all know that our capacity to build on the growth and innovation potential of small and medium-sized enterprises is decisive for the prosperity of the European Union .
SMEs also play a crucial role in overcoming the crisis .
We must therefore relieve the burden on them and support them , based on the idea that fewer rules have the potential to mean much more to SMEs .
As Chairman of the SME intergroup I would make it quite clear , however , that the Small Business Act is just a declaration of intent by the Heads of State or Government .
Declarations of intent alone are of no use to SMEs , and that is why we make a crystal clear call for national and European legislation to be led by the ' Think Small First ' principle , and we have made four demands .
The first is that Member States must announce how and in what timeframe they will incorporate the core elements of the ' Think Small First ' principle into national legislation .
Secondly , Member States should , on a compulsory basis , present the progress made on the implementation of the ' Think Small First ' principle in the annual reports on the Lisbon process national reform programmes .
Thirdly , we need standard criteria for the measurement of progress in the implementation of the ' Think Small First ' principle .
Then , fourthly , we must establish the ' Think Small First ' principle as an obligatory component of future legislation at European level , too .
In addition , in response to current events , I would say that all existing regulations should be examined in terms of their pro-cyclical impact on SMEs .
We need to act quickly on this .
Unfortunately we do not have the opportunity to hear the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality because Ms Podimata is not available at this moment .
on behalf of the PPE-DE group . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first I would like to emphasise the significance of this joint debate on SMEs and I sincerely hope that the SMEs will hear the strong signal that our Parliament wishes to send out to them .
Our group gave an enthusiastic welcome to the draft Small Business Act that the Commission presented to us last June .
It is true that , since 2000 , initiatives have been taken on SMEs .
These initiatives were appreciated but inadequate .
Why do I say inadequate ?
Because , according to the people they affected , all too often they remained just good intentions .
Today , then , we must go further .
The Small Business Act gives us this chance because it is part of a truly proactive global approach .
I wish to point out that the European Parliament has already scored a success , as it was following the oral question that we asked in December that the Competition Council unanimously adopted the action plan that Commissioner Figel ' mentioned just now .
This obviously showed the governments ' strong political will and , today , I would like to welcome the excellent report by Mrs Herczog which extends this impetus in such a timely way .
I would like also to express my thanks for the quality of the cooperation that we have received and the excellent work that , I must say , we have achieved in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy .
Today we have only put forward two amendments in the plenary session .
This shows how well we did our work .
As for our group , with the amendments that we have put forward and that our rapporteur has been happy to accept , we have set about looking for a way of getting the Member States and Community bodies more deeply involved to guarantee that the planned measures really deliver added value to the SMEs .
We have called for the principle of Think Small First to be a compulsory and integral part of all future legislation .
We have insisted on the Community patent and also , of course , on the financial resources so that these resources can be accessed effectively and quickly .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , perhaps you will allow me , firstly , to say something in reaction to the Commission 's statement .
Firstly , I regret that the Commissioner 's colleague , Mr McCreevy , is not here - I think the horse racing season may have started again !
I really regret it because the subject of company law is really important for us and is at the heart of his portfolio .
Secondly , Commissioner , I really regret your arguments against Parliament 's proposals on the co-determination of employees .
We clearly stated that this is not meant for small companies , but that the SPE Statute is available for all companies .
It is not restricted to size .
We do not want this SPE Statute to be a way of abusing and circumventing existing legislation - particularly in national traditions - something which is a very important aspect of co-determination .
We do not want ' shopping around ' to exist and a new Delaware to be created in the European Union , where companies can circumvent this type of legislation .
Thirdly , regarding the fourteenth directive - which we know Mr McCreevy is not very much in favour of - you repeated the same arguments he put forward .
He should take seriously the fact that Parliament really wants him to present this proposal .
Fourthly , we tabled a resolution together to ask the Commission to consult the social partners on the basis of Article 138 .
This would have been proper before we decided on a regulation concerning the SPE , because co-determination is an issue which is dealt with under Article 138 of the EC Treaty and which first requires a consultation of social partners .
This has not been done .
We now ask for it to be done immediately afterwards .
However , if I hear this type of reaction from the Commission , I will seriously reconsider and suggest to my group that we reconsider whether we can support the SPE product .
Perhaps you should make some phone calls tonight to Mr McCreevy and Mr Špidla and see whether tomorrow you can present a better proposal on this before the vote .
Briefly - because I am now using up my speaking time - the PSE 's position is not against the chance for small and medium-sized enterprises to get this new statute - we are in favour of that - but it is against this form of abuse .
We found a very good compromise with the rapporteur .
It is also very up-to-date and is not at all obsolete , but very topical at this time , considering the disastrous workings of shareholders and financial markets , to consider a better way of governance for companies , in which employees have a part .
Commissioner , you really have to consider with your College and with the Commissioners in charge whether you can make a more positive statement to the Parliament .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would like of course to add my compliments to Mrs Herczog for the excellent 90-point report on the Small Business Act .
However , Commissioner , the work of the European Parliament will only be truly effective with quick and effective implementation in each of our States .
You said in your opening remarks , Commissioner , that on the basis of this report , you were going to create a global strategy , but you will not be unaware that there is currently a financial crisis , an economic crisis and a climate crisis which require fast answers from us .
I will take two examples .
First example : I call for companies to be paid within 30 days .
That is included in Point 87 regarding the Cohesion Fund .
I call on the Commission and the Member States to take measures so that all public contracts are settled with the companies at 30 days .
When it is known , moreover , that 20 % of petitions for bankruptcy are due to delays in payment by public authorities , we can see how far this action by governments and the Commission would reduce the level of unemployment , which is growing daily .
Second example : red tape .
In Point 72 , we call for red tape to be cut by at least 25 % .
I can tell you that I , as a company director , have been waiting for such a concrete measure for years .
Company directors are not there to fill in forms the whole day long .
They are there to provide products and services to our fellow citizens .
If you heed this call , Commissioner , not only over and above the global strategy that you wish to create , but also in terms of the practical response of the governments and the Commission , then , within the framework of the current recovery plans , there will be provisions that deliver solutions to our fellow citizens straight away .
Mr President , when speaking in this debate I want to draw attention to four issues .
Firstly , I would like to express the hope that Mr Lehne 's report will provide a strong stimulus for the European Commission to prepare suitable legal measures , which , in accordance with the freedom of establishment guaranteed in the Treaty , will allow companies to move their registered offices within the European Union , without being burdened with excessive red tape .
Secondly , these kinds of transfers should , conversely , contribute to protecting the existing rights of shareholders , creditors , and especially the rights of employees .
I would also like to express the hope that the solutions proposed by the rapporteur , involving the drawing up a transfer proposal , and especially a report explaining and justifying the legal and , above all , the economic aspects of the proposed move of the company 's seat , and its implications for shareholders and employees , will not prove to be an additional obstacle to the transfer of companies .
Fourthly , and finally , it would appear that competition , in terms of taxation and salaries , was the particular motivating force behind the proposed solutions , as it was seen to have a positive effect on the speed of economic growth in individual Member States and , therefore , also throughout the European Union .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , the draft European Private Company statute is presented by the Commission as a component of the European Small Business Act .
In this framework , and taking the United States ' model , it was a question at the start of setting aside a defined share of public contracts for small companies .
Such noble intentions are only to be applauded .
Unfortunately , it is totally different now that it has arrived , accompanied by the European private company .
First , take the size of the target enterprises .
In place of small enterprise , the already vaguer concept of small and medium-sized enterprises has slipped in .
This has led finally , and I am reading from the explanatory statement of the draft regulation adopted by the Commission , to a ' statute that can also benefit larger companies and groups ' .
This totally changes the philosophy of the policy , and now what will happen to these pseudo-SMEs ?
In truth , they will be subsidiaries of multinationals who , as we know , have long been demanding a single , less binding statute than what currently applies to the companies they control in the various European countries .
Let us look now at the nature of the benefits offered to companies by the EPC statute .
It is no longer a question of giving easier access to public contracts .
Rather , and again I am reading from the explanatory statement of the Commission 's text , its aim is now ' to improve the framework conditions for businesses in the Single Market ' .
To this end , all European Private Companies could have their registered office in one country and their real activities in another .
They could also transfer their registered office to any Member State they choose .
How can we not see in these provisions a way of allowing the companies in question to create constraint-free letter-box companies under the most indulgent conditions for the business world ?
Does not the Commission even specify that ' the relevant applicable law is the law of the Member State where the EPC has its registered office , which applies to private limited-liability companies ' ?
As the European Trade Union Confederation accurately notes : ' there is a great threat that companies will use the EPC statute to elude the most protective legislation ' for workers .
We now understand why the Commission did not consult the trade union organisations before adopting its proposal , contenting itself with the pure formality of an online consultation .
To sum up , when reading this draft regulation it appears that the emphasis placed on ' small enterprises ' is above all political window-dressing aimed at making acceptable a rehash of the sadly famous ' country of origin ' principle .
It amounts to a revamped Bolkestein .
This is why my group proposes that Parliament send a clear signal to the Commission and the Council by rejecting this proposal for a European private company statute .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that we must resolve this crisis of small and medium-sized enterprises in an authentically European way .
We are witnessing a plague striking small and medium-sized enterprises across the whole continent , caused by a lack of access to credit .
The problem is that the banks are not lending to businesses , and it is also true that the attempts of some governments to finance the banks so that they , in turn , will finance small businesses , are failing because no one knows what debts the banks are in fact suffering at this time .
I therefore propose that the national states , by nationalising their national banks , advocate printing money , or vouchers corresponding to money , to finance small businesses .
An attempt of this kind was recently made in the Republic of Taiwan , which issued vouchers that for all intents and purposes correspond to money , and gave them , in the form of personal vouchers , to Taiwanese citizens .
This meant that , for all intents and purposes , USD or EUR 3 billion was issued in the Republic of Taiwan .
We must do the same ; we must give credit to small businesses by issuing money practically as states no longer in debt but in credit .
( EL ) Mr President , I shall focus my speech on the first of the issues at debate , the statute for a European private company .
As you know , just 8 % of European small and medium-sized enterprises engage in cross-border transactions at a time when small and medium-sized enterprises represent approximately 99 % of the companies in the European Union .
This fact proves the shortcomings in the policy to encourage intra-Community business applied to date .
It also proves the need for targeted measures to be adopted to create a single and more favourable regulatory framework at European level .
The global economic crisis has now hit the real economy , the millions of small and medium-sized enterprises throughout Europe .
Under the present circumstances , our prime target must be small , efficient enterprises .
The Commission proposal for a regulation to the Council goes in the right direction which , in my opinion , is to reduce to a minimum the administrative burden faced by European small and medium-sized enterprises , which are required to meet different local administrative requirements in order to set up a company .
The flexibility and uniformity of European private companies , the minimal cross-border component required , the simplification of checks on the legality of the memorandum and articles of association and the principle of starting capital of EUR 1 are the main tenets of a strategy which may well give new momentum to the development of intra-Community entrepreneurship .
To close , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Lehne , on the effort which he made in successfully achieving a compromise between the divergent opinions formulated by his colleagues in the Committee on Legal Affairs and in the various political groups .

( ES ) Mr President , I believe the debate we are having this evening is useful in clarifying certain points : firstly , the fact that the debate on European private companies is being held at the same time as the debate on small European businesses does not mean that a European private company is necessarily a small European business .
As Mrs van den Burg said , and I believe that Mr Wurtz also highlighted the point in his criticism of the proposal , the European private company statute , as conceived in the Commission proposal and as approved within the Committee on Legal Affairs , is an instrument for the creation of undertakings which may be large and which have certain characteristics , such as limitation of the liability of the partners and the prohibition on trading in these undertakings on public markets .
Both European private company status and national private company status , however , may apply to small businesses or to large ones .
As Mrs van den Burg said , it is precisely the flexibility or malleability of the European private company that means we must be extremely cautious .
This has been the task of the Committee on Legal Affairs .
The amendments adopted by the Committee on Legal Affairs , which are quite numerous , are designed precisely to prevent the European private company formula from forming a basis for , as Mrs van den Burg was saying , the emergence of a European Delaware .
This is particularly relevant to one of the subjects of concern to Mr Wurtz : workers ' participation in companies .
I think that the wordings adopted within the Committee on Legal Affairs point out these restrictions clearly .
It is not a question , as Mr Wurtz was saying , of applying the country of origin rule , but rather , in accordance with the rules that we adopted in the Committee on Legal Affairs - and I would recommend that Mr Wurtz read the amendments we adopted - there is a set of restrictions preventing the country of origin rules from applying to those companies in which there is a higher level of workers ' participation than normal .
They are included in full in the amendments that we have adopted and I believe that , with these amendments , it is wholly admissible to adopt the text , even from Mr Wurtz 's viewpoint .
In other words , we are dealing with a form of European company that exists in all our countries , which ought to be harmonised in the context of the European Union .
We must not , however , in doing so , allow these companies to become virtual entities , but they must exist within the context of national situations and comply with national legislation , particularly within such a delicate sphere as workers ' co-determination .
I believe that the text adopted by the Committee on Legal Affairs makes some crucial contributions and , therefore , the Commission would be mistaken not to take these amendments into account .
I believe that the amendments by the Committee on Legal Affairs are directed , precisely , at limiting the shortcomings in the Commission 's text , and I believe that Parliament can adopt it in good conscience , not only because of the progress it makes in the context of small companies , but also in view of the management of this type of company , which exists under law and which would be subject to rigorous scrutiny by workers in a system of co-determination .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , small and medium-sized enterprises have never been as important as they are today .
SMEs are particularly important against the background of the economic and financial crisis , which was caused by the large rather than the small enterprises .
SMEs are important because they too will soon be suffering , yet they are responsible for much of our economic performance .
In the country I know best , SMEs account for 20 % of all patents , 40 % of all gross investment , 49 % of total turnover , 70 % of all workers and 80 % of all trainees .
What is needed now is a rethink .
We must press the large reset button , as it were .
We must promote entrepreneurial mindsets - this is what the Small Business Act stands for .
I should like to congratulate Mrs Herczog on this report .
It is indeed important that we now describe and regard SMEs as a cross-section , that we rethink support measures , that we give precedence to small enterprises in public tenders ( ' Think Small First ' ) and that we prevent public authorities from intervening in competition .
I congratulate you , therefore ; what are needed now are tax cuts for labour-intensive sectors .
Madam President , I too would like to welcome this report .
About 80 % of all new jobs in the European Union have been created by SMEs , and in my own constituency of Dublin about 400 000 people are employed by about 100 000 companies in the SME sector .
We must do all we possibly can at the moment to support these companies in difficult times .
I welcome the fact that the EIB has a fund of EUR 31 billion for small and medium-sized industries , and I think that more should be done in this area .
Also , the cutting of red tape and bureaucracy by the Commission has to be welcomed .
That amounts to savings for the European Union of about EUR 2.3 million .
I had a meeting recently with Commissioner Verheugen where we discussed with Irish business people the problems that they faced .
One idea that should be looked at is that of maybe having a moratorium on new red tape coming from Europe , because that is stifling business .
During these difficult times , we have to do everything we possibly can to make sure that businesses survive until the hoped-for upturn .
However , that cannot be done by Europe alone .
It must also be done by national governments and by local governments , which have a huge role to play .
If we want to get our small businesses and employment to stabilise in the European Union and in each individual Member State , we must do everything we possibly can to try and save them .
The challenge that we have at the moment is about jobs , jobs , jobs , and we must bend over backwards to try and protect existing employment and , hopefully , in the years ahead try and create new jobs .
That is absolutely essential for all of us .
( EL ) Madam President , the European private company is an effort to inflict even greater damage on workers ' social and labour rights , along the lines of the Bolkestein directive .
While the pretext is being put forward that this company will benefit small and medium-sized enterprises , in fact it strengthens the monopoly business groups .
A form of company is being created with no capital ( just EUR 1 suffices ) , which will be able to establish a fictitious registered office and relocate it anywhere .
The Member States with the lowest level of protection for wage and social rights will be used in order to circumvent and reduce the workers ' rights to the lowest possible level .
The regulation , which is directly applicable in the Member States , is the natural complement to the Bolkestein directive and the anti-labour judgments handed down by the European Court of Justice in the Viking , Laval and Ruffert cases .
It is a consequence and the result of the Maastricht Treaty and of the application of the four freedoms .
The European private company exposes the political powers that voted for Maastricht , which tried to deceive the workers when they voted for the Bolkestein directive by lying and saying that it allegedly did not affect workers ' rights .
That is why we shall vote against this regulation .
All those who support this anti-grassroots policy are sowing winds and are certain to reap hurricanes .
Madam President , the fact that 70 % of private employment in Europe is provided by SMEs is a tremendous tribute to their entrepreneurial tenacity , because oppressive EU regulation makes their lives unnecessarily and extremely difficult .
Hence , I would repeat a call I have made before that during the currency of this economic downturn , there should be a regulation holiday for SMEs .
The cost of EU regulation in the United Kingdom has been reckoned to be GBP 107 billion over the last ten years .
That is GBP 107 billion that should have been going into innovation , into intensified export efforts and into growth .
Yet much of that has had to be spent on mere compliance with regulation .
The simplification of procurement procedures , reducing patent costs , relaxation on state aid rules and real action against unfair competition from the Far East are all essential if SMEs are to flourish .
Today we need family SMEs - small businesses - more than ever because they have the type of commitment and sticking power to get us through this crisis .
However , they need our help and they need it by lifting the dead hand of EU regulation from them .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , many Members have raised the subject of participation .
I do not wish to go more deeply into this now , but I do want to point out in this connection that our Member States ' company law also has the function of defending the interests of public policy , such as creditor protection , security of the legal system and consumer protection , a function that is safeguarded in the Member States by administration of preventive justice , for example by means of form and register provisions .
There are major differences between Member States in this regard .
The decisions of the Committee on Legal Affairs take account of this in many places - which is to be warmly welcomed - by leaving Member States ' options open .
Ultimately , however , these things are counteracted , or at least can be counteracted , unless we do something about the fact that the registered office and the actual seat - that is , the actual place of business of the company - are allowed to differ , as this ultimately renders these safeguards meaningless .
The company can locate its registered office practically at will , and thus evade the requirements of the country where it really does business .
In my opinion , Member States thereby de facto - although not de jure - lose a great deal of sovereignty over their company law and its regulatory function , as these can be invalidated .
I wish to add that this will - or rather could - also jeopardise the reputation of the European private company , at least in the Member States with stricter requirements of their own .
One could suggest that we wait and see what happens and then make the necessary adjustments , and I would agree with them if this development were not reinforced by the procedures and the unanimity .
That is my greatest concern .
There is no reason for this course of action .
The case-law of the European Court of Justice is only a stopgap measure because we do not have a directive on the transfer of company seats ; but , in the form currently envisaged , this European private company would basically reinforce this disintegration - enshrining it in Community law once and for all .
For this reason , I would ask the Council to reconsider this issue very carefully .
( ES ) Madam President , small and medium-sized enterprises are the backbone of the European Union 's economy .
Their great dynamism and capacity to grow and innovate have earned them a notable position in the EU 's policies .
We congratulate Mrs Herczog , because her report encourages the growth of SMEs on the basis of a principle which is by no means trivial : in the political and economic actions of the EU and its Member States , we should think small first .
The Small Business Act contains legislative proposals and political agreements that will give rise to administrative , regulatory and financial conditions with the potential to develop these units within the European economy .
The current crisis and the instability of the financial system are restricting SMEs ' access to credit , and this is slowing down their usual economic activity .
Now , more than ever , we need a coordinated response at European level and the initiatives of the Member States ought to be structured in terms of and aligned with the provisions of the document we are discussing today .
In conclusion , I would like to say that it is particularly important to allocate EUR 30 000 million in the 2009-2011 period to encourage lending to SMEs .
This initiative is in addition to the Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme and the JEREMIE initiative , and will have a multiplying effect on the funds that SMEs will be able to obtain .
We are fully convinced that European coordination and the European scope of the response are vital in starting out on the road to economic recovery as soon as possible .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Small Business Act was conceived and was born in a different climate to the current one , at a time when there was growth and development .
We come to adopt it today in Parliament in a totally different situation , while SMEs are suffering severe hardship and great difficulty as they are hit by the storm of the manufacturing crisis and the financial crisis .
As we adopt the Act in Parliament , I believe the primary message should be to say to SMEs that Parliament and the European institutions are standing by them and want to strengthen the will and capacity for resistance that small and medium-sized enterprises in Europe are now demonstrating in the face of this storm .
We want to reinforce this by indicating the priorities of this support and by saying practical things : calling for more flexibility in the law , and for tools to be made available that will create an environment less hostile to these companies .
The second thing that I believe we must demonstrate is that we are helping SMEs in what is currently the most critical factor , namely access to and availability of credit .
The funds made available by the EIB are not enough : it is absolutely crucial that we say - and we will say it tomorrow - that we want to do more to give credit to small and medium-sized enterprises .
( PL ) Madam President , the financial crisis , and the resulting economic crisis , are inducing employers to attempt to alter the legal status of their firms to reduce costs , including costs connected with employees ' rights and social obligations .
That is why they are looking to register their companies ' offices in countries where regulations and economic conditions create cost-cutting opportunities , because the legal requirements , such as the minimum wage or pension contributions , are lower .
Information contained in the report draws attention to the fact that the cross-border transfer of companies ' registered offices should not lead to companies avoiding legal , social or tax regulations .
Labour rights must not be violated .
We cannot allow social standards to slip .
A different means of supporting small and medium-sized enterprises should be be found , such as the provision of loans .
- ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , in Mrs Herczog 's report on SMEs we are talking about 70 % of jobs and 70 % of VAT receipts in the EU .
I would therefore like to express not only my enormous appreciation for the initiative of the rapporteur but also my support .
In the current crisis SMEs are clearly in the high risk category .
We must therefore promote better social awareness of SMEs .
They constantly encounter a range of obstacles .
It is much harder for them to obtain loans than it is for large corporations .
The administrative and bureaucratic burden is also heavier for SMEs .
It is always much harder for SMEs to win public contracts in Europe than it is in the US and many Asian countries .
We assert that they are essential to the health of the European economy .
Let us therefore give them what they need to confirm this , opportunities in the current period when the crisis is spreading as a result of the domino effect set off by the financial giants and multinational companies .
( PL ) Madam President , the adoption of a statute for a European private company will enable the creation of these companies , which will operate in all Member States on an equal basis .
The aim , above all , is to remove the current burdensome regulations for small and medium-sized enterprises operating internationally .
To run such an operation , SMEs are de facto forced to found a company in the target country .
This process , in view of the fact that there are 27 different legal systems in the EU , clearly generates huge costs .
In the case of a European private company , the owners will be able to register their business in the same form , irrespective of whether they are operating in their own home country , or in any other Member State .
The time and money saved on legal advice , management and administrative procedures will undoubtedly make the process simpler and more convenient for entrepreneurs looking to invest .
One of the main fears that sceptics have concerns the lack of a requirement for the company to own a sufficient amount of share capital to protect creditors .
Nothing could be further from the truth .
Limited companies provide proof of the fact that a company can be successful without the need for share capital - they are the most popular kind of company in the world .
In today 's world , share capital has lost its most important function , namely that of protecting creditors .
In the case of a European private company , that protection is provided by other mechanisms , based mainly on the increased transparency of its operations and closer cooperation with creditors .
Today , commercial partners themselves do not pay as much attention to share capital as to the flow of capital , known as cashflows , which reveal much more about the solvency of a company than capital alone .
There is still the question of employees ' rights - it is especially in this context that trade unions are concerned about abandoning previously achieved standards .
However , I consider this to be a false alarm .
The proposed statute contains an unambiguous provision , according to which employee participation takes place in accordance with national legal regulations .
The attractiveness of the European private company could be threatened by the threshold for employee participation being set too low .
I think the minimum level of 500 employees should be maintained , so as not to burden smaller enterprises with additional costs .
( ES ) Madam President , more attention should be paid to SMEs within the European Union , since they represent 99 % of undertakings , 70 % of the labour force and nearly 60 % of European added business value , and play a fundamental role in European diversity , innovation and cohesion .
It is vital that we provide them with an integrated framework that boosts entrepreneurship , accepts the principle of thinking small first when formulating policies and stimulates their enormous potential .
Administrative bodies should adjust to their needs and family orientation in order to facilitate their existence , their transfer , particularly in cases of illness , retirement or bankruptcy , and their winding-up .
The 23 million European SMEs cannot be subject to the same requirements as the 41 000 large undertakings .
A simpler legislative environment , without disproportionate bureaucratic burdens , is vital .
Moves in this direction include the European private company statute , the initiatives to create companies in 48 hours , to reduce administrative costs by 25 % by 2012 , the creation of a one-stop scheme for VAT and reduced VAT rates for labour-intensive and locally supplied services , and a common consolidated corporate tax base .
SMEs should increase their participation in the internal market and in public procurement .
Currently , only 8 % have cross-border activities , and their share of public tender participation is 42 % .
Ways to promote more balanced competition conditions would be to facilitate the exemption from new State aid categories , to promote cooperation , to amend the directive on late payment in order to ensure payment within 30 days , and to remove obstacles to public procurement .
At this time of crisis , European action to safeguard access by SMEs to finance at a reasonable price is key .
Also crucial are measures to constantly increase knowledge transfer and the effectiveness of support services .
( SV ) Madam President , we know that small businesses form the backbone of our economy .
At this time in particular , the EU and the Member States need to make things simpler for small businesses , both those already in existence and future businesses , by reducing the number of rules , reducing bureaucracy and lowering costs .
Small and medium-sized enterprises have a totally different capacity from traditional large enterprises when it comes to adapting to new circumstances and adopting new discoveries and technology .
In addition to making it easier for small businesses to participate in public procurement by providing better access to the internal market , making it easier to obtain capital and making the rules on state aid non-discriminatory , there must also be a change in attitude permeating all decision-making , in schools , universities and the workplace .
Research shows that there is a strong correlation between entrepreneurship and growth .
The forthcoming Swedish Presidency will , in particular , be making targeted efforts to facilitate enterprise by women , an important European strategy for the future .
( ES ) Madam President , with regard to this debate we need to be aware , at the end of the day , that this is not a legislative standard - and , therefore , a Community rule applicable to the various Member States - but rather a set of benchmarks which attempts to ensure that , henceforward , all European Union Member States adopt a common approach with respect to small and medium-sized enterprises .
There are many aspects to this subject , but I am going to mention three that I certainly believe are important .
Firstly , there is a need to remove many of the legal barriers , many of the obstacles and much of the excessive red tape hindering - to an extraordinary extent in certain countries - the creation of small businesses , and also the development of these businesses once they have been created .
All this requires financial and human resources to tackle this extraordinary amount of excessive regulation , and these resources can thus not be used for other purposes .
Secondly , there are the issues relating to technological innovation and applied research .
To this end , we must also redouble our efforts to ensure that SMEs have access to Community programmes , which also , in many cases , suffer from too much red tape .
Finally , I believe the relationship between SMEs and the training and educational spheres is vital : if the SMEs , the small businesses , do not become the natural arena for additional skills training at the various training levels , then in fact we , or rather the SMEs , will cease to have certain extraordinary resources , and by that I mean persons being trained .
( PL ) Madam President , this legislative proposal corresponds in great measure to the European Parliament resolution , with recommendations to the Commission on the European private company statute , which was adopted two years ago .
The purpose of the proposal is to create a standardised form of enterprise under Community law , which will be attractive to small and medium-sized businesses and will be based on simplified conditions and keeping the bureaucratic burden to a minimum .
The minimum capital stock of EUR 10 000 , proposed by the Commission , may benefit the company 's image by providing a certain level of credibility .
On the other hand , this amount is more difficult to raise in some Member States than in others .
Share capital should not be a serious barrier to starting a business and therefore I endorse the compromise amendment adopted by the Committee on Legal Affairs , which sets the minimum capital stock of a European private company at EUR 1 , but is accompanied by a requirement stipulating that the company 's managing body must sign a statement of solvency .
Regarding the question of employee participation in the enterprise , this should be decided by the law of the country where the company has its registered office .
However , an exception should be made to this rule if the right of participation of a certain number of employees of the company , which would apply in the Member State where they actually work , would be restricted by the law in force in the country where the European company is registered .
In this case , the management of the enterprise would be obliged to create a uniform system of participation , as part of an agreement negotiated with employee representatives .
Finally I would like to add that this new form of company does not replace other forms of enterprise which already exist in different countries , but offers an alternative to them , and that only when specific conditions concerning the establishment of such a company are met .
Madam President , as a small businessman with some 25 years ' experience in the ' real world ' , I support the broad thrust of the Small Business Act and the report by Mrs Herczog from my committee .
In particular , I would like to welcome the proposal for a directive on reduced VAT rates for labour-intensive and locally supplied services , particularly at this point in time .
I also welcome the amendments calling for implementation of the results of the high-level expert group on the reduction of administrative burdens .
If ever small businesses needed something , it is the reduction of administrative burdens .
I welcome , too , the amendment calling for a swift agreement on the Community patent , adapted to the needs of SMEs .
Mind you , ' swift ' and ' Community patent ' are not words and concepts that go comfortably together .
I also welcome the call for improving access to finance because , in the current economic climate , access to finance is crucial for the survival , let alone the prospering , of small businesses .
However , I have two reservations .
The first concerns the proposal for a common consolidated tax base , because I fear that this would remove flexibility from SMEs and also from Member States .
Secondly , I have personal doubts about the merits and benefits of changing the Late Payment Directive .
I personally have always had doubts about the worth of this measure to small businesses , because I feel that they are better off managing their own credit than leaving this to legislation .
( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in this report we try to underline the importance of SMEs , including family businesses and those integrated in the social economy .
I want to congratulate my colleague , Edit Herczog , as her report is vital in this respect .
Other documents and texts have been produced in this area and it is important that they agree .
For example , I would mention the European Eurostars Programme and the report on pre-commercial procurement .
Madam President , this report also underlines the many ways of cutting red tape to make it easier to set up this type of enterprise , in order to take advantage of their capacity for initiative , start up new businesses , manufacture new products , provide new services suited to the needs of consumers and other businesses , and thus boost the development of the European economy .
I also want to mention something that is very important in my opinion : this is the issue referred to in paragraph 47 of the Herczog report .
It is advisable for certain aspects of the legal and fiscal system of the Member States to be improved in this respect , as the current model in most Member States can discourage the transfer of businesses , particularly family businesses , thus increasing the risk of liquidation or closure of the company .
Member States must therefore carefully review their legal and fiscal framework to improve the conditions for the transfer of businesses and to promote and apply effective models for the transfer of businesses to employees as an alternative to their closure .
This approach would allow jobs to be protected and profits to be reinvested in order to better develop these businesses .
To end , I would point out that support for innovative projects of small and medium-sized enterprises , easier access to European funds and improved access to credit , particularly , but not only , in the current context , are vital factors for supporting SMEs .
( RO ) First of all , I wish to thank the rapporteur and those who have worked on perhaps the most important piece of legislation from this last parliamentary term .
It must be highlighted that we attach , first and foremost , special importance to SMEs and entrepreneurship among women , and because we have just celebrated International Women 's Day on 8 March , I would like to take this opportunity to convey my best wishes to them .
However , we must emphasise that this is a fairly complex act in which we have included everything we could include relating to SMEs : cutting red tape and attaching particular importance to research and development activities within SMEs and to the finances relating to these activities .
I think that this piece of legislation will bode well during the current economic crisis because the European economy needs cohesion and its biggest driving force , SMEs .
For this reason , I believe that we need to give the Commission and Council our maximum possible support , speed up the approval of this act and be able to highlight the European economy 's strength and dynamic activity in this area so as to hold onto , here in Europe , everything that the European economy and production stand for .
Lastly , we must ask the Commission to find as many sources of funding as possible and provide SMEs with as many credit mechanisms as possible .
( HU ) With regard to the report on small and medium-sized enterprises , I would like first of all to congratulate the Commission and in particular the rapporteur , Mrs Herczog , for the excellent work .
At the same time , I regret that this report was not prepared in accordance with Rule 39 of the Rules of Procedure , requesting that the Commission submit concrete legislative proposals .
Specifically , I consider it important for the sake of the Member States that we require them to report on progress in their annual Lisbon reports .
Otherwise , the majority of the good recommendations made herein will remain a dead letter .
I also agree with Edit Herczog that preferential treatment of the new Member States , and especially of those outside the euro zone , is an important political consequence of this whole exercise .
They are in a particularly difficult situation beyond even the generally disadvantageous status of small and medium-sized enterprises , and yet they could play an extremely important role in overcoming the crisis .
To cite only a few elements of the internal market : it is indeed of concern that only 8 % of SMEs engage in cross-border activities ; this percentage must be increased .
Mentorship is particularly important in encouraging such activities .
This could be accomplished , on the one hand , by reducing administrative burdens , and on the other hand , through activities involving VAT , such as a one-stop shop system or a reduced VAT rate .
Furthermore , we need to promote a stronger SME orientation in public procurement at the Community level as well , for instance by selecting SMEs more often as lead contractors , or by issuing calls for tender intended specifically for them .
The SME Circle , of which I am President , would emphatically like to see results in the establishment of a thorough guarantee and credit system at EU level .
I hope that the new European Investment Bank ( EIB ) opportunity will fulfil the hopes placed in it .
As for the rapid implementation of the payment directives and in order to resolve the debt situation , coordinated steps must be taken at Member State level .
All in all , both in order to find new markets and to deal with administrative challenges , Member States ' efforts to strengthen a mentor system and EU support for such a venture must come quickly .
( FR ) Madam President , I would like to welcome the discussion and the adoption of this European private company statute and I would like in particular to praise our rapporteur , Mr Lehne .
I think that the text that will be adopted by this House will , in a way , carry his name and the European private company will be known to posterity as the Klaus-Heiner Lehne company .
I would just like to comment on one point .
I share the view that Mr Becsey has just expressed .
I believe that the provisions for worker participation proposed in the compromise run counter to the agreed objective , in other words run counter to the ease and effectiveness of this statute for small and medium-sized enterprises .
I think it is a mistake to introduce worker participation at such a level , in other words in such small companies .
I understand perfectly well the attachment to a system of social and economic management which has proven its worth .
I think that , in this case , we are losing some of the effectiveness of the statute we are proposing and that is going to be adopted , by imposing worker participation systems on small companies when such systems , I feel , are only suitable for large companies .
However , aside from this reservation , I think that this text is excellent .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Tuesday , at 12 noon .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection . - ( ES ) Madam President , firstly I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Herczog , for her report and her cooperation with the draftsmen of the opinions of the other committees .
As draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , I would like to point briefly to the three elements that we believe are essential - although we also have a very broad consensus regarding other elements - and which we wished to highlight when drawing up our opinion .
Firstly , I want to point to the need to take action to tackle the situation that often arises when the owner of a small or medium-sized enterprise retires .
In too many cases , this retirement entails the cessation of operations for these enterprises or , in other cases , their absorption by larger undertakings , with the result that they cease to be small or medium-sized enterprises .
Secondly , I would like to stress the value of training as a key element , both in improving the capacities of the enterprises and their staff , and in highlighting the social value of enterprises within the wider context of society .
Lastly , I want to refer in particular to women , who continue to experience the greatest difficulties in running this type of enterprise .
Madam President , I rise to challenge Mr Allister on what he said earlier in his ludicrous comments about the supposed costs of EU regulation to businesses , and in particular British businesses .
These are based on some so-called studies which are being hawked around the British Euro-sceptic press at the moment with ever more lurid calculations about these costs .
However , those studies are wrong on three counts .
First , they exaggerate the amount of legislation that is adopted at EU level instead of national level , quoting 50 % or more whereas most national studies show it to be between 6 and 15 % .
Secondly , they take no account of the fact that EU legislation , when we get it right , cuts costs to businesses and cuts red tape by having a single set of standards - common rules for the common market - instead of 27 divergent and separate ones .
Thirdly , they take no account of the fact that when we do impose costs , it is often deliberate in order to save money downstream .
When we require cigarettes to have a health warning system , or when we require asbestos to be phased out of our products and our workplaces , it is in order to cut health costs and save lives for people downstream .
These studies cynically make no attempt to balance up the whole picture , and it is a scandal that somebody who claims to represent all of his voters only looks at one side of the argument .

Madam President , it is a pity that Mr Toubon is leaving the room , because I wanted to respond to an accusation he made concerning our compromise : namely that it requires new heavy burdens on SMEs .
In fact , in the compromise , the status quo is being resettled for mergers , divisions of companies and transfers of seats .
Regarding new companies starting from scratch , there is a fairly high threshold for companies with fewer than 500 employees .
Those with between 500 and 1 000 employees have exactly what is in the other directives .
One cannot say that this is making the status quo even heavier ; it is making it lighter .
In this consultation with the social partners , we want to look at simplification and a better system which is harmonised all over the EU .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to thank everyone for a very interesting debate .
First of all , I apologise on behalf of my colleague , Charlie McCreevy , who has an Ecofin commitment early tomorrow .
His absence is due to preparations for that .
I wish to respond to some of the points raised .
Part of the response lies in the overall process which we are driving together including , for example , the great political signals Parliament has sent to SMEs in 2009 .
These provide good encouragement , especially in a time of crisis , especially as we believe that SMEs have very high potential and that they deserve specific attention - mainstreaming , for example , the connection between education , training and SMEs .
I am pleased that , since 2007 , we have been working together with DG Enterprise and Commissioner Verheugen on entrepreneurial education , which is very much needed in Europe and lags behind many other areas .
I could quote many examples of good instruments - such as Erasmus for Young Entrepreneurs - but do not want to speak on these just now .
It is a process of many issues around access to finance .
The EIB is now freeing up space and volume for credits : EUR 30 billion for SMEs , EUR 1 billion a year more for medium-sized corporations , and an additional EUR 1 billion for mezzanine financing .
We recently decided , as you know , to relax the rules on state aid , levering the de minimis threshold to EUR 500 000 , which means better conditions in general for more intensified state aid .
This will also help facilitate subsidies for the production of green products .
Mr Karas spoke on the Small Business Act ( SBA ) .
Some Member States are already monitoring and reporting on SBA implementation .
This was the case in 2008 and , starting in 2009 , there will be annual assessment by Member States as part of all national reform programmes .
We will therefore know more , and this culture of mainstreaming and support will grow .
On public procurement and SMEs , the Commission held vast consultations with stakeholders , including business organisations .
One real problem lies with application of the rules by public buyers .
We need more competition , more transparency and no discrimination , but the good news is that 42 % of volume , above EU thresholds , is already going to SMEs in the European Union , which is really significant support .
Mr Wurtz spoke on the separation of registered offices and headquarters , and the problem of a potential erosion of employee participation .
The separation of SMEs ' registered offices and headquarters is already general practice in half of the Member States , including those with very high standards of social policy safeguards .
It ensures the flexibility companies need when doing business in more than one country .
Regarding the 30-day request by Mr Beaupuy , this should be dealt with in the proposal already in the pipeline on late payments , which should be adopted in the Commission before the end of the month .
The issue of consultations and worker participation has been much discussed here - and not only today .
As part of its preparations , the Commission conducted , between July and October 2007 , a public consultation on the potential SPE .
Representatives of trade unions , including European trade unions , presented their views at conferences , especially during 2008 .
A major conference was held in March 2008 , and we discussed these questions with experts from European trade unions several times that year .
I want to underline one important thing , which is the legal basis .
This is not Article 138 , because we are not in the field of social policy , but Article 308 , making it a different initiative based on unanimity of the Member States .
There was no reason to launch a specific consultation under the former article .
I want to remind you that we already targeted large public companies when we launched the proposal on the European company , and that SPE proposal was designed for SMEs .
Employees ' information and consultation rights were dealt with in 2001 , in the first directive on the European company .
Since 2002 , we have had a general framework for informing and consulting employees in the European Union .
There is no reason to disregard these rules and come up with a different solution in this current proposal on the SPE .
If workers ' collective rights are to be improved , which is our intent , this should not be done only in respect of one type of company , but through a more general initiative that also takes into account the different traditions in the Member States .
We have already made important progress in the evaluation of employees ' rights in the European company statute .
Follow-up measures will be considered when the full assessment is completed in 2010 .
Some points were made on why there was not more input into taxation and accounting .
I would remind you that we do not have general legislative power on every issue .
Legislative initiatives on company law , insolvency law , accounting and tax law are attached to very specific , and often restrictive , legal bases in our Treaties , and the existing Treaty hardly serves as a basis for a complete body of European business law .
Last but not least , I want thank you for a very open and constructive debate , and also for real cooperation on SME policy issues .
I see many friends of SMEs here .
The recommendations in the first report will be taken into account in the implementation of the action plan , and especially in all relevant issues connected to small businesses .
Concerning Mr Lehne 's report , a lot of work still needs to be done because we need to achieve agreement in the Council .
We will need some time , especially in the light of unanimity , but your input can really soften the atmosphere and help to find real consensus and approval .
We want to facilitate this progress and to put in place a statute which really helps European businesses .
On the cross-border transfer of registered offices , the Commission agrees that companies should be free to move their seat within the European Union , provided that the rights of shareholders , creditors and employees are guaranteed .
We therefore need to strike the right balance between freedom of establishment and the interests of third parties .
I would conclude by saying that this is the European Year of Creativity and Innovation , and that it is very important to have an approach which brings forward the creative potential of our businesses .
People are very important , not only because there is a crisis , but because there is no greater potential than that of human beings .
Issues such as IPRs or the Community patent could in the near future be addressed through a more open-minded and open-hearted political approach .
Europe could be more innovative and creative in supporting SMEs .
Madam President , Commissioner , I should like to make four comments .
Firstly , with regard to the directive on the transfer of registered offices , I think that the Commission should abandon its argument , as it runs the risk of making itself a laughing stock among experts .
The theory that transfers of company seats can be arranged such that a company is started up in a neighbouring country and then one 's own company merged with it under the Directive on mergers could scarcely be more bureaucratic .
We are talking here about reducing bureaucracy and trying to make things easier for SMEs .
This proposal just goes to prove how little sense it makes for the Commission to persist in refusing to present a proposal on the 14th Directive .
This benefits no one but lawyers .
My second point concerns participation .
Mrs van den Burg is right : real SMEs are not affected in the slightest by the compromise we have presented .
We are aiming only to avoid abuses and to record companies that are actually large companies and are more suited to the European company than to the European private company in terms of the number of employees .
It is practically only abuses that are being recorded .
My third point concerns the real-seat theory , to which only seven Member States remain committed - only seven !
Last year , the largest Member State , Germany , abandoned this theory .
The European Court of Justice does not advocate it , but allows it in exceptional cases , as proved by the Cartesio ruling .
That ship has sailed ; there is no point in continuing to argue about it .
The fourth thing I want to say is that the argument on the part of left-wing Members - none of whom stayed for the debate earlier on - that the proposal should be rejected does not take account of the substance of the report - Mr Medina Ortega is absolutely right about this .
The substance of the report actually takes care of all the criticism that has been presented .
Therefore , I would suggest that the left-wing Members , too , consider rereading the report and the amendments and then discussing them once again with their group .

rapporteur . - Madam President , it is a great pity that all of my voters are not here in the room , because it was wonderful to listen to so many Members from so many countries and so many parties welcoming my report on the Small Business Act .
However , I have to say that my report would not have been possible without the Commission , namely Mr Verheugen and his small business team , Mrs Le Bail and others .
I would also not have been able to do it without the Small Business Intergroup .
Most of my colleagues agreed with everything in the report , as can be seen from the fact that not too many amendments were introduced .
Some colleagues asked why it is not legally binding .
It is not legally binding by nature for many reasons .
However , tomorrow we will ask for a roll-call vote on many paragraphs in order to prove the Parliament 's common action and the Council 's common requirement to do this .
Finally , I would like to say that exactly 200 years ago Darwin published his book on the origin of species .
He said that the survivor is not the strongest , but the one most able to adapt .
I think what we have done with the Small Business Act is to create a place for Member States to adapt and manoeuvre , and for small businesses within the Member States to adapt faster , survive this crisis and face the next challenges . Thank you very much for your support .
I have received four motions for a resolution from four political groups on the participation of workers in the European private company .
The vote will take place on Thursday .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
I would just like to highlight two absolutely essential aspects .
Access to funding is vital , along with the legal and administrative facilities .
Creating a special fund for SMEs and developing microcredits are conditions without which SMEs cannot withstand the difficult market conditions and the opportunity to create new SMEs would be very limited .
The second aspect is linked to the status of women running small businesses .
In many respects , they do not differ significantly from employees .
Reasons for this can be the lack of development of services facilitating the balance between private life and work activities , as well as the tough competitive environment in which networks matter very much .
Such networks , which facilitate the flow of information and can provide support , if needed , are a feature of businesses run by men , whereas women are more vulnerable from this point of view .
For this reason , links must be encouraged between businesses run by women and those run by men .
We also call for recognition in all Member States of the status of co-ownership for women working in small family businesses .
In most cases , the owner is a man , while any women are regarded as unpaid family workers .
They do not even benefit from the social insurance which employees enjoy .
In fact , when they are old and if they have separated from their partners , the adverse consequences are obvious and disastrous ...
The competitiveness of SMEs is frequently reduced as a result of the barriers blocking cross-border trade .
Lifting these barriers would bring about greater legal stability and would make it possible to calculate more efficiently the liability risks facing enterprises and entrepreneurs .
Through this report the European Parliament has indicated that it has fully understood the vital role which small and medium-sized businesses play in terms of the European economy 's competitiveness .
A well-conceived European Public Company Statute , intended to supplement the legal forms which already exist , would benefit the competitiveness of European SMEs in many respects : it would consolidate the European internal market , simplify the legal framework for enterprises , thereby reducing consultancy costs and facilitating access to cross-border markets , and it would improve economic integration and growth .
This statute would also offer SMEs greater flexibility .
SMEs account for more than 90 % of the EU economy and two-thirds of its jobs .
They should therefore be given the best possible conditions in order to contribute to economic growth in an integrated internal market , capitalise on the opportunities available and face up to the challenges of globalisation .
in writing . - ( DA ) The aim of this proposal , according to the Commission , is to improve the framework conditions for business in the EU 's internal market .
The proposal will achieve this by giving enterprises the ability to freely choose the EU Member State in which to have their registered address , regardless of where their actual operations take place , and for them only to be obliged to comply with the laws of the country in which they have their registered address .
This will open the way for the circumvention of hard-won workers ' rights in the EU Member States .
The truth is specific .
Allow me to be specific .
A Danish company with a registered address in Copenhagen and 35 employees is , under Danish law , obliged to accept the workers appointing representatives to the management of the enterprise .
This ensures that the workers get some insight into the position and future of the enterprise .
If the proposal that has been submitted is adopted unchanged , the company in question could simply register itself as a European company based in Finland .
Suddenly , 150 employees are required in order to obtain employee representation .
In most other EU Member States , the situation is even worse .
Perhaps the Commission 's proposal will be improved slightly in the forthcoming negotiations .
Perhaps the text that is finally adopted will not be so bad .
In any case , we should ask ourselves the question ' why ' ?
Why does the Commission time and again submit proposals , the only objective of which is to reduce the rights of workers ?
Could it perhaps be that there is something fundamentally wrong with the EU ?
Future of the European Common Asylum System ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the report by Giusto Catania , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the Future of the European Common Asylum System .
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in the last year the number of refugees worldwide has increased .
The figure now stands at approximately 12 million .
If we include those who are internally displaced , this rises to more than 26 million people worldwide who are in need of the same kind of protection .
The reason for this is that wars continue to exist in the world ; at present there are 4 million Iraqi refugees and displaced people , and it is clear that these refugees are a consequence of wars that our countries played a part in starting .
The creation of a common European asylum policy is necessary because , under the rule of law , we have an obligation to guarantee that these people are received equally throughout the European Union .
This becomes all the more important if we consider that some Member States do not yet have a systematic law on asylum .
I note with regret that harmonisation of asylum procedures has been deferred for two years , meaning that it will be implemented in 2012 .
We must put an end to the awful disparity that exists between the Member States and the different asylum systems .
We are at present in a paradoxical situation whereby recognition rates of candidates to refugee status for certain third country nationals vary from approximately 0 % up to 90 % depending on which Member State receives the request .
Harmonisation of standards should result in a high level of protection throughout the EU and should not be based on the lowest common denominator .
The institution of asylum is an essential part of our democracy and the protection of human rights , and it is unacceptable that it has been severely eroded in recent years , as the needs of asylum seekers and the principle of non-refoulement laid down in international conventions have not always been respected .
The European Union should provide for mechanisms at the external borders to identify asylum seekers and ensure that persons entitled to international protection gain access to its territory , including in the context of its external border control operations .
For this reason we consider it appropriate to review the role of Frontex , which often handles asylum seekers as if they were illegal immigrants .
With this report , the European Parliament is asking Frontex to provide detailed data relating to the number of asylum seekers identified as such during its operations and the plight of persons intercepted and sent back to a country of transit or origin .
We must ensure that international conventions are correctly applied , as well as cooperation agreements with third countries .
Agreements cannot be made with countries that have not signed the Geneva Convention .
Many Member States ignore this , however , including Italy , which has signed an agreement on managing migration flows with Libya , a country that does not intend to sign the Geneva Convention on refugees .
We are very pleased - we have emphasised this and hope that it comes across in this report - that the Court of Justice has annulled the article of the Asylum Procedure Directive concerning the creation of the concept of ' safe third countries ' and a common list of safe third countries .
In our view , there can be no such thing as a ' safe third country ' ; it is an erroneous concept , since any citizen can be persecuted even in countries with high democratic standards .
Asylum seekers are vulnerable people who require appropriate reception conditions .
Member States cannot detain people for the sole reason that they are applying for international protection .
I would therefore argue , as a matter of principle , that asylum seekers should not be detained .
Unfortunately in many Member States the detention of asylum seekers is still a reality , due to the fact that they enter the country illegally .
Regrettably , and I will conclude with this point , there is no other way to enter the European Union .
This is the paradox : even asylum seekers must be subject to mixed flows to enter the EU .
Asylum is not a concession : asylum is a duty for states and a right for those fleeing war .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , honourable Members , the Commission adopted an action plan on asylum in June .
The Commission undertook to present , between 2008 and 2009 , concrete proposals to improve protection standards and to introduce more solidarity between the Member States and also to reinforce practical cooperation .
We have set out the principles that should guide the action of the Union , maintain its humanitarian and protective tradition , guarantee real equality of treatment throughout the Union , improve the effectiveness of the asylum system and promote solidarity within the Union and between the Union and third countries .
I am pleased to learn that Parliament fully shares the Commission 's philosophy .
It shares our ambition to build a more protective , more effective and more just European asylum system .
The fact that Parliament is now a co-legislator with the Council gives me hope that the negotiations , which will be long , will now have more chance of arriving at instruments of the highest quality which are more in line with the fundamental rights .
Thanks , then , to the co-decision procedure and qualified majority voting in the Council , the Union can harmonise these international protection standards at a higher level .
I thank Parliament for the solid support it has given to all the initiatives that the Commission has announced in its action plan .
I also thank you for the priority you have given to dealing with my recent proposal on the creation of a European asylum support office .
We need the support of Parliament to ensure the success of this mechanism , which will allow us to reinforce practical cooperation and the quality of the asylum systems .
I hope the three institutions reach an agreement quickly so that this office can open as soon as possible .

However , Mr Catania - and let me thank you for your report - you are worried about some situations , in particular , the detention conditions for asylum seekers , the rights of asylum seekers under the Dublin procedures , the impact of border control operations on access to protection and the burden assumed by certain Member States in the reception of the flows of asylum seekers .
I have some answers for you .
As for the conditions of detention for asylum seekers , the Commission has proposed , in the amendments to the directive on reception conditions , clearer rules than those currently in force , in particular the prohibition , in all cases , of the detention of unaccompanied minors .
We have also specified the cases where detention is possible for adults , with safeguards such as the right to effective recourse or the right to legal aid and regular judicial checks on the detention measure .
In addition , in keeping with Mrs Roure 's report on open and secure reception centres , adopted on 5 February , Parliament identified a number of problems in these centres .
The proposed amendments to the directive on reception conditions should provide an answer to these problems .
Following the same principles , I proposed that the rights of asylum seekers subject to the Dublin procedures should be better guaranteed .
We must , for example , facilitate the reuniting of families , the reuniting of children with the members of their family , and reinforce the procedural guarantees enjoyed by asylum seekers subject to the Dublin procedure .
The best asylum procedure would be useless if access to such a procedure were not guaranteed .
I agree with you , Mr Catania , on the need to improve our work with border officials , to train them and make them aware of asylum issues .
You mentioned mixed flows .
Frontex really needs to be able to undertake this training task .
Once established , the support office will contribute to this by preparing manuals for border officials .
We must also arrive at a better definition of responsibilities in the case of people rescued at sea .
Where should they disembark ?
Where , if need be , could they ask for asylum ?
I am working with the Member States to try to find the right answers to these questions .
Naturally , one has to be aware of the pressures the asylum systems are under in some Member States .
We want greater solidarity , not only in financial terms , but also in the form of teams of rapid response experts , created by the office .
We are also going to examine the possibility of the voluntary transfer of refugees to a Member State other than the one which granted protection .
At the end of this week , I am going to Lampedusa and Malta to look at the practical requirements and at how the Union can offer its support .
Let me take this opportunity , Madam President and honourable Members , to thank you for the extra EUR 10 million that Parliament approved at the end of 2008 for the European Refugee Fund .
These EUR 10 million will be used relocate more refugees in the Union in 2009 .
I wish , in this matter , to stress the importance of the commitment made by the Member States following the mission we sent to Jordan and Syria on the relocation of Iraqi refugees in the Member States of the European Union .
We are working , and I am working , on all fronts , in other words , improving the quality of the legislation , practical cooperation and solidarity between the Member States and between the Union and third countries .
I would really like to thank Parliament for its support .
We must make the European Union a true united common area of protection .
It is indeed my intention to include this in the Stockholm programme .
Thank you , ladies and gentlemen .
Thank you Mr Catania and Mrs Roure for all the very useful work that has been accomplished .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Development . - ( LT ) In recent years , the number of refugees worldwide has reached 16 million .
In 2007 , the EU received more than 200 000 asylum applications .
Both refugees requesting asylum and some Member States are facing problems , and a great burden which the European Common Asylum System would alleviate .
Government institutions should apply concrete , clear and equal terms when deciding whether asylum applications should be accepted .
It is important for refugee status to be granted on the basis of a concrete case , rather than a general assessment , based on nationality for example .
I would also like to draw attention to the fact that the European Commission 's Policy Plan on Asylum does not mention the Frontex agency , which plays a very important role in the area of refugee protection .
Moreover , it is important to mention that the number of asylum applicants depends directly on the political , economic and social situation in the countries of origin of the asylum applicants .
Therefore , the Common European Asylum System should be closely linked to the European Development Cooperation Policy and humanitarian work , which would reduce the number of asylum applicants , seekers , who are often economic migrants .
Madam President , Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , following the Tampere conclusions , much has been done to harmonise the laws of the Member States on asylum .
However , this harmonisation has been based on the lowest common denominator , with very different practices and procedures continuing to exist .
We still do not have equal conditions of access to protection throughout the EU and , as a result , there are still problems such as secondary movements and multiple applications .
In 2008 , as already highlighted by the rapporteur , the number of refugees grew to over 12 million .
We therefore urgently need to begin the second phase of the Common European Asylum System .
There can only be an identical level of protection throughout the EU if a single asylum application procedure is established , for reasons of efficiency , rapidity , quality and justice in decision-making , together with single standards for qualification as refugees or persons needing international protection .
Only in this way can asylum seekers be treated equally , regardless of the Member State in which they make their asylum application .
I am therefore delighted at the presentation of this asylum action plan , to which various public players have contributed and which defines the road map to be followed in coming years with a view to developing the Common European Asylum System .
I support the proposed amendments to the Reception Conditions Directive , to the Asylum Procedures Directive and to the Asylum Qualification Directive in order to clarify the criteria allowing asylum seekers to qualify for international protection .
I am pleased that Commissioner Barrot has underlined the need to ensure coherence with other policies impacting on international protection , and I hope that this same coherent approach will be extended to other common areas .
Finally , I want to congratulate the rapporteur , Giusto Catania , for his work , which will be supported by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , I wish first to congratulate our rapporteur for this excellent report as it reveals , rightly , the imbalances which characterise the current asylum law in Europe and he puts forward a number of proposals that will really allow us to move forwards in the right direction .
We must put an end to the existing unacceptable disparities between the Member States .
In fact , the response an asylum seeker gets depends on the country in which the request for asylum is lodged .
We also call for a substantial improvement in the conditions in which asylum seekers are housed .
This requires , in particular , the affirmation of the principle that asylum seekers must not be placed in detention , particularly vulnerable persons , women , children and the victims of torture .
This also requires guaranteed access to minimum rights to housing , employment , health , education , in other words , to the fundamental rights that ensure the dignity of the person .
Finally , for us it is vital that we reform the Dublin II system .
Our visits to the detention centres , in particular , have shown us - as you said , Mr Rothe - the collateral damage caused by an unsuitable operation , insofar as it places an unacceptable burden on the countries most directly affected by the flows of migrants towards Europe 's door .
There is still a long road ahead of us before we achieve a common policy on asylum .
We must not harbour any illusions , but the new Commission proposals , to which I trust we can make an effective contribution , will allow us , I hope , to lay the foundations of a structure which , although it might be fragile today , we hope will be solid in the future .
I sincerely thank Commissioner Jacques Barrot for the tenacious will he has shown in this matter , because will is what is needed , and a great deal of will at that .
I hope , Commissioner , that you will have the time to implement this work , because it is our duty and a moral imperative for the values that we in the European Union defend .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , I support the report of the rapporteur and the work of the Commission .
There is no excuse for the poor state of refugee management in the EU , since the numbers of asylum applications are low by historical standards .
Lack of common practice , different sources of country-of-origin information and failure to implement EU laws properly means there is an uneven playing field .
This is causing shopping-around by applicants and pass-the-parcel by states .
Another element creating unequal access to protection is that some Member States are just deporting people before they can be assessed and even , in effect , bribing third countries to stop them coming .
Many arriving in mixed flows may well be economic migrants , which does not make them criminals .
However , even if only a few are refugees , they must be identified .
As Mr Catania says , protection in human rights concerns must be integrated into border management , particularly in the mandate of Frontex .
People should not be detained just because they apply for asylum .
Besides the single common procedure and content of protection , there needs to be practical cooperation , support and solidarity , including through the important European Asylum Support Office , providing common sources of country information .
Better quality and more accurate first decisions would save money through fewer costly appeals .
Obliging EU states to allow asylum seekers to work after six months , if their claim is not decided , is very important : they would retain dignity and also pay tax .
I am very disappointed the UK has decided to opt out from an improved Reception Conditions Directive as that would bar automatic detention solely on the grounds of submission of an asylum claim , cut across UK fast-track detention and enforce the right to work after six months .
It is pretty shameful , in my view , that my own country regards these conditions as too onerous .
Madam President , we should once again wholeheartedly thank the French Presidency , which made great progress on the question of asylum when it brought about adoption of the European Pact on Immigration and Asylum by the Council in October of last year .
It is true that the European Union needs a common asylum policy and needs to develop an attitude of solidarity in relation to admitting refugees .
EU Member States which are especially exposed to an influx of asylum seekers should be provided with assistance .
The question of asylum is a very delicate one .
It is difficult to judge who really needs protection and who is trying to escape poverty in their own country , and , while the latter also deserve help , we cannot admit everyone .
In summary , our EU procedures should be unified , transparent and fast .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) Madam President , the creation of ' Fortress Europe ' is going faster and faster as each year goes by .
This is very unfortunate , not least because a common asylum policy will , in all probability , entail a tougher and more restrictive policy in which people needing protection will lose out the most .
This development is worrying , to say the least .
The report seeks to introduce common standards for determining when a person is to be considered a refugee .
Why , I ask myself .
We already have international conventions that specify this .
We should not be trying to create new EU standards , which , with all probability , would be more restrictive than the Geneva Convention , for example .
Almost every week we hear horrific reports from refugee camps in southern Europe .
Those who have ended up there live in terrible conditions , to which the authorities choose to turn a blind eye .
The problem is clearly not the individuals detained in the camps , but rather the fact that human rights are not being respected , despite the fact that all Member States , at least in theory , meet the Copenhagen criteria .
This is the issue we should instead be discussing here in Parliament .
Access to a country 's territory has to be a matter for each country to take decisions on , but international conventions and agreements must , of course , be respected .
( RO ) The European Common Asylum System is currently fraught with a lack of consistency with the legal instruments for international protection .
As a result of the major discrepancies in the decision-making processes which the 27 Member States use for dealing with asylum applications , the rate in terms of acknowledging applicants ' refugee status varies between 0 % and approximately 90 % .
In addition , the Dublin system 's criteria place a disproportionate burden on Member States located at the European Union 's external border as they are responsible for processing asylum applications as the first country of entry .
Phenomena such as secondary movements from one Member State to another and multiple applications still exist .
One of the most urgent requirements in EU asylum policy is the exchange of analyses , experiences and information between Member States .
Practicable solutions must also be found for developing cooperation between the administrative authorities responsible for examining asylum applications .
However , the most difficult problem to resolve remains communication between Member States about the different treatment given to applicants for international protection according to their country of origin .
I hope that the regulation for creating a European Asylum Support Office , proposed by the Commission three weeks ago , will help partially resolve the current issues .
I already urge future managers of this European office not to ignore cooperation with the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders , with the European migration network and with the competent bodies in Member States and third countries involved in migration and asylum activities .
Apart from avoiding duplication of effort , this cooperation will facilitate the coordination of actions by Member States and the use of their expertise on asylum matters .
( SV ) Madam President , Commissioner Barrot , I would like to begin by thanking Mr Catania for his report .
I fully share the view that it is unfortunate that entry into force has been postponed until 2012 .
There are three issues I would like to raise , namely the rights of children , support and opportunity for women caught up in people trafficking and , finally , how we can be better prepared in the event of a sudden crisis in the world .
I think that it is good that Parliament is calling attention to the fact that children and minors should receive special support .
What nevertheless still concerns me is the fact that children can be taken into custody .
I find that unacceptable .
Yesterday was International Women 's Day .
The issue that I have been involved with during this parliamentary term is how different countries treat women and children caught up in people trafficking , that is to say whether these people have a right to stay in the EU or to receive help to return home .
When the Social Democrats governed Sweden it was a foregone conclusion that women who had been violated in Sweden - irrespective of whether it was a result of people trafficking , marriage or whether they had been subjected to violence - had a right to stay .
Now , a woman may possibly be allowed to stay , but only if she cooperates with the police and prosecutors .
For what crimes other than people trafficking is cooperation a requirement for asylum ?
I think that this is discrimination against women and children and I would like to address this issue today , following Women 's Day .
The third issue is how different countries receive asylum seekers and which countries are chosen .
My country , Sweden , is one of the countries that have accepted the most refugees from Iraq .
Compared with both the US and Canada , it is an enormous amount , and the same is true in comparison with most EU countries .
I hope that the new asylum system in the EU will be better prepared to accept joint responsibility when something happens in the world or , as in the case of Iraq , when countries are invaded .
It should not be the case that an EU system based on solidarity only functions when things are calm - it must also function in times of crisis and conflict .
Madam President , the number of people seeking refugee and asylum status is growing alarmingly .
As the report states , there are currently about 12 million refugees and about 26 million internally displaced persons worldwide .
This is hardly surprising , as some countries in continents such as Africa and Asia slide further into political chaos and the world slips further into a financial and economic crisis of as yet unknown depths .
What we can be sure of is that over the coming months and years there will be yet more refugees and asylum-seekers .
It will surprise no-one that the European Parliament solution is harmonisation of national asylum systems .
The report proposes a common European asylum system and a common asylum support office with common standards for granting refugee and asylum status .
It proposes that national governments should not be able to hold an asylum-seeker in detention solely on the grounds that they are asylum applicants , and that refugees should be allowed to request movement from one European country to another .
It proposes that where an applicant is held in detention , that person should have the right to a remedy before a national court .
All this is a recipe for chaos and gridlock in national asylum systems .
Many , if not most , of those people who seek refugee and asylum status in European countries far from home are , of course , economic migrants seeking a better life .
And who can blame them ?
But the easier we make it for them to come to Europe , the more will come .
The common systems proposed here will make it even harder for nation states to protect their own borders and easier for untold numbers of economic migrants to cross those borders .
Britain needs even stricter controls , not more lax ones imposed by the European Union .
( MT ) The rapporteur was right in saying that a common asylum policy must be built upon the solidarity principle .
It is precisely this solidarity that is lacking in our asylum policy , as Commissioner Barrot will personally observe later this week when he visits my country of Malta , as well as the island of Lampedusa .
Commissioner , you will discover that the solidarity you seek will elude you .
Solidarity was introduced for the first time in the Immigration and Asylum Pact last October .
It was entered by way of a clause on burden-sharing , which focused on distributing the load amongst countries .
This was the first time it had been introduced and it was a positive move .
This clause is applied on a voluntary basis and allows migrants that arrive in one country seeking asylum to be able to transfer to another European Union country .
This Parliament even allocated EUR 5 million in this year 's European Union budget so as to facilitate the implementation of this clause .
Until now , in practice , we have not witnessed the application of this clause except in the case of France , which offered to take 80 asylum seekers from Malta .
This is an important gesture , but other European Union countries did not follow suit , which is a great pity .
Therefore , my question to the Commissioner is , what action is the Commission taking to guarantee that this mechanism on burden sharing is being executed ?
What is it doing to ensure that more countries offer their solidarity and take immigrants from a country that is shouldering a disproportionate burden ?
Does the Commission intend to draw up a European reallocation programme between countries and how does it plan to build upon and apply this clause ?
( RO ) In the current situation where the number of refugees has increased worldwide and the European Union is receiving more than half of the asylum seekers , establishing a European Common Asylum System must be an urgent priority .
In this respect , I welcome the proposal to create a European Asylum Support Office to coordinate the various countries ' national policies in order to avoid a disproportionate burden being imposed on certain Member States .
I think that this office must be organised so that it can play an important role in the event of a crisis and assess asylum applications correctly .
I think that the new European Union Member States , namely Romania and Bulgaria , need to be given support by the European Union through effective solidarity mechanisms in order to guarantee adequate conditions for welcoming asylum seekers .
However , let us not forget that we must be proactive , not reactive , at European level by focusing greater attention on cooperation with third countries in order to avert crises .
( RO ) Every year European Union Member States host millions of people who are seeking refuge from persecution and conflict in their countries of origin .
However , the rate of recognition of refugee status at a national level in these states varies between 0 and 90 % .
In addition , the Dublin system , involving the process of readmitting refugees to the first country of transit , creates a discrepancy between these countries and those located centrally with regard to coordinating the asylum policies and measures provided for refugees .
As other speakers before me have also mentioned , the European Common Asylum System must allow Member States to provide an increased level of protection to refugees , from the time they are received until they are fully integrated into local communities , by establishing a common asylum procedure which sets out clear , reasonable , uniform terms that the authorities can use to manage asylum applications .
Particular attention must be focused on solidarity between Member States with a view to coordinating the large flows of asylum seekers in some countries , both through providing financial assistance and adopting internal resettlement and reallocation mechanisms allowing the refugees to be dispersed uniformly throughout the European Union .
( ET ) I would like to thank the rapporteur and emphasise the importance of this topic , even though I represent the Member State of Estonia , which is notable for the small number of refugees who arrive here .
Refugee status has until now been granted to only a few people a year , but we are also a small country , and although we are attractive to tourists , life here is difficult .
We do recognise the need for solidarity , but I think that those who have already had to suffer so much in life should not be punished once again with a harsh climate unless they choose it themselves .
Thus it would be sensible to speak of the sharing of responsibilities and not people , in order to improve the situation of countries that receive a large number of asylum seekers .
The harmonisation of standards is definitely worthy of support .
If we have a common border , it is logical that asylum seekers should receive equal treatment throughout the European Union .
- ( CS ) Madam President , I profoundly disagree with the Euro-sceptic campaign against the common migration and asylum policy enshrined in the Lisbon Treaty .
We need to act jointly and more firmly to combat illegal economic migration , while providing more dignified conditions to asylum seekers .
It troubles me that the children of refugees in European camps have no access to education or necessary health care for months at a time .
It is also unacceptable that within the Schengen area some countries recognise the status of refugees and others do not .
It is regrettable that the Frontex agency does not monitor the numbers and countries of origin of applicants for international protection .
Yes , we do need a unified asylum procedure and we also need to help the buffer states on the basis of solidarity .
We must also , however , link asylum policy with development policy in order to preclude migration .
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank my fellow Members who have spoken in support of this report , as well as Mr Barrot for his support and the work the Commission is undertaking to amend certain directives , particularly the Asylum Procedure Directive , demonstrating a willingness to improve the common asylum system .
Parliament acts as co-legislator in this field , and I believe that we must exercise our role in order to harmonise asylum procedures at a higher level , pushing for a system of harmonisation that allows for large numbers to be received and improves standards of reception in the Member States so that the system is increasingly cohesive .
I believe that this Parliament has fulfilled an important role by visiting administrative detention centres in Europe .
We have visited a great many of them - Mrs Roure was the rapporteur for the final report - and we have observed that often the right to asylum has been breached in Member States , often normal reception conditions such as the right to healthcare and legal aid have not been guaranteed , and information on potential asylum seekers has not been provided .
This has happened because mixed flows have been managed in such a way that the fight against illegal immigration and the defence of external borders has taken precedence over the need for reception and in particular the reception of asylum seekers .
I agree with the points made by some of my fellow Members , particularly on the need to review the Dublin regulation and to guarantee a solidarity mechanism between Member States in order that the burden might be shared , but also that we need a solidarity mechanism regarding asylum seekers because their right to be transferred to another place so that their case can be heard must also be recognised .
Finally , and to close , some Members have raised the question of border controls .
I think that there is a basic error in this reasoning : the issue of defending borders and the issue of asylum are two wholly separate matters .
We must guarantee the right to asylum as a fundamental right to be upheld within the European Union .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
Madam President , last year , the number of refugees worldwide grew to over 12 million , while as many as 26 million people have been internally displaced , which shows the seriousness of the problem .
Unfortunately , standards are not in the slightest sense harmonised , because the percentage of applicants from certain third countries who are granted refugee status ranges from around 0 % to 90 % in different Member States .
A unified procedure should be established for granting asylum , as well as unified standards which enable decisions to be made about who should be recognised as a refugee or whether a person is in need of international protection .
All the people who make decisions in this field should have equal access to professional information about the applicant 's country of origin and the bodies authorised to hear appeals , as should the people who are applying for asylum .
During the waiting period , it is extremely important for the authorities to give due consideration to the diverse needs of asylum seekers in more difficult circumstances , such as children , disabled people and women .
It is essential to establish a common database , in order to publish and collect information about countries of origin .
It is worth emphasising that the obligation to provide assistance is guaranteed under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea ( UNCLOS ) , and is legally binding for all EU Member States and on EU 's Frontex agency .
The social situation of the Roma and their improved access to the labour market in the EU ( short presentation )
The next item is a short presentation of the report by Mrs Kósáné Kovács , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the social situation of the Roma and their improved access to the labour market in the EU .
Thank you , Madam President .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen .
After several months of work , I submit to Parliament the report on the social situation of the Roma and their improved access to the labour market , a report which expresses our deeply felt responsibility for the European future of the Roma , an ethnic minority whose population equals that of a member state .
In recent months , the necessity to take action has not waned but has instead become even more urgent .
The global financial crisis has swept through Europe , and the accompanying economic shakeup once again severely affects the most vulnerable social groups , and in particular the Roma .
The increasing and justified existential anxiety of the majority in society constitutes a fertile soil for hatred of minorities , for a discriminatory , exclusionary stance and for scapegoating .
It is fortunate and of symbolic significance that the adoption of the Roma report could take place in the very week when Parliament is preparing the next Council meeting , seeking not only the tools to help us emerge from the crisis but also the opportunity to reduce human traumas and the risks to livelihood on the basis of the principle of solidarity that unites Europe .
In recent decades , we have learned that there is no dynamic economic development that could automatically offer mobility , using the existing systems of redistribution , to those at the lowest social stratum .
On the contrary , we have seen that , if there is no policy to support the principle of equal opportunity , then the differences at the edges of society can grow even greater during periods of development .
Our task is now to mobilise the resources for dealing with the crisis and growing the economy in such a way that the 10 million Roma do not fall victim to the crisis , but become participants in the recovery .
The position of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , adopted by a large majority , finds it unacceptable that a significant portion of the Roma population lives in conditions like those in the developing world .
Tens of thousands of Roma children still grow up in segregated schools , where they cannot gain competitive knowledge , and they carry with them throughout their lives the wounds of exclusion and discrimination .
Millions live in ghettos , without running water , sewers and often without electricity , and their life expectancy is 10 to 20 years lower than that of the majority .
They lack vocational training , they live by casual labour , and their lifestyle is daily the object of visible discrimination .
And what is most dramatic : this situation reinforces their verbal exclusion , hate speech and conflict resolution determined on an ethnic basis .
For who has not heard it said that ' if he 's a gypsy , he does not want to change his situation but prefers to steal rather than work ' ?
The root cause is the fact that their quality of life remains at that of a developing country ; this in turn intensifies the tendency to exclusion , and the tree of hatred bears the fruit of murderous acts .
Force can only be eliminated by striking at its roots .
This concerns not only Central and Eastern European countries , who long for peace , but every European citizen .
We should also not forget that it is in the fundamental interest of aging Europe to make sure it is populated not by unfortunate people who depend on social assistance , but by well educated , working citizens , capable of paying tax , social contributions and insurance .
This is the subject of the report before you today .
In order to do what is necessary , it is indispensable for the various institutions of the European Union to work on the elaboration and planned implementation of a comprehensive Roma policy .
A common European resolve is needed in order for the well intentioned , often costly efforts of Member States , which often remain ineffective due to lack of collective will , to shift to a new track .
I wish sincerely to thank all my fellow Members whose significant initiatives helped make this a more comprehensive report .
Willingness to cooperate may help advance the understanding that it is not a matter of choice , but of necessity , for the European Union to integrate immediately this sizeable potential workforce , one that has centuries of experience adapting to their milieu . Thank you for your patience .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , Mrs Kósáné Kovács , ladies and gentlemen , I wish first to thank Mrs Kósáné Kovács for her report that contributes to the joint efforts to promote the social inclusion of the Roma .
The Commission shares your analysis , Mrs Kósáné Kovács , as to the main underlying reasons for this exclusion : the social segregation they suffer , the obstacles they face trying to access education , the discrimination that prevents them from fully participating in the world of work , that prevents access to goods and services , and above all - and you have highlighted it very well - the prejudices and stereotypes with which they are saddled .
The Commission also supports the European Parliament 's proposals for sustainable solutions , in particular your emphasis on child development from the preschool phase , the development of microcredit to strengthen entrepreneurship , self-employment and the targeted implementation of structural funds .
For the Commission , the implementation of effective , sustainable solutions requires the action of all the key players , including , essentially , the Roma themselves , to develop , implement and monitor the policies that affect them .
In addition , the Commission considers that it would be better to use Community instruments and policies to achieve the inclusion of the Roma , that there must be an exchange of best practice , such as the ACCEDER programme in Spain or the desegregation efforts in Hungary .
To be effective , the policies must be targeted and respect the specific situations of the Roma communities to achieve the goal of social integration .
In the spirit of your report , Mrs Kósáné Kovács , the Commission will continue to support the social inclusion of the Roma by reinforcing the protection of the individual rights of all the Roma , in particular women and children , taking into account the problems of the Roma in the framework of policy coordination at European level , in particular as relates to employment and social inclusion , via a more active implementation of the structural funds and the European Social Fund , and , finally , by reinforcing the institutional capacities of Roma civil society .
I wish to thank you for your report , Mrs Kósáné Kovács .
I can tell you that my colleague , Commissioner Špidla , and I are very aware of these problems .
I would add that our Fundamental Rights Agency is to give us two reports on the situation of the Roma that I hope will allow us to propose and promote what you have just explained to us so well .
Thank you , Mrs Kósáné Kovács , and thanks to Parliament for its support .
That concludes this item .
The vote will take place on Wednesday .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
Coming up with a European solution to the problems which the Roma are facing requires us to take into account that they are citizens just like we are , even if they are subject to exclusion .
Representative organisations and Roma communities must play an active role in drawing up inclusion policies .
Increased efforts are required to improve their living conditions and access to education and health services .
These are the minimum conditions required for them to be able to get and hold down a job in the countries where they live .
The opportunities for mobility have had the totally opposite effect for them , making discrimination worse .
Women are in an even more vulnerable position because they are subject to numerous forms of discrimination from a gender , ethnic and social perspective .
There are national programmes for inclusion and combating poverty , which have produced modest results .
The economic crisis must not be used in any way at all as an excuse for not implementing the social inclusion programmes .
If anything , it is a reason for concerted action .
Roma , like any other disadvantaged group , may pay dearly as a result of the crisis 's impact .
The unusual reactions which we have seen in Italy are a warning .
We can think about solutions to problems or find the culprits .
The right has always preferred to put the blame on others , mainly the vulnerable .
As a representative of the left , I would rather we find solutions .
I would like to congratulate Mrs Kósáné Kovács on her report , which presents a comprehensive analysis of the socio-economic status of Roma communities .
Her report formulates numerous forward-looking recommendations , calling for example upon the Commission to take into consideration in its technical policies the impact of the policies toward the Roma , and to recommend introducing a unified system of requirements into development programmes .
Member States ' unfounded plans and the scattered projects , most of which are funded by the European Union , do not yield true results .
We need a common action plan that rests on solid legal bases and that is able , by means of sanctions , to ensure the implementation of Member States ' undertakings .
The Roma communities must be involved in the process of planning , implementation and monitoring , from the lowest level to the international consultative bodies ; uniform benchmarks and deadlines must be set , in order to verify that the financial resources invested are used effectively .
Poverty and social exclusion are geographically concentrated , and research has clearly drawn up the map of European poverty .
The majority of the Roma live in small regions ' condemned to death ' , and even maintaining their current quality of life costs an enormous amount .
Over the long term , it could paralyse budgets and threatens to break down wider social cohesion .
Therefore Community strategy must make possible an immediate emergency intervention in these areas , by means of distinct programmes funded from development funds set aside at EU level , which should be able to deal with the problems in all their complexity , as well as by ensuring the permeability between funds and , if necessary , by introducing region-specific forms of support .
As a representative of the right , I believe in the contribution of every citizen to the general well-being and prosperity of society .
I think that the integration of all social groups into society and social cohesion must be a goal approached without any display of populism and loud fanfare .
The sustainable , effective integration of the Roma must be based on their economic contribution and the involvement of every one of them in the labour market .
In my country , which is no exception , the Roma are socially marginalised and live in poverty .
In practical terms , their education stops at a very early stage .
In fact , research carried out by the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences in 2007 indicates that the proportion of graduates is almost zero : barely 0.2 % .
This lack of education puts the Roma on the very bottom rung in the labour market and is the cause of their high level of unemployment .
For them to become integrated effectively , apart from the issue of education , their living conditions also need to be improved and they must be actively included in the labour market .
However , none of this can come about without the involvement of the Roma themselves , without their active , conscious desire for things to change .
I see this as the major challenge facing all of us .
in writing . - ( HU ) The events of the past years have demonstrated that it is time to address seriously the economic , cultural and health situation of Roma living in the European Union .
The degree of social disadvantage in certain regions is of nearly tragic proportions , and in the current economic crisis threatens us with a social explosion .
Therefore I particularly welcome the report by Magda Kósáné Kovács , which seeks an answer to this serious social problem .
I am also pleased with the objectives set in the report , but an assessment of the situation , information campaigns and reinforcement of civil society are not in themselves sufficient .
We need concrete , decisive steps in the areas of education and job creation .
If sufficient financial resources are not available for these objectives , then the initiative will remain a dead letter .
We need an EU Roma strategy as well , for these proposed objectives to impact the Member States ' economic , educational and health policies ; for only in this way will it be possible to guarantee a life of human dignity for the 10 million-strong Roma community and to hasten their integration .
The strategy for improving the situation of European Roma demands an action plan , and therefore I hope there will be people willing to continue the work begun in this report , which presumably will spread over several parliamentary terms .
While in Italy the government 's approach to the Roma issue has been not entirely consistent and at times highly questionable with respect to humanitarian principles , in Europe an effort has always been made to maintain the difficult balance between integration and security .
The European Parliament 's resolution on the social situation of the Roma and their improved access to the labour market in the EU is an example of this .
The repeated recourse to emergency legislative measures to address problems associated with the Roma clearly indicates an inability to tackle a phenomenon that is not new .
What is needed instead is a systematic approach and coordinated , long-term solutions in the areas of education , healthcare and , most importantly , labour market policies , since employment and education facilitate social acceptance and integration .
Europe is calling for an end to the discriminatory practice of evicting occupants of Roma slums and instead for the development of specific housing projects that will redress the housing problem facing these communities .
In short , we require consistent policy choices that combine solidarity and responsibility , enabling us to offer a balanced response to an emergency that is otherwise in danger of getting out of hand .
We are well aware that this is a difficult route to take , but there is no other way to reach our destination .
I would like to call on the Commission to adopt concrete measures to support the Roma 's integration into the labour market through providing funding for training and retraining , as well as measures aimed at a strict application of the legislation on combating discrimination in employment .
I wish to reiterate the need to create within the EC a specialist department to support interaction between the Commission and national governments , aimed at implementing the projects targeted at the Roma minority concerning their social , economic and cultural integration .
We are all aware that the problem posed by the Roma 's situation is not only a national problem for each Member State separately , but is a European problem and must be resolved at this level .
I would like to stress that the new Member States in particular need proper support from the EU in integrating Roma , both from a social perspective and in terms of the labour market .
It is well known that the number of Roma who do not have access to the European Union 's labour market is worrying .
We must therefore stop putting off the creation of effective European programmes to boost primarily the Roma 's access to education so that unemployment stops being an aspect of life constantly passed on from one generation to the next .
The free movement which Roma from the new Member States currently enjoy has not meant that access to the EU labour market has been just as easy .
All we can say is that the only thing which Roma migrants in other Member States have done is to export their own poverty .
Against the backdrop of the current economic crisis , it is even more difficult for Roma citizens to access the labour market , which means that a large number of them are living below the poverty line .
We are therefore facing a major challenge during a period of economic crisis in terms of encouraging employers to offer jobs to the largest minority in Europe .
Commission action plan towards an integrated internal control framework ( short presentation )
The next item is a short presentation of the report by Mrs Stauner , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the Commission action plan towards an integrated internal control framework .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the principle of effective internal control is one of the most important budgetary principles that the Commission must observe when implementing the budget and utilising the funds .
The European Court of Auditors ( ECA ) and the European Parliament have been calling for effective , efficient control of the budgetary resources for years , and numerous attempts and suggestions have been made by the ECA , in particular , seeking to ensure that the Commission uses these resources appropriately and economically .
Nevertheless , the ECA has not been able to give the Commission a positive statement of assurance for years .
I need only remind the House of the occurrences in connection with irregularities in the implementation of the Leonardo programme a few years ago , and other support areas that have always been very susceptible to irregularities and perhaps even to fraud .
In January 2006 , the Commission adopted an action plan towards an integrated internal control framework , again with the aim of obtaining a positive statement of assurance from the ECA .
As stated in our report , there is no doubt that the Commission has made some serious efforts to develop the action plan .
However , it is quite clear to Parliament that the implementation of the measures is a long way behind schedule .
Therefore , the Commission must speed up the implementation of the envisaged measures considerably so that positive effects can be seen in the ECA 's Annual Report in the foreseeable future and also so that we Members of the European Parliament can grant a budget discharge with a clear conscience .
I do not want to go into the details of the still unsatisfactory implementation of the measures , but I would emphasise that efficient control activities are now all the more necessary considering that , in connection with the economic recovery package , almost all the criteria for the implementation of support measures have been significantly relaxed , including in the interests of providing rapid assistance .
I need only remind you of the planned relaxation in the Structural Funds and of the significant changes in the eligibility principles with regard to the EU Globalisation Fund .
We know , of course , that all the support measures , particularly in the field of the Structural Funds , are implemented in close cooperation with the Member States , which is absolutely vital in order to guarantee the validity of the expenditure , but also generates substantial problems when it comes to control by the Commission .
We have known for years that the Commission cannot always approach such controls in the Member States as it would perhaps like and as dictated by the budgetary principles and the ideas of the ECA .
Parliament has great difficulties in getting a final picture , particularly in the case of the annual summaries and management declarations at national level , which the Commission presented to us for the first time on 15 February 2008 , as the documents do not keep to uniform criteria .
Therefore , our report - which was also adopted unanimously by the Committee on Budgetary Control - calls for continuous pressure to be exerted on the Member States to provide data that is both complete and comprehensible .
It is my fervent hope that the Commission will continue to take seriously its task of introducing the internal control framework in future . Thank you very much .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , I thank Mrs Stauner for her report and Parliament for the constructive dialogue we have had since the Commission undertook the action plan for a discharge , towards a positive statement of assurance .
In this context , the Commission feels that the statement of assurance issued by the Court of Auditors for 2007 is the best that has ever been obtained .
The action plan has contributed to this improvement .
I am pleased to tell you that the Commission brought forward to 3 February the adoption of its latest report on the progress achieved .
As Mrs Stauner requested it in her report , this should allow you to take it into account in the discharge resolution .
Our communication of 3 February presents an initial assessment of the impact of the action plan as of 31 December 2008 .
It concludes that considerable progress has been achieved during the term of the current Commission .
I will mention several of its points .
In terms of simplification , the proportion of the budget spent according to clearer and easier to apply eligibility rules has risen to 25 % of the budget .
In the framework of the economic recovery plan , we propose other simplification measures , in particular for the structural funds .
The Court of Auditors reported an improvement in the clarity and reliability of the annual activity reports on the Commission 's services finalised under action No 3 .
The Commission has reinforced the financial corrections- action No 11 in the structural funds - : in 2008 , an amount of 1 billion 500 million was recovered .
In comparison , the amount recovered in 2007 was 288 million .

The Commission services are increasingly applying common standards for control methods , ensuring improved coordination and sharing of the results .
This is helping to reduce the administrative burden and allowing better use to be made of control results .
We continue to reinforce the responsibility of the Member States for shared management - action No 5 - and we have just received the annual audit summaries for the second time .
The Commission will continue these actions along with other initiatives to improve the control framework .
Mrs Stauner 's report stresses the key role of the concept of tolerable risk in the pursuit of future improvements .
This concept aims to define at the policy level the acceptable balance between the control results and their costs .
It is obvious that a zero error rate is impossible and it seems logical that the error rate may vary according to the area inspected .
The interinstitutional discussion of this concept is taking place on the basis of the recent Commission communication .
Vice-President Kallas had the opportunity to discuss this in Parliament in January .
I would like to stress the importance of this initiative , which will allow the discharge authority better to appreciate the quality of the risk management introduced by the Commission .
Our last report shows you that the Commission has completed the various actions .
The Court of Auditors will make its own assessment of the impact of the various actions in its 2008 annual report .
I thank Mrs Stauner for her report , which is a call to improve our accounting framework still further .
That concludes this item .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
in writing . - This report which aims to bring more transparency , efficiency and accountability to European spending , is more relevant than ever to implement the EU budget by following the principles of sound financial management .
We need a genuine commitment to transparency and effective internal controls in order to extract maximum benefits from of our policies and priorities .
Moreover , I fully support the view that if an action cannot be satisfactorily implemented in terms of cost and risk , then it should be reconsidered .
In the current economic situation we cannot allow any wasteful spending or misuse of European funds .
At the same time the institution needs to have less complex legal requirements .
It is necessary to simplify the administrative and financial burden on applicants and benefeciaries of the EU especially since many instances unnecessary bureaucracy has resulted in impediment to effective policy implementation .
The challenging task is to find the right balance .
Integrity of online gambling ( short presentation )
The next item is a short presentation of the report by Mrs Schaldemose , on behalf of the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on the integrity of online gambling .
rapporteur . - ( DA ) Madam President , I am both proud and pleased to be able to present to you this evening the own-initiative report on the integrity of online gambling .
As you know , the issue of gambling has always been extremely controversial in the European Parliament .
Gambling was removed from the scope of the Services Directive , as well as from that of the E-Commerce Directive and it was also eliminated from the Television without Frontiers Directive .
Why should that be the case ?
Well , I believe that most of us agree that gambling is indeed a financial service - the European Court of Justice has determined as much - but it is a completely separate financial service .
We cannot compare gambling on the Internet with buying an electric kettle or engaging a carpenter to lay a floor , and it should therefore be dealt with separately .
This is what the Member States have done up to now .
They have laid down strict regulations in order to protect consumers against gambling addiction and against fraud and match-fixing , but also to prevent money laundering . In addition , their aim has also been to maintain law and order .
However , not all gambling is the same .
In fact , gambling on the Internet poses a number of specific challenges that land-based gambling does not , partly because of its cross-border nature and also because it is so readily accessible .
The negotiations surrounding the report have , at times , been more heated than I would have liked .
We were very divided on the issue of whether gambling on the Internet poses a greater risk of someone becoming addicted to gambling , for example .
I am a little surprised by this , because the figures speak loud and clear .
A study from Sweden and other countries shows that the risk of someone developing an addiction to gambling is five to seven times higher if that person plays poker on the Internet than if he or she simply goes out and plays poker in the real world .
However , I would be the first to admit that we do not know all of the consequences for consumers of gambling on the Internet .
This is one of the areas in which we were actually able to agree on something , and that is that we need more information about how we can best protect consumers .
However , there are six points in particular in the report that I would like to highlight here this evening :
1. there is a significant majority in the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection that believes that operators of online gambling should not merely comply with the gambling legislation in the Member State in which they provide their services , but also where the consumer lives ;
2. clarification should be provided at a political level ahead of a clarification by the court as to how we should tackle the challenges and problems posed by the European online gambling market ;
3. cooperation between Member States should be strengthened significantly ;
4. we need to develop standards for protecting consumers against fraud , gambling addiction and the other dangers involved ;
5. we need more research in the area ; and finally
6. the European Parliament fully supports the initiatives and the process initiated by the Council and we urge the Commission to give its support to this , too .
Overall , I believe that the report will help to bring the gambling sector back into the political area in which it belongs .
The report is a balanced one and , in fact , also received considerable support in the committee , despite it being a sensitive issue .
It was voted through with 32 votes in favour and 10 against .
An alternative resolution has been put forward by a minority in the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
I have attempted to integrate as many of their views as possible in the report , but the political differences are so fundamental that it was not possible to include all of them .
I would like to thank my colleagues for their support and I hope that my report will receive the support of a large majority tomorrow .
That concludes this item .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( FI ) Tomorrow we will see that many parts of Europe still have the political will to maintain their vitally important monopoly on gambling , and that is true of Finland as well .
The European Parliament 's support for the Finnish National Lottery , the Finnish Slot Machine Association , and the Finnish gaming operator , Fintoto , is important , because the infringement proceedings launched by the Commission are still an issue .
It is important for the European sports movement and activities at grassroots level that the Member States can preserve their national gambling systems .
They are also a fundamental element in what is a special feature of sporting life in Finland , in which voluntary work supported by society is also a basic support for high-level sports .
It is also easier to counter the side-effects of gambling in countries where the state has a monopoly .
Online gambling accounts for just around 5 % of all the takings from gambling , but the sector is growing at an enormous rate .
That is why it is important that the rights of Member States remain as before , even in the age of the internet .
We should not forget that after the adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon the EU will have competence in certain areas of sport .
This will help in the fight against the side-effects of professional sport , such as racism , doping and hooliganism .
Gross revenues from gambling on the internet amounted to EUR 2-3 billion in 2004 .
According to the aforementioned SICL study it now accounts for almost 5 % of the total gambling market in the EU .
A rapid growth in these services in the future is unavoidable and we therefore need clear and transparent rules .
The report by Mrs Schaldemose considers a different approach to the gambling industry in Europe and therefore I cannot support it .
It makes no distinction between gambling operators that are licensed and operating in accordance with the law and those operating often without a license and unlawfully .
It is necessary to start from the fact that most European states have a gambling industry .
I agree that individual Member States should continue to determine the rules for internet gambling .
As long as there is no applicable evidence of threats to players , money laundering or corruption in sport we should not regard all of the companies as criminals .
There are also serious firms who use the best technology and operate in accordance with the law .
I am not a supporter but rather an opponent of internet gambling .
However , in my view a general ban would lead to the growth and illegality of these activities and a total absence of rules .
I believe that the position I have drafted with my colleagues represents a fairer and clearer alternative to the rapporteur 's report .
Ensuring food quality : harmonisation or mutual recognition of standards ( short presentation )
The next item is a short presentation of the report by Mrs Petre , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on ensuring food quality : harmonisation or mutual recognition of standards .
rapporteur . - ( RO ) I would first of all like to thank the European Commission for this welcome initiative of the Green Paper on agricultural product quality and for the consultation launched on this topic .
The Green Paper provides a response to a real need on the part of Member States to promote the image of their agricultural products , especially the benefits in terms of quality , both among European consumers and consumers in other countries .
These high standards are demanded by consumers and are a means of achieving maximum added value .
Although the codecision procedure does not apply , I hope that the European Parliament 's opinion will definitely be taken into consideration during the phases to come .
I would also like to thank my colleagues from the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and , especially , the experts for the support they have given in promoting this report .
Simplification of marketing standards , keeping consumers better informed , particularly about the origin of food products , and better protection for European quality products at a global level are some of the most important proposals in the report .
Quality policy cannot be treated separately from the issue of the future of the CAP or from such challenges as climate change , the need to preserve biodiversity , energy supplies and water resource management .
At the same time , consumers , as we all know , are showing an ever-increasing interest not only in food safety but also in the origin and production methods of food products .
Certification schemes are associated in the minds of consumers with a guarantee of higher quality .
The purpose of standards must be to assist farmers in delivering quality products that meet consumers ' expectations , avoid consumer disappointment and facilitate price comparison over a range of product quality .
As rapporteur , I would like to see a reduction in the level of complexity of the European system of basic standards and the numerous provisions which European farmers must comply with .
I am in favour of simplifying and adopting rules that will sufficiently guarantee food safety in the EU .
I am also proposing means of simplifying the process for establishing standards by shortening procedures in the Commission , transferring this burden to other bodies or by referring to international standards .
I also believe that any simplification must take account of the administrative tasks which come under the remit of the public authorities or stakeholders .
As market trends change and technology advances , marketing standards may become partially obsolete and have to be adapted and updated .
The European Union must insist that all food products comply with its production standards , especially as regards health and safety .
In addition to this , the European Union must ensure a level playing field between locally produced and third-country products .
I am in favour of the mandatory introduction of labelling the place of production of primary products as ' produced in the European Union ' or outside it .
I would also like this system to be extended to processed food products to take into account the origin of the main ingredients and raw materials and to establish a link between these items and the place where the product was last processed .
I believe that rules must be adopted concerning the use of the terms ' mountain ' and ' island ' , given the significant resulting added value for agricultural and food products from these less favoured areas .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Petre , for this report .
The European policy on the quality of agricultural products represents a major issue for farmers , those involved in the food chain in general and , of course , consumers .
This is why the Commission adopted the Green Paper on the quality of agricultural products and consulted the stakeholders before drawing up the legislative proposals .
The Commission welcomes your report , Mrs Petre , as well as the discussions that have taken place in the various European Parliament committees .
These discussions are in addition to the 560 contributions received during the consultation period introduced to help the Commission to define the strategic directions which are to be published in a communication scheduled for the end of May this year .
The Commission intends to help Europe 's farmers to communicate the demanding conditions of production with which they comply .
I said that the proposal to indicate the place of production has received very little support , with even less support for the idea of a European logo showing compliance with European standards .
On the other hand , there is a demand for ' country of origin ' labelling .
The Commission welcomes the support for its policy of simplification toward trading standards .
The Commission has always been in favour of simplifying legislation where necessary .
Therefore , Mrs Petre , you spur us on and encourage us to continue our work .
The Commission has taken note of the request to define optional reserved terms , such as ' farm ' or ' mountain ' .
I can tell you that this is also the view of the majority of those responding to the Green Paper .
As for geographic information , the Commission shares your view .
The procedures should be simplified or , at least , speeded up .
We are currently looking at the responses to the Green Paper to decide how to do this .
The question of an agency remains open .
In the meantime , the advantages and disadvantages of such a body need to be studied with care .
As for the negotiations with the WTO , I can assure you that recognition of the European quality systems remains firmly on the Commission 's agenda .
A consensus appears to be on the horizon on the need to harmonise , to set up a framework for the certification systems and arrive at mutual recognition between these systems .
Guidelines might be sufficient and would avoid too many administrative constraints .
This is a first step towards a true quality policy for agricultural products .
The Commission is now impatiently awaiting the next steps and the fruitful discussions that we are expecting and speaking for my colleague Mrs Fischer Boel , I assure you that the Commission will involve Parliament in all the coming actions that it will take in this field .
It is a field whose importance you have correctly emphasised , Mrs Petre , not only for the producers but also for all of us as consumers .
That concludes this item .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - In a highly globalised world , farmers face increasing pressure .
In order to be competitive , they can either cut costs or specialise in production of niche high-quality products .
Thus , food-quality schemes do not only provide consumers authentic products but can also support rural development .
To give farmers an alternative for rural development , we need to simplify the marketing standards and strengthen the incentives for small-scale producers to participate .
But simplifying standards does not mean less quality or authenticity .
EU standards for placing food on the market are already among the toughest in the world .
To preserve confidence in quality schemes , it is necessary to implement them with reinforced controls and traceability systems .
Furthermore , in the case of ' protected geographical indications ' or ' protected designation of origin ' , it would be desirable to label the main ingredient ( s ) with the place of origin if not from that particular area .
Consumers identify in these products specific qualities resulting from a certain origin or farming method .
There are , however , cases when the ingredient indicated on the label is not exactly the same as the one really used in the food , for example ' Parma ham ' not really coming from Parma .
in writing . - ( FR ) The consumer is increasingly demanding with regard to the quality , origin and safety of agricultural products .
The EU has successfully introduced a quality labelling system that guarantees the authenticity of regional products and traditional production methods .
The Member States and the EU now have a duty to promote these quality products and do more to protect them at international level .
This supposes a guarantee of fair competition between European products and those of third countries by , in particular , protecting European farmers against any product which usurps a recognised nomenclature .
Products whose names might be usurped should have WTO international protection and any request to register a protected designation from third countries should be subject to greater control .
To provide better information to the consumer , it is important that the label specifies the country of origin of primary products and , in the case of processed products , the origin of the main ingredients and where the final processing took place .
At the same time , the EU must ensure that the principle of ' conditional access to the market ' is upheld by recommending that the WTO adopts stricter protection standards for quality products , so that imported products can be subject to the same safety and quality requirements as European products .
in writing . - ( PL ) Madam President , quality is a key word throughout the entire food production chain , namely ' from field to table ' .
It is extremely important to make EU consumers aware of the high requirements and standards implemented in the area of foodstuffs , which farmers and producers of agricultural and food products have to meet , and of the associated costs .
EU food is distinguished by its high quality and correspondingly high standards .
The same cannot always be said of imported goods .
I do not think that we should create further certification systems at Community level , or further symbols which will differentiate food products in the EU .
This will mislead the consumer .
Instead , we should concentrate on promotional measures to inform consumers about EU symbols which are already in use and which consumers should view as a guarantee of quality .
Another challenge is to improve the process of assessing applications concerning regional products and to speed up the registration process .
Unfortunately , the processing of these applications by the European Commission drags on for years .
The Lesser Poland and Kielce regions of Poland are still waiting for registration of products such as fasola korczyńska ( the Korczyn bean ) , kiełbasa lisiecka ( Lisiecka sausage ) , wiśnia nadwiślanka ( the Vistula region cherry ) , śliwka szydłowska ( the Szydlow plum ) , jabłka łąckie ( the Łącko apple ) , obwarzanek krakowski ( the Cracow bagel ) and fasola z Doliny Dunajca ( the Danube Valley bean ) .
Cooperation between the courts of the Member States in the taking of evidence in civil or commercial matters ( short presentation )
The next item is a short presentation of the report by Mr Medina Ortega , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , on cooperation between the courts of the Member States in the taking of evidence in civil or commercial matters .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Madam President , at this late hour on a Monday the Commission will probably have other things on its mind more worrying than this report .
To be brief , what we are doing is simply responding to a report by the Commission , which is a report on the application of Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1206 / 2001 of 28 May 2001 on cooperation between the courts of the Member States in the taking of evidence in civil or commercial matters .
This sphere is , in fact , not a Community one , but an intergovernmental one , in which the Council - through the regulation - has tried to encourage cooperation between the courts .
I believe , however , that there has been a certain lack of rigour on the European Union 's part in its attempts to achieve this .
That is to say , certain measures have been taken , such as the formulation of practical ideas , the use of electronic media , and so on , but I recognise that it is quite difficult for the Commission to act .
I do not know what the Commission has achieved or what it hopes to achieve , but it seems to me quite difficult to achieve anything because of the huge difficulties involved in this form of intergovernmental cooperation .
What we are asking is for the judicial authorities to collaborate , but we are talking about 27 countries , judicial authorities that use 22 different languages , with legal systems that have significant differences between them , and we are trying to achieve results .
The Commission has found that the results are not good , that there is a huge delay in the implementation of these cooperation mechanisms and , therefore , that we do not have the resources to achieve this .
The ideal solution would be to use physical means .
For example , what could the Commission do to equip courts , particularly those at a lower level , with technological facilities such as videoconferencing systems ?
Videoconferencing might be an idea that seems out of reach in many small courts within the European Union , but it appears to be the only way of achieving this .
I think the European Union ought to make use of institutions that already exist , and specifically the European Judicial Network .
We should strengthen this institution so that the judges themselves , using their cooperation systems , can develop this type of communication .
On the other hand , the whole area of training judges is vital .
This , too , is something that the Commission cannot do by itself .
What the Commission can do , however , is to foster the development of courses of this type , providing training in Community law and in the knowledge of the various legal systems .
Aside from this , there is another huge difficulty , which is the problem of languages : how can a Spanish judge , for instance , communicate with a Finnish judge , when the two languages are so different ?
It cannot be argued that the judges , as well as having to be experts in their own law , which is fairly complex in itself , should be obliged to have knowledge of this kind .
What can we do from the practical point of view to help the judges with regard to interpreting and translation ?
What could we do to help them to achieve this ?
In drawing up this report , I am not setting out to take a severe or harsh approach towards the Commission .
I think the task is quite a difficult one .
What I would like to know , taking advantage of the fact that we have here a Commissioner who is interested in this subject , is what the Commission thinks can be done to give greater rigour to this 2001 regulation , which was a little vague , a little too much based on voluntary action ; I do not know whether , from the practical point of view , it can produce any results or whether it will be possible to make progress with it .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , I wish first to thank Mr Medina Ortega , who raises a whole series of vital questions .
It is true that judges and practitioners in each country need to be more aware of this regulation .
It should be stressed that the direct taking of evidence as mentioned in Article 17 of the regulation has simplified and accelerated the obtaining of evidence without posing any particular problem .
The central bodies mentioned in the said regulation have an important role to play in monitoring the courts required to handle requests presented under the present regulation , and in the resolution of the problems that they encounter .
The assistance provided by the central bodies may be essential for small courts faced for the first time with a problem linked to the taking of evidence in a cross-border context .
IT and videoconferencing , used alongside a secure e-mail system , should , Mr Medina Ortega , be a standard resource for sending evidence .
The usual task of the European Judicial Network in civil and commercial matters , as you said , is to facilitate this legal cooperation in Europe .
Since it came into force , the implementation of the regulation on the taking of evidence , on several occasions , has been at the centre of the network 's work .
A handbook on the application of the regulation was produced in 2006 and distributed among all the European courts in 2007 .
The European Judicial Network in civil and commercial matters may , without doubt , use its contacts - you are correct in this , Mr Medina Ortega - to involve itself more deeply in achieving greater compliance with requests to take evidence within the timescales set out in the regulation .
That is true .
I want to carry on and briefly examine the outlook .
It is true that the regulation sets precise criteria for the form and content of the request .
The request must be completed according to a specific form and contain specific information : the name and address of the parties to the proceedings , the nature and the matter of the particular case and a description of the evidence to be supplied .
The regulation also states that the request must be presented in one of the official languages of the Member State in the receiving court or in any other language that the receiving Member State has indicated as acceptable but , as you have just underlined , language is not the least of the problems .
A request for the taking of evidence should normally be carried out quickly .
If it is not possible to carry out the request in the 90 days following its receipt by the receiving court , this court must inform the issuing court and state the reasons for this .
In fact , it is only possible to refuse to carry out the request for the taking of evidence in exceptional and strictly limited situations .
Such was the regulation .
A study of its application was carried out in March 2007 and , on the basis of the study results , the Commission adopted a report in December 2007 .
The report was drawn up according to Article 23 of the regulation .
What does it say ?
That the application of the regulation has somewhat improved , has been simplified and has speeded up cooperation between the courts on the taking of evidence in civil and commercial cases .
It has therefore already achieved two main objectives : to simplify cooperation between Member States and speed up the taking of evidence .
Simplification has been achieved , in particular , by the introduction of direct court-to-court transmission , although sometimes the requests go to the central bodies , and by the introduction of standard forms .
Progress has also been noted in the speed with which requests for the taking of evidence are handled .
Most are carried out faster than prior to the regulation coming into force , fortunately , and within the 90 days set out in the regulation .
I would therefore say , Mr Medina Ortega , we think there is no need to modify the regulation .
However , it is imperative that its operation be improved .
In the action plan it adopted in November 2008 , the Council entrusted the Commission with the creation of a European e-Justice Portal .
The creation and entry into service during this year of the first version of this portal is obviously an absolute priority for us and for me .
As for the use of videoconferencing , that too will be made a priority .
The European Judicial Network in civil and commercial matters is , for the moment , preparing a handbook on the legal aspects of the use of videoconferencing in the taking of evidence .
Obviously , this handbook will be sent to European judges and will be finished for the end of this year .
It will be part of the portal which , as I said , will appear before the end of the year .
Obviously the courtrooms will still need to be fitted with videoconferencing equipment .
We hope to take advantage of the new financing methods during the revision of the 2010-2013 financial perspective .
Financing options for cross-border projects already exist in the Civil Justice Programme , where the use of videoconferencing features as a priority .
I would say to you , Mr Medina Ortega , that I am with you on a major point which , in my view , must be a priority for Stockholm : I mean training for judges .
For the issue you have raised this evening , the taking of evidence , we really do need suitable training for the judges .
For me this will be one of the guidelines for the coming Stockholm Programme .
In any event , thank you for this helpful report which has been most enlightening .
That concludes this item .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Implementation of Directive 2006 / 43 / EC on statutory audits of annual accounts and consolidated accounts ( short presentation )
The next item is a short presentation of the report by Mr Doorn on implementation of Directive 2006 / 43 / EC on statutory audits of annual accounts and consolidated accounts .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Madam President , this report is about the implementation of the eighth directive on statutory audits of annual accounts .
It is a good thing that Parliament is paying closer attention to the implementation and transposal of the legislation we pass here .
We in Parliament can decide on the most outstanding rules and regulations , but if those rules and regulations are not implemented and complied with in the Member States , we are wasting our time here .
In the transposal of the eighth directive , too , many things have gone wrong .
Key definitions are framed differently in different countries and the number of Member States that have independent public oversight is a long way short of 27 .
The report calls on the Commission to take steps quickly to correct these deficiencies .
We also wonder whether the method of harmonisation employed , namely minimum harmonisation , is indeed the right way to attain the uniform application of key concepts .
Perhaps we do need to think again whether key definitions of this kind are the way forward or whether a different method of harmonisation - one that is not open to multiple interpretations - needs to be used .
Finally , Madam President , the report discusses the Commission 's recommendation on the limitation of the civil liability of accountants .
Should further measures be necessary in order to achieve convergence in Europe , we shall look forward to the Commission 's proposals .
The objective must and will remain to aim for the effective and independent auditing of accountants .
The economic crisis has taught us that strict auditing and oversight are indispensible .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , honourable Members , I would like first to thank Mr Doorn for his report on the application of the directive on statutory audits of accounts .
I would like also to thank the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , and more particularly Mrs van den Burg , who has contributed to the production of this report .
In the context of the financial crisis , it is essential that all Member States who are currently behind should quickly transpose the directive to achieve the objectives set .
The Commission continuously monitors the transposition status of the directive in the Member States .
A dashboard is regularly published on our website .
The results relating to the Member States ' performance should clearly improve this spring .
Mr Doorn 's report has certainly facilitated such an improvement .
As your report emphasises , the Commission has already adopted the recommendation on quality assurance and the recommendation on the limitation on the civil liability of statutory auditors .
I thank Parliament for its support for these two initiatives .
The recommendation on the limitation on the civil liability of statutory auditors is part of a strategy to reduce the concentration in the auditing market .
To explore other options along the same lines , a consultation on control structures in audit companies and on their consequences for the auditing market was published in November .
The European Parliament is asking the Commission to assess the national laws transposing the directive and to inform it of the effects of the measures taken by the Member States in the wake of the recommendation on the limitation on the civil liability of auditors .
At the appropriate time , we will be happy to prepare these assessments , taking into account all the issues raised in the report by Mr Doorn .
This is a commitment from Commissioner McCreevy that I am happy to pass on to you .
I thank Mr Doorn and I dare to hope that we will see practical results .
The item is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Facing oil challenges ( short presentation )
The next item is a brief presentation of the report by Herbert Reul , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on ' Possible solutions to the challenges in relation to oil supply ' .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in this report on oil supply I make a plea - and this was also agreed in committee - for emphasis to be placed on the importance of oil in the European energy supply of the future .
Oil will clearly remain a very important source of primary energy in the EU even in the medium and long term .
We have been seeing a steep rise in demand caused by economic and population growth and also by the desire for individual mobility .
In recent months and years we have been concerning ourselves in varying ways - the report also concentrates on this to a large extent - with the logical question that arises as to how to reduce consumption , how to reduce demand .
How can we lower our consumption or cover it with other energy sources too ?
This report seeks to look at the fact that we politicians should be thinking about whether and how the resources , the supply side , can be increased and what can be done in this regard .
Three or four points are mentioned in this regard .
Firstly , massive investment is needed to produce and exploit the available oil : USD 350 billion per annum is the figure always quoted in this connection .
Secondly , it must be pointed out that we need to be much more active in the field of technological innovations .
We also need to think about how to exploit all the available reserves as efficiently as possible .
This brings the focus not only to the issues of technology and the usability of land but also very quickly to foreign-policy considerations , of course .
In this regard , too , in a number of points I cannot list exhaustively here , this report attempts to point out that we must step up our efforts to make unconventional oil resources commercially viable : so as to contribute to diversification , to answer the question as to how transport routes too can be changed , and to raise the question as to what contribution foreign policy can make in terms of strengthening relations and mutual dependency and reliability between the European Union and the oil-producing countries .
This report does not attempt to answer all the oil-related questions but rather seeks to examine a number of issues that have not been central up to now .
It disregards all efficiency and energy saving issues , not because they are unimportant but because they are dealt with elsewhere .
A number of new questions should be raised in this connection - we should even consider , for example , whether sufficient young blood is entering the technology field : young people who are prepared to get involved in this field and to seek new solutions .
That was a brief summary of the substance of this report .


Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , I wish , on behalf of the Commission , to thank Mr Reul for having prepared the report on the possible solutions to the challenges related to oil supplies I also wish to thank the members of the various committees that have put forward views on the issue for their valuable contributions to this important debate .
The economic conditions have greatly changed since the Commission communication of June 2008 , entitled ' Facing oil challenges ' .
At the time , crude oil reached USD 140 a barrel , with major effects on the general economy and on private individuals in the European Union .
Since then , the price of crude has fallen by a good USD 100 to below USD 40 a barrel .
However , the analysis carried out at the time by the Commission remains relevant to the structural conditions of the oil markets , world energy demand in the medium and long term and the importance of European Union policies on energy and climate change .
All these factors will change our forms of production and consumption and our behaviour .
Many of these questions were discussed in detail in the second strategic analysis of energy policy adopted in November 2008 , which has been the subject of debate on other occasions in Parliament .
Furthermore , the adoption by the Council and the European Parliament , in December 2008 , of the package of proposals on energy and climate change was a major step towards resolute action on our future energy needs , in particular with the setting of the objective for the use of 20 % renewable energies in all energy consumed by 2020 .
The Commission gives a favourable welcome to most of the points raised in Mr Reul 's report .
We note the support for new investments in replacement energy sources , such as renewable energies , and the priority given to energy-efficient goods and services .
These features were put forward by the Commission in the European Economic Recovery Plan .
We , of course , welcome the importance given to the intensification of the dialogue with the producer countries to find pragmatic solutions to the problems faced .
It is clear , given the growing connection between energy and foreign policies and the need to ensure energy security , that good relations with the producer countries must be promoted to make the operation of the international markets more predictable .
The question of transparency on oil reserves must be raised in this context .
As for the transparency of oil stocks , this question was broached at the time of the second strategic analysis .
On this issue , the option of a weekly publication of information on commercial stocks is currently being studied .
On the issues of energy savings and diversification of sources , we note the arguments put forward on the potential for energy savings in the building sector and we await with interest the conclusion of the debates on the revamp to the directive on the energy performance of buildings .
As for the parts relating to the need to diversify energy sources in the transport sector and exploit the potential of energy-efficient vehicles , I note that the recovery plan includes an initiative on green cars .
In conclusion , I would draw your attention to the Commission commitment further to develop the action on all the questions raised in relation to oil prices .
These questions form part of the general policies on energy , climate and research .
We are pleased to continue our cooperation with the European Parliament in all these fields and I thank Mr Reul again for having provided some information and explanation , which will be a very valuable guide for our future energy policy .
The item is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
Mr Reul 's report is extremely important in the context of the current economic crisis and the challenges linked to climate change .
As a member of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , I have consistently supported the line that we must not play down the importance of investments in clean technologies and renewable energy as solutions for reducing the dependency on oil , cutting carbon emissions and , last but not least , as a solution for creating new jobs and stimulating economic growth .
I welcome the fact that this report too mentions biofuels as a resource which has not been sufficiently exploited , and I hope that the recommendation to facilitate market access for them will be taken into account by the European Commission .
The use of biofuels offers a viable economic and social alternative for rural development and environmental protection .
At the same time , I am pleased with the increased attention being given to energy efficiency in buildings , which has been included as a priority in the European Economic Recovery Plan and mentioned in Mr Reul 's report as a solution for reducing the demand for fossil energy resources .
Energy efficiency has the benefit that it will also reduce the size of consumers ' bills at a time when the economic crisis is having an increasingly adverse impact on them .
in writing . - ( EL ) Now , more than ever , the European Union needs a common European energy policy which will promote energy security and energy solidarity and , at the same time , support viable energy choices .
Today , oil is the most important source of energy in Europe , mainly due to its widespread use in the transport sector .
By way of illustration , it has been stated that in 2030 the EU 's reliance on oil is expected to reach 95 % .
We cannot ignore the fact that imports basically come from countries in which political instability prevails and cannot therefore be considered secure .
Furthermore , today Europe faces three challenges , the financial , the energy and the environmental challenge , which inevitably limit our choices .
Oil is an outdated source .
Its cost has doubled since 2005 , its price fluctuates constantly and it is linked to high CO2 emissions .
The reorientation of energy policy is therefore the only way forward .
Supporting nuclear energy or new mines in Africa is not the solution .
The solution is to support European and national measures to promote energy efficiency and invest in projects which make use of renewable energy sources .
Commission Reports on Competition Policy 2006 and 2007 ( short presentation )
The next item is a brief presentation of the report by Jonathan Evans , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the reports on competition policy 2006 and 2007 .
rapporteur . - Mr President , the European Commission produces its annual competition report and it is traditional for the European Parliament to cast its eye over the report and to produce an own-initiative reaction to it .
In this case , because of timing factors , the reports for 2006 and 2007 have been brought together but - taking up one of the points mentioned by Commissioner Barrot a little earlier - it is the case that the context of our consideration of these reports has changed rather markedly , since we in fact began the exercise of considering the report some time ago .
At that time , we were focused on the whole business of the modernisation of competition policy , the significant amount of work taken forward by former Commissioner , Mario Monti , and by the current Commissioner , Neelie Kroes , and on looking at the impact of that in terms of the Commission 's ability to deal with the abuse of market power and to deal more effectively with mergers and state aid .
By and large , that has been a very good story in these reports and this is very clear from the reaction that we have from Parliament 's own report .
We have seen record activity on the part of the Commission in terms of dealing with hardcore cartels , we have seen the development of the leniency system , we have seen record fines put into operation by the Commission and we have seen record activity in terms of mergers and state aid notifications as well .
This is a process that is gathering pace in terms of modernisation because the Commission is currently bringing forward proposals , in a White Paper , on introducing private damages .
That is something , similarly , that our committee and Parliament have been supportive of .
Our committee has drawn attention to two specific concerns - what we regard as being the unequal relationship between producers and retailers , particularly in relation to food retailing .
Parliament has , in fact , put down a written declaration on this , signed by more than half of the Members .
Our committee has also expressed some concern about abusive practices in the services sector .
However , I mention the change of context because , of course , we all recognise that since the reports were published by the Commission , the Commission 's work - in terms of state aid particularly - has really taken on a rather different dimension .
Almost on a daily basis , the Commission is now looking at the effect of the bail-outs that are taking place in the context of the current financial turmoil .
It is very important - and our report says so - that , in addressing those matters , we recognise some of the challenges that there are for an effective , open market .
It is very important that , when the Commission gives its approval , it is giving that approval in ways which are compatible with the Treaty and do not create such significant market power in future that it becomes a scenario for abuse in its own right .
The banking sector in the United Kingdom at the moment is one very clear area where there will have to be , when economic circumstances become a little calmer , a general review of the new architecture that we have got and of whether that architecture really is compatible with the operation of a free , fair and open market .
We have received reassurances from Commissioner Kroes in this regard but , nonetheless , our committee has put those pointers down in this report .
Generally our view is that the Commission is to be congratulated in its work and that is the thrust of the report , which I anticipate will be passed tomorrow by a very large majority .

Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr Evans , first I wish to thank you on behalf of Neelie Kroes and the entire Commission .
We really welcome the unambiguous support of the European Parliament in its report for a firm and sustained application of competition policy in all these fields of action : the fight against trusts and cartels , the control of merger-acquisition operations and State aid .
The Commission particularly welcomes the importance given by the European Parliament to the staffing needs of the Competition Directorate General as it faces a growing workload in the current economic crisis .
In this context of recession , the Commission remains determined to take decisive action against calls for protectionism .
The Commission welcomes the European Parliament 's warning against the suspension of the competition rules , which offer important support in this effort .
It should never be forgotten , Mr Evans , that these competition rules are also there to stimulate productivity and to allow us to come back in even better condition after the crisis .
2009 must be a year of cooperation .
We are relying on the support of all the European institutions and of our international partners to re-launch the economy and ensure the correct operation of the markets .
Mr Evans , thank you .
You can be sure that Mrs Kroes , who must already have said this to you , has noted your report with a great deal of interest .
The item is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
The next item was to be a brief presentation of the report by Claire Gibault , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , on equal treatment and access for men and women in the performing arts .
I think it is a very interesting report .
Unfortunately , Mrs Gibault has informed us that she is unable to attend this evening to present her report .
In compliance then with the Rules of Procedure , I am unable to give the floor to anyone else as she has not delegated anyone .
The brief presentation of her report will not therefore take place .
However , the vote on this report will be held tomorrow , as set out in the agenda .
in writing . - I welcome the efforts of the Commission in the field of competition policy , its effective challenging of cartels and the record fines that were imposed on offenders in 2006 and 2007 .
I fully support the Commission conclusion that European energy markets are not functioning properly .
In that regard , it is very disappointing that the European Council has failed to resolve the issues identified by the commission in its sectoral analysis .
Energy costs represent a share of household budgets that is growing at an alarming rate , and with the effects of the financial crisis we are likely to see a substantial increase in poverty across the EU .
It is unacceptable that energy market inefficiencies are distorting the market to the detriment of businesses and consumers .
To address irrational energy pricing we should probably consider the creation of an independent energy regulators in all member states who would have the competancy to ensure that any increase in pricing levels of public utilities like energy and water , drainage , airport charges etc ... , would have to be justified .
in writing . - I strongly support the consumer protection orientated calls of this Report from MEP Evans , in particular the call for the Commission to conduct a sector inquiry into on-line advertising .
Consumers are frequently misled by deliberately confusing online offers and advertisement despite European legislation that seeks to prevent this .
The Commission must act to ensure legislation in this area is upheld and not just a lip service to consumer rights .
I welcome the calls for the Commission to undertake and analysis of the effects of competition on unequal relationships between suppliers and retailers .
This is a problem of particular importance in Ireland .
This disparity in competition policy should not be permitted to continue and consumers are being punished further in an already challenging economic time .
I also welcome the General Block Exemption Regulation ( GBERS ) which allows Member States to authorise aid in favour of SMEs , regional development , training , employment and risk capital .
Measures which support entrepreneurship and innovation and bolster SMEs in this difficult time should be delivered quickly .
SMEs are the cornerstone of the economy and it is our duty to ensure that they are supported to the best of our collective ability .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 10.55 p.m. )
Closure of the session
I declare the 2008-2009 session of the European Parliament closed .
Opening of the session
I declare open the 2009-2010 session of the European Parliament .
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9.05 a.m. )
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Decision on urgent procedure
The next item is the vote on the use of the urgent procedure for the proposal for a Council regulation establishing a multi-annual recovery plan for bluefin tuna in the Eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the request for application of the urgent procedure put before us this morning , in implementation of Rule 134 of the Rules of Procedure , was submitted to us by the Council last week and relates , as you said , to the proposal for a Council regulation establishing a multi-annual recovery plan for bluefin tuna in the Eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean .
The aim of this proposal is to implement the new recovery plan , as recommended for these areas by the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas at its meeting last November .
As the Council pointed out in its request for application of the urgent procedure , this regulation needs to come into force before the start of the main fishing season on 15 April , which means that the obligatory consultation of this Parliament needs to be carried out in this plenary session so as to pave the way for a political agreement within the Council in the coming weeks .
In view of this , and of the fact that the European Union needs to meet its international commitments and to do its part in the crucial efforts to deal with the acute crisis in bluefin tuna stocks , the European Parliament 's Committee on Fisheries has unanimously approved this request for application of the urgent procedure .
I therefore encourage you to confirm this approval in this morning 's vote .
( PT ) Madam President , just a brief point of order about the agenda for this week .
Wednesday 11 March is the European Day for the Victims of Terrorism .
This day was proposed in the first place by Parliament in a vote that took place on 11 March 2004 .
We were then debating an assessment of the area of freedom , security and justice .
It was the day of the tragic attacks in Madrid .
It was originally proposed for 11 September but , given the tragedy that occurred on that day , Parliament voted for it to be on 11 March .
Several days later , on 25 March if my memory serves me correctly , the European Council adopted this date as European Day for the Victims of Terrorism .
Yet now , we have a plenary sitting tomorrow - 11 March - and I see from the agenda that there is not even a memorial of any kind .
I would like to know if something of this sort is planned for this week 's part-session .
Mr Ribeiro e Castro , it is my understanding that the President will make a statement tomorrow at the opening of the plenary about the day you refer to and the special circumstances .
This will play a part in that regard .
Type-approval requirements for the general safety of motor vehicles ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Schwab , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning type-approval requirements for the general safety of motor vehicles - C6-0210 / 2008 - .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start - and not for the sake of formalities but out of genuine feeling on my part - by offering my heartfelt thanks to Commissioner Verheugen , the Commission , its staff , the Czech Presidency , which is unfortunately unable to be with us today , and those on the committee for their positive and constructive cooperation on this dossier .
If you look into how environmentally-friendly measures for cars can be achieved , you are sometimes surprised that so much time is spent looking into other measures .
I think that we , as Parliament , as a European body , have together taken an important step forwards that has not , so far , really managed to demonstrate its importance to the general public or in the political debate .
The regulation that we are passing today is environmentally friendly since , as part of the CO2 package , it represents an important contribution , on the part of European policy , to the reduction in CO2 emissions from motor vehicles .
At the same time , however - and I would call this clever environmental policy - it also helps consumers - drivers - to pay less while , at the same time , acting in an environmentally-friendly manner , as it leads to considerable savings , not only in terms of CO2 , but also in terms of the consumption of petrol and diesel .
In addition , it also - and this , too , is an important point that was particularly important to Parliament and its Members - leads to improvements in the safety of European roads , and not only in relation to goods vehicles , but in relation to cars as well .
I have no intention of going through the individual points of the regulation headline by headline , but I do think that there are a few important political signals that we should go into at this point .
The first point is that , by introducing a mandatory tyre pressure monitoring system for motor vehicles , we will be bringing about a situation whereby better tyre pressure , through an improved driving performance of tyres that the tyre industry is capable of realising , will see drivers in Europe consume up to 5 % less fuel without seeing the costs rocket .
A tyre pressure monitoring system that is already on the market costs around EUR 100 , sometimes significantly less , and the resultant cost savings for consumers will be significantly above that .
The second point that I think merits special attention is the fact that we have succeeded in obtaining the mandatory fitting of a stability system - known as the ESP system - into vehicles as early as 2011 and that we did this not against the will of the European motor industry but with its express participation and support , as this will lead to a considerable improvement in safety on European roads .
Unfortunately , due to the fact that the relevant technical specifications were not yet sufficiently ready , we did not manage to also secure the mandatory fitting of the emergency braking systems and the lane departure warning systems - I apologise for these somewhat technical terms , which do not generally come up in the public debate on this issue - by the year 2018 in goods vehicles , in particular .
This measure will lead to a significant improvement in the safety of European roads , especially of our motorways .
All I can say is that this could reduce the numbers of deaths and injuries by around 35 000 .
Finally - and there are still a few differences of opinion on this issue - we have also brought about a situation through this regulation whereby tyres will produce considerably less noise .
This does involve some costs , it is true , and for that reason , we thought it was particularly important to include text in the regulation stating that the reduction in noise emissions by road traffic cannot be solely down to tyre manufacturers and , indirectly , consumers , but that it is also a responsibility of the Member States in terms of the road surfaces they provide , and I am extremely grateful that the Council did , in the end , adopt this stipulation .
I thank you for your cooperation and I look forward to an interesting debate .

Madam President , honourable Members , I , too would like to begin by expressing thanks , in this case to the rapporteur , Mr Schwab , and to those Members of this House who participated in the preparatory work , for their truly constructive and engaged cooperation , which makes agreement right at the first reading possible .
What we are actually dealing with here is what appears to be a very technical regulation , yet it is a regulation with a large and far-reaching political significance .
What we are aiming to adopt today represents a milestone when it comes to improving road safety .
This regulation will make European cars safer .
It is a milestone in terms of the environmental compatibility of European vehicles , as environmental compatibility , of course , is something that will not only be achieved through producing more fuel-efficient engines - cars also offer other entirely different options for saving fuel and reducing pollution .
At the end of the day , it will also form an important part of our policy of better lawmaking , as it will lead to a truly drastic simplification of the entire regulatory environment .
Allow me to begin with the aspect of safety , which was the most important element in this project .
Road safety in Europe is still an issue that demands our earnest attention and that causes us great concern .
The rules that we are laying down here , and that will apply as standard to European cars from 2011 , will lead to 35 000 fewer deaths and serious injuries a year on Europe 's roads .
The introduction of the electronic stability programme for passenger cars and for commercial vehicles , in particular , can save almost 3 000 lives a year and prevent serious injuries for 25 000 people .
This is , ultimately , a piece of safety equipment which , especially when it comes to goods vehicles , which are often involved in serious accidents , has only rarely been used up to now .
The costs to manufacturers will be far outweighed by the overall economic benefit .
This package of measures will play a considerable part in implementing the European Strategy to reduce CO2 emissions from passenger cars and light commercial vehicles .
It makes low rolling resistance tyres mandatory and requires the installation of tyre pressure monitoring systems and gear shift indicators .
These measures will reduce average CO2 emissions by 6 to 7 grams of CO2 per kilometre .
That is , therefore , a really very noteworthy contribution .
What is more , I do not wish to miss the opportunity to point out that this proposal will lead to a significant reduction in noise pollution from roads since reducing tyre noise levels will bring about a significant improvement in this situation .
Allow me , at this point , to stress once again that we can only achieve sustainable mobility in Europe if , as part of an integrated approach , we include the potential of all the factors that are involved here , which means the vehicle itself - which is what we are discussing today - but we also have to discuss the transport infrastructure and the driving behaviour of the people involved .
I am very pleased that that is exactly how the European Parliament sees it .
As for simplifying the legislation , this regulation will bring about an impressive simplification of the regulatory environment .
This single regulation will rescind 50 existing directives and , wherever possible , replace them by international rules .
Lower administration costs , better transparency and greater international harmonisation will mean noteworthy savings for the industry , and that will help reinforce its competitiveness .
At the same time , the Member States will benefit from reduced spending on administration .
When it comes to cars , it is scarcely possible not to mention the fact that the European motor industry currently finds itself in a very serious crisis , the most serious for decades .
It is natural , therefore , to wonder whether this is the right time to be implementing technical regulations .
Let me be quite clear in my response to that , when I say that what we are aiming to adopt here today is one of the results of the CARS 21 process , in which we worked intensively with manufacturers , the Member States and civil society on how the framework for the European motor industry will look in future and how we envisage the European car of the future .
I would like to emphasise strongly that , even in this crisis - and specifically in this crisis , in fact - European manufacturers must not slacken off when it comes to developing and bringing onto the market cars that meet the requirements of the early 21st century , and those requirements are quite clear .
Consumers want vehicles that use less fuel , are better for the environment and are safer .
The vision for the European car of the future that resulted from CARS 21 , and the common line of all the participants when it came to the future of this industry , is exactly that - what we want is for Europe to send out to face the international competition not only qualitatively the best cars , but also those that consume the least , are the most environmentally friendly and the safest , and I am absolutely convinced that , with products like that , the European industry will retain its leading position in the international vehicles market . Thank you very much .

Madam President , Commissioner , I would like , first of all , to congratulate Mr Schwab on the compromise that he has produced in collaboration with the Council .
Not every issue was covered , but that is the way with compromises .
The introduction of mandatory safety systems for vehicles is something I particularly welcome .
The mandatory introduction of new safety technology such as ESP will mean that , in future , it will not only be those who buy premium cars who will benefit from a higher standard of safety on the road , but also the drivers of goods vehicles .
In doing this , we are making a crucial contribution to the safety of Europe .
This must also unconditionally apply to tyre safety .
It is right to clearly class the wet grip , and thus the safety , of tyres as more important than rolling resistance , which helps reduce CO2 emissions .
Tyres ' rolling resistance , depending on the driving conditions and speed , accounts for 20 to 30 % of fuel consumption .
It is therefore clear that , given the current environmental debate and in order to reduce petrol costs , a reduction must be achieved . However , it is necessary to realise that , without rolling resistance , which occurs through the deformation of tyres and their elastic properties , safe and comfortable driving would be impossible .
We therefore have to see safety in another light here , too .
The new developments by the tyre manufacturers show that it is possible to have both safety and lower rolling resistance .
In this way , we will also enable the European motor industry to take , and retain , a world lead .
The compromise motions that we will be voting on tomorrow send a clear signal away from the CO2 hysteria and towards greater road safety .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , on behalf of my group , I would like to thank my colleague , Andreas Schwab , for handling a very complex dossier very skilfully .
We should also perhaps say in the absence of Council that the negotiations there have been tough but fair , and we have a very good outcome .
I would like to pick up on a number of points built on what the Commissioner said .
I am privileged to have been part of the Cars 21 initiative from the very beginning , and we are now seeing the impact of that integrated approach .
This is important terminology and a classic example of how a number of different provisions have been brought together in a rolling update of the regulatory framework affecting motor vehicles , but one which the industry is expecting .
We set down a road map in Cars 21 about the environmental and safety challenges that we expected the industry to meet , and the crucial thing there is to give them stability and knowledge so that they can plan and design their new products in a sensible and sequenced way , albeit with demanding deadlines and targets .
We do not want to resile from those challenging targets , but to give them that stability .
As Günter Verheugen pointed out , with the industry in such a dire position at the moment because of a lack of demand , that regulatory stability is crucially important .
I would like to highlight two points .
Firstly , the agreement to bring in electronic stability control systems at the earliest possible date is a very major contribution to safety and I very much welcome that .
Those of us who have had the opportunity to test those systems will understand their efficiency .
Secondly , I want to highlight issues around the international framework , the repeal of the EU directives and their incorporation into national legislation .
I welcome that , but I think it is now more important than ever , Commissioner , that that process becomes much more transparent about the line the Commission is taking on negotiating those directives which are being done in another body , a UN body , and not within this House .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , let me begin by congratulating Mr Schwab on his report and thanking him for his extremely cooperative approach to this whole matter .
Last Thursday night , a colleague of ours , Linda McAvan , was involved in a very serious car accident .
Her car was destroyed , but she walked away relatively unhurt .
This was because the car she was driving had the most modern safety features and this enabled her not to be seriously injured .
That is the context in which we are discussing this report .
Road safety saves lives , as Commissioner Verheugen commented , and is so important to the well-being of many families in the European Union .
We should not lose sight of that , even in these very difficult times .
That is why I was determined to oppose those people in this Parliament and in the Council who wanted to weaken this Commission proposal .
I believe the original Commission proposal is a very good one , and we were determined to resist changes to it .
There was one main weakness , however , in that proposal , which is that there was no provision for the selling off of tyres that did not meet the new requirements after the implementation date .
I believe that to be a major flaw .
That is why I proposed to the committee - and the committee accepted - an amendment stating that tyres that did not meet the standards after the implementation date should be sold off after 12 months .
However , in the current circumstances of the car industry , given that cars are not being sold , it was quite clear in the discussions we had with the Council that , in fact , 12 months was probably unrealistic , and we had to consider the serious environmental consequences of getting rid of tyres that are perfectly good and sound . Therefore , we were prepared to accept , in the trialogue , 30 months after the implementation date as being the period before which tyres not meeting the requirements should be sold off .
However , thanks to the intervention of Mr Schwab , if the Commission believes that there could be an earlier date , that is provided for in the comitology procedure .
This was an important area of strengthening .
I would also draw attention to the important environmental measures - particularly tyre pressure monitoring systems - which will not only save on CO2 but also make cars safer , because under-inflated tyres are a cause of many accidents .
We have reduced rolling resistance and included gear shift indicators in this proposal , which was not in the original proposal .
This will not only benefit the environment but also save motorists money - it is cash in people 's pockets , which is very important at this time .
The point about safety has been well made .
As I say , tyre pressure monitoring systems are very important , because under-inflated tyres - much to my shame , the United Kingdom is one of the worst culprits for having under-inflated tyres - are a cause of accidents .
Lane departure warning systems and electronic stability control are also important .
I congratulate Mr Schwab on bringing the implementation of these forward by a year , because they will be of major advantage in terms of safety .
As Mr Harbour and the Commissioner have pointed out , simplification is part of this proposal and that is very important .
Finally , I would draw attention to what we have done in terms of demanding greater emphasis , in road services , on reducing noise .
This is because road traffic noise is a cause of stress , and stress is a cause of ill health and , indeed , of fatalities , and it is therefore important to address that issue .
Madam President , Commissioner , this is a constructive report with clear environmental and safety objectives .
The committee was clear with regard to noise and health .
As many as 210 million Europeans are currently exposed to traffic noise which , according to the World Health Organisation , presents a direct danger to health .
Tackling tyre noise is not the only way to reduce traffic noise , but the best results are achieved by a combination of measures , of which dealing with noise emitted by tyres constitutes an important part .
Some people , perhaps even some in this House , say that there is conflict between noise emissions and the safety properties of tyres .
There is no evidence for this in any of the detailed and independent studies carried out .
I am therefore disappointed that the compromise does not reflect what we voted through in the committee .
As regards lorries , 90 % of tyres already meet the noise levels contained in the compromise .
This is not what we would call a high level of ambition , unfortunately .

Madam President , I would like to welcome this report and congratulate Mr Schwab on its development .
We must welcome anything which makes roads safer .
Certainly , the vehicle itself is the most important aspect of this , as well as ensuring that vehicles are of a safer standard .
As the Commissioner said , this is the consolidation or combination of more than 50 other rules .
I welcome this simplification because all over Europe , vehicles that are manufactured need to be of the highest standard and vehicle manufacturers need to be responsible for achieving this standard - not only in relation to car tyres , but also in relation to the other aspects mentioned here this morning , such as electronic control and other modern features which ensure that the cars and the vehicles we put on the road are of the best possible standard .

Madam President , I , too , would like to thank the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteur , and in particular Mr Titley and the Commission , for this sound proposal .
My thanks to the Czech Presidency , on the other hand , are somewhat more ambivalent .
I have to say that we were put under heavy pressure by the Council in this trialogue and that the Council showed little ambition .
Quite the opposite , in fact , in that the Council warned us in advance against setting our demands too high so as not to jeopardise the manufacturers in these times of economic crisis .
I see this completely differently , and I think that the majority in this Chamber does too - particularly in times of economic crisis , what we need is clear standards and for the European industry to be motivated and given incentives to set its standards high and develop models for the future , and not for the current situation .
Energy efficiency and CO2 emissions clearly play a very important role in this .
The issue of safety is clearly also important , while the issue of minimising noise , which was given short shrift in this debate , must also not be overlooked , as more and more people are falling ill as a result of noise , with the attendant high costs for society .
For that reason , it is also important that this regulation should be in line with relevant standards .
Overall , we have achieved a good compromise .
We did not sign the first reading agreement as we were critical of the procedure and also of the pressure from the Czech Presidency , but we can live with this compromise , and we , as a group , will be voting for it .
Madam President , overnight we have had another terrorist murder in my constituency of Northern Ireland .
Before turning to the subject in hand , let me take a moment to express condolences to the family of my policeman constituent who has been so brutally murdered by the IRA and to condemn this further act of gross terrorism .
With regard to the matter before the House , I would have to say that I am rarely lobbied in my constituency in favour of an EU regulation and I suppose I would have to say that on even fewer occasions am I persuaded .
On this occasion , however , I was pleased to be persuaded , because this proposal contains provisions which both improve road safety and happily assist a company in Northern Ireland which is at the cutting edge of technology and production of tyre pressure monitoring systems .
Thus a proposal which makes the fitting of such systems mandatory is not just good for road safety ; it is also good for jobs in my constituency .
With devastating levels of road deaths across the EU , measures which make our cars - and thus our roads - safer have to be welcome .
It is one area above all where regulation has a definite role to play .
It should be sensible , rational and necessary regulation , not regulation for regulation 's sake .
On this occasion , however , I think that this report has got the balance right , and I congratulate the rapporteur on his report .

( CS ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I appreciate the high degree of professionalism shown by Mr Schwab in amending the draft regulation of the Commission to include measures which will increase the competitiveness of the European car industry while , at the same time , enabling Member States to monitor effectively market adherence to motor vehicle type approval requirements .
For example , by checking tyre pressures , we can reduce fuel consumption and thus also emissions , and by introducing modern electronic drive control systems in 2011 , a reduction in the number of accidents on European roads will be achieved one year earlier .
Noise reduction is another benefit and one which relates both to tyres and road building .
This regulation will reduce the administrative burden and will simplify legal regulations in accordance with the UN agreement on unifying vehicle requirements .
This regulation is an excellent example of integrated legislation and I am delighted that the Czech Presidency was well prepared for it and that an agreement between Parliament , Mr Schwab and the Council will therefore be reached at first reading .

( DE ) Madam President , a difficult compromise has been reached and I am of the opinion that Mr Schwab has produced a masterpiece here , so from now on , I will be referring to him as Grand Master Schwab .
In order to increase the safety of car drivers on Europe 's roads , the early introduction of the ESP anti-lock braking system is particularly welcome .
In addition , the fact that the wet grip values for tyres will , in future , be improved again is something that is to be viewed as a positive development , as is the fact that tyre pressure monitoring systems , lane departure warning systems and advanced emergency braking systems are to be considered for other categories of vehicle .
I would , however , like to criticise the fact that the manufacturers have gone ahead with higher tyre noise levels for goods vehicles and I likewise do not welcome the failure to introduce safety measures other than the ESP earlier than is proposed .
I would , furthermore , like to point out that no precise specification of the performance requirements with regard to winter tyres ' ability to initiate or maintain vehicle motion was included in the compromise with the Council .
I personally find it incomprehensible that no specification of the required driving properties on black ice or mud , for example , was made .
Class C1 , C2 and C3 tyres that do not meet the provisions of this regulation as set out in Annex 1 will now be permitted , under the compromise on transitional periods , to be sold for a further 30 months .
Parliament had envisaged a 12-month transitional period for this , which would have been what was necessary here .
In closing , I would like to remind you all , once again , of the 180 km / h maximum design speed , as I believe this to be a very sensible measure .

( NL ) Madam President , I should like to thank Mr Schwab for his commitment , as he was simply left with his back to the wall at the trialogue .
When I studied European law , codecision powers were evidently quite different from today .
The first-reading deal that we now have before us , which was negotiated by four MEPs - including myself as shadow rapporteur - differs markedly from the text adopted by Parliament .
This differs from the Commission proposal - the economic crisis was misused to submit an atrocious proposal .
Indeed , everyone complains that it lacks substance , and yet it is evidently being accepted .
In the opinion of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , democracy and the role of Parliament are being undermined .
After all , if the text adopted by Parliament at first reading is not included in the trialogue negotiations , a second reading is needed , as that is the way it works .
We also think that it sends out a bad signal when four Members agree to a text in trialogue and the whole House simply follows suit .
The ALDE Group will be voting against this proposal for reasons of principle .
This is mainly for procedural reasons and not because we consider the contents poor , although there is much room for improvement there .
Madam President , I want to raise a related matter .
The Commission will know that three ' F ' gases are among the six major greenhouse gases .
I was rapporteur on the Mobile Air Conditioning ( MAC ) Directive relating to their use in mobile air conditioning .
It would appear that loopholes are being exploited between that legislation and type approval legislation , which was the tool chosen to implement the directive .
I have been alerted over the last few weeks to plans by car manufacturers to avoid any refrigerant change at all , in 2011 and beyond , by applying type approval of certain components .
This would mean that the deadline for prohibition of the use of R134a would now be 2017 rather than 2011 .
Hence , the avoidance of tonnes of CO2 equivalent emissions will no longer happen .
National type approval authorities are ultimately responsible for the implementation of the MAC Directive .
For example the VCA , which is the type approval authority in the UK , has recently stated that it will approve , after January 2011 , new types of vehicles fitted with existing - already approved to Regulation ( EC ) No 706 / 2007 standards - MACs containing ' F ' gases with a GWP greater than 150 .
As a consequence , we have evidence of car manufacturers delaying - if not stopping altogether - development and investment in innovative sustainable technology .
Can the Commissioner please comment ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , at this point , I can but offer my sincere thanks for the broad support for this proposal from all sides of the House .
What we have , of course , is a compromise , and there is always scope to want a little bit more in such cases .
I can also say that I , personally , and the Commission would have been prepared to go a step further .
What we have now is what we were able to achieve , however , and it represents a major step forward .
In particular , I would like to emphasise once again what Mrs Rühle said .
Politically speaking , the crucial thing , especially in this situation , is to improve European vehicles in areas that will be crucial in future .
One thing is quite clear , and that is that the crisis in demand is not just the result of the general economic conditions and the economic uncertainty but also has something to do with the fact that the vehicles that European manufacturers are offering have perhaps failed to meet the requirements of the European market in recent years where fuel consumption , environmental friendliness and safety are concerned .
That is why it is so important that this is now quickly rectified .
Please allow me to say something about the issue that Mrs Doyle mentioned .
I am aware that there is an erroneous interpretation of the requirements pertaining to type-approval in a number of Member States - as you have just quite correctly pointed out - but it is an erroneous interpretation , one which is not in line with the legal framework that is in place .
The Commission will ensure that the necessary clarifications are issued and that the negative consequences that you have highlighted , Mrs Doyle , will not occur .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am , of course , pleased by the congratulations , but I must say that , in the trialogue , you are only ever as strong or as quick as those you are working with .
I am therefore happy to share the credit for Mr Bulfon 's compliment with all of you .
I must say , however , and I think this is extremely important , that I did not feel pressurised by anyone , nor did I feel under political pressure .
The only difficulty that there was in this legislative proposal - and I do not want to hide this , it was also discussed a little - was , of course , that of framing this ambitious legislation so that we would not be losing jobs in the European Union , but safeguarding them .
This balance was not always easy to achieve on individual points , but I believe that , in the end , we did find a very sound middle ground solution that satisfies all the interests .
All the same , I have to say that , for all the processes that we have settled in trialogue over recent weeks or months , there was repeated criticism that things were moving too quickly .
That is something that we could certainly discuss at the beginning of a parliamentary term and then stick to for that entire term , but there should be no criticism that processes are democratically unsound at the end of a term - the time when particular issues are being resolved - after three years of participation in such a process here in Parliament .
I accept the criticism , but I think that this issue is something that would need to be resolved immediately after the elections for the entire parliamentary term .
It is also important for this proposal to be put back in the context of Mr Sacconi 's proposal , which has been successfully passed .
His proposal was about reducing the CO2 emissions from motor vehicles to 130 grams , with 10 grams to be envisaged for additional measures .
One part of these additional measures has now been regulated .
I cannot wait to see how we will take up the rest of these grams that have yet to be decided and what proposals the Commission will put forward for Parliament to decide upon .
I might add that , when it came to the issue of the transitional period , we had to find a middle path , from an economic point of view .
We have not laid down the 30-month period conclusively , but instead , the Commission is to carry out another impact assessment for each individual type of tyre , on the basis of which we can then decide until when the deadline can run for each type .
It is my belief that it makes the most sense economically to remove tyres lawfully produced in the European Union as quickly as possible from circulation , but only when the market really offers the proper potential to do that .
I would like to close , therefore , by offering my sincere thanks , once again , to all those who were involved .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
First of all , I would like to congratulate Mr Schwab for the balanced report he has compiled .
This report meets the needs of the industry by creating simplified , transparent legislation through replacing no fewer than 50 basic directives , thereby reducing the administrative burden .
We are therefore helping a competitive car industry .
It is important for all of us to make Europe 's roads safer and reduce the number of fatalities and serious injuries by introducing standard equipment .
The ESP system must become accessible to everyone and no longer be an optional extra .
Obviously , we must not forget either the impact on the environment which the new tyre pressure monitoring system will have , with its reduction in carbon dioxide emissions . This will also be accompanied by a reduction in noise and sound pollution in general .
New technologies will enable us to have safer , greener cars .
Integrated pollution prevention and control : industrial emissions , titanium dioxide industry , use of organic solvents , incineration of waste , large combustion plants ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Krahmer , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on industrial emissions ( integrated pollution prevention and control ) ( recast ) - C6-0002 / 2008 - .
Madam President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , we will shortly be voting on the directive on the prevention of industrial emissions .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety adopted a series of compromises by a large majority .
I hope that we can hold that course , as these rules will harmonise the environmental requirements for industrial installations across the EU .
Doing so improves the protection of the environment whilst , at the same time , ensuring fair competition .
At the heart of the compromises is the European safety network .
This concept introduces Community-wide limit values for pollutant emissions by industry .
These define clear requirements for the licensing of industrial installations .
In order to obtain a permit , they must be better than the specification from the safety network .
This approach allows sufficient room to manoeuvre to set individual requirements . What it certainly means , however , is the end of the opportunity to abuse that room to manoeuvre and operate installations with poor emissions ratings via derogations .
With the safety network , we will achieve clarity together with the necessary flexibility .
There will be absolutely no need for stretchable derogations that are open to interpretation .
When I made this proposal , I was accused of being a ' green activist ' .
That - and I will put this somewhat carefully - is an exaggeration .
This is about improving the implementation of EU rules that have been in force for years .
Best available technique - which is what the European safety network is aimed at - should have been standard in all industrial plants in the EU since last autumn , yet that is still far from the reality .
Best available technique is currently seeing judicious use in three Member States .
Oxides of nitrogen and sulphur are some of the primary issues in industrial environmental pollution .
There is potential here for a reduction of 60 % to 80 % if the best available techniques are consistently applied .
Those are the European Environment Agency 's figures .
This technique is not science fiction .
It is not something from the laboratory , it is not at the laboratory stage , it is available , it is affordable and it works .
Despite that , many Member States are saving themselves the effort , because there is good money to be had even in pollution-spewing installations .
Some Member States have been simply overlooking the need to invest in modernising their plants for years .
That distorts competition and damages the environment and I am therefore arguing for a new approach for the improved implementation of best available techniques .
The compromise packages will also reduce expenditure on bureaucracy , which only costs money and does nothing to help the environment .
We are therefore linking the number of reports that plant operators have to send to the authorities to the risk posed by their plants and to whether the operators meet the requirements imposed on them .
The same applies to inspections by the authorities .
Where there may be danger , a closer look should be taken . Where nothing happens , there is no need for constant monitoring .
For many in this Chamber , soil protection is a sore point .
A constructive debate on this topic is , unfortunately , clearly no longer possible , although it was possible to reach compromises .
They reduce the soil status report to the essentials - the status report need not be comprehensive and need not always be carried out .
Instead , we are concentrating on the actual risk posed by a given plant .
Analyses are required where relevant quantities of hazardous substances are actually handled .
Furthermore , the clean-up of sites to their original condition is unrealistic , for which reason the compromise now talks of clean-up to a satisfactory condition .
That does not change my own personal view that soil protection is not an area that should be regulated at EU level .
It would be better left to the Member States .
IPPC affects almost all sectors of industry .
That being the case , there has been very intensive lobbying over recent days .
In some areas , improvements on the original compromises were actually necessary , one example being in relation to agriculture .
The calculation of threshold values for poultry farms is too bureaucratic .
Instead of differentiating by species between turkeys , ducks and broiler chickens , we should keep the threshold of 40 000 places for poultry .
The production of natural manure , liquid manure and slurry , furthermore , is not something that belongs within the scope of this directive .
The subject is relevant , regulation serves a purpose , but please , not in this legal act .
A farmer 's field is no industrial plant .
Farmers have many more items on their wish lists , and the decision about these two points is appropriate .
I therefore went to some lengths to get the agreement of the shadow rapporteurs on this point .
The same applies to power generation from waste gases in steel production .
This process is very efficient and produces energy from an otherwise useless by-product .
The marginal reduction in the emission of pollutants that was desired could only be achieved with a large degree of financial expenditure .
This was about keeping things in proportion .
I find the behaviour of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , in pulling out of the compromise and going through the entire report again , scattering amendments everywhere , distressing and regrettable .
Such an approach is not constructive .
Reaching political decisions requires at least a minimum level of mutual reliance and working together .
I can understand that members of the PPE-DE Group might not be completely satisfied with the various compromises .
All I can say , in that regard , is that I would have been very happy to have discussed their proposals , but at no time during the compromise negotiations with the shadow rapporteurs were such proposals put forward .
Their uncoordinated last-minute actions mean that there is now a danger that exactly the opposite will be achieved - sound and correct proposals are being jeopardised .


I would like , at this point , to offer my sincere thanks to the other shadow rapporteurs , in particular , Mr Turmes , Mr Hegyi and Mr Blokland , who were reliable partners in negotiation despite differences in substance .
We have an opportunity here , today , to send a signal for both better environmental protection and fair competition .
I hope that we will use that opportunity for a plan that is supported by major economic and environmental groups .
Please support the compromises ! Thank you .
Madam President , I am delighted that we are debating today the proposal to reform the directive on industrial emissions and I would like to specifically thank the rapporteur , Mr Krahmer , and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety for their excellent work on this dossier .
I would also like to thank the Committee on Legal Affairs for its positive contribution .
Over recent weeks , the Commission has collated reliable evidence proving that the current directive on integrated pollution prevention and control is not being applied adequately and that industrial emissions have remained at excessively high levels .
This situation has caused a serious impact on the environment and on the health of European citizens .
Furthermore , it is distorting competition between European industries .
This unacceptable situation must stop .
The main component of the integrated approach on the basis of which the directive operates is best available techniques .
These techniques bring significant environmental and economic advantages .
First of all , they reduce emissions and limit the use of resources , thereby contributing to long-term improvements to the security of energy supply in the European Union .
They also provide incentives for ecological innovation , which is needed in order for European industry to respond to future global demand for environmental technologies .
In order for us to adequately exploit the advantages of the best available techniques , their application framework must be strengthened and improved .
That is the objective of the Commission proposal .
It clarifies and upgrades the role of BAT reference documents ( BREF ) in the application of legislation .
This makes the licensing terms of businesses throughout the European Union more similar and , by extension , achieves greater convergence in conditions of competition .
BREFs are drafted through a transparent procedure with the broad participation of the Member States , industry and other relevant agencies .
The effort required in order to draft and approve them is considerable .
We must support the approval procedure and the institution of the BREF in general .
This will allow BREFs to play a bigger role in defining the terms on which operating licences are granted to industrial companies , which will result in our industrial plants ' meeting the highest possible environmental requirements laid down in the legislation of the European Union .
The Commission proposal provides the necessary flexibility for derogations from BREFs , provided , of course , that they are warranted by local conditions at the time .
However , a detailed statement of reasons and justification is required for every derogation , so that possible abuse can be prevented .
At the same time , for certain sectors of industry which have a particularly serious environmental impact , minimum mandatory requirements must be set at European Union level .
Moreover , relevant minimum standards have already been adopted for sectors such as large combustion plants or waste incineration plants .
As you are aware , this issue has been a particular cause for concern to the rapporteur to the European Parliament .
Even though minimum mandatory requirements may be considered useful as regards certain industrial sectors , it is not certain that it is necessary or useful to define minimum standards for all sectors .
Minimum standards should be adopted only if and inasmuch as they are necessary and warranted from an environmental point of view .
One typical example is large combustion plants , which bear a large share of the responsibility for atmospheric pollution .
The best available techniques are anything but correctly applied in this specific sector .
That is why the Commission has proposed new minimum requirements for large combustion plants on the basis of the conclusions from the relevant BREF .
Provision is made to apply them in 2016 .
These are measures which will help considerably in achieving the relevant targets of the thematic strategy on environmental pollution in an economically viable manner .
Furthermore , the net benefit from the requirements in question , both at European Union level and at national level , offsets the relevant cost .
Finally , apart from improving the application of the directive , the basic objective of the reform is to simplify the legislation and reduce administrative costs to both industry and the competent authorities , in accordance as ever with the principles of the European Union 's better lawmaking programme .
That is why the proposal merges seven current legislative acts into one directive .
This will improve the clarity and cohesion of legislation , both for the Member States and for companies .
The benefits of this simplification are numerous .
Reducing pollution caused by industrial plants is a basic priority for both environmental and economic reasons .
The proposal tabled will simplify the current legislation and , at the same time , will strengthen the application framework for the best available techniques .
This will make a further contribution towards improving environmental protection and the viability of European industry .
I therefore await your views on this important proposal and the constructive dialogue that will follow with interest .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I think that , as has been said , this directive represents the most significant tool for controlling pollution that Parliament has debated since the Climate and Energy Package .
It has not perhaps come at the best of times , given the financial crisis , which is putting the industrial system under pressure and has therefore caused disproportionate lobbying of parliamentary groups by these companies , which are worried about the financial implications of this directive , as in the case of the Climate and Energy Package .
We are encouraged by the fact that we are still at first reading and therefore perhaps , at second reading , we will be able to regain some ground through corrections and improvements .
I have to say to Mr Krahmer , the rapporteur , that the road has not been easy .
Mr Krahmer criticised the position of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , which questioned some compromises . I would like to point out , however , that no fewer than 60 amendments were tabled , at least a third of which were from Members of the PPE-DE Group .
There is thus a general desire in Parliament to re-examine certain key points of this directive and unfortunately , there has been no meeting between the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteur in recent days to discuss the 60 amendments .
We must not forget that the directive has come about due to the fact that the previous directive has , until now , not proved easy to implement in the Member States .
The system of controls and testing has become too diverse .
As Mr Krahmer said , it needs to be amended .
Greater effort is also required from the European Commission , however .
The reference documents on best available techniques ( BREFs ) take too long to prepare and therefore cannot guarantee that the directive is applied in a transparent manner .
It is true that there is a very strong collaboration process in place with the involvement of industrialists , but if BREFs were to be adopted more quickly and on a regular basis , then we would also see an improvement in the protection of public health .
I would also like to add that industrialists have certainly made few investments in the past : a greater commitment is needed , and I believe that , since too many people in Europe fall ill and die due to atmospheric pollution caused by industrial emissions , we must introduce appropriate clean-up measures and a strict system of monitoring and testing .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , 7 I would like to clarify that I am speaking in place of our shadow rapporteur , who is unfortunately unable to be with us today , but I am able to give the united position of our group .
We fully support the compromise , which is the product of more than a year 's work .
Our thanks for this go to Mr Krahmer , who has played a very important role , listening carefully and even revising his initial positions .
This compromise will lead to a greater degree of protection and lend support to European industry , partly by introducing flexibility .
As has already been said , the focal point of this consensus , this agreement , consolidates and extends the application of the BAT or best available techniques , reinforcing the rules and making them more transparent .
The minimum requirements proposed for large combustion plants must be met in order to apply the BATs and air quality criteria to this sector .
This is why , for our part , we are saying that the amendments tabled in plenary must not be carried .
They weaken the compromise , particularly those aimed at narrowing the scope of the IPPC , the application of the BAT and the requirements for large combustion plants .
I must emphasise that our group , albeit after an animated internal discussion , has decided not to table any amendments .
Therefore , we invite others to do the same and not to support the amendments that have been tabled in order to send out a strong , clear message at first reading .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , the idea behind the Directive on Integrated Pollution Prevention and Control ( IPPC ) was to enable us to achieve maximum environmental benefit for minimum cost , giving much flexibility to industry and to Member States .
However , as the Commissioner has pointed out , that principle is being abused : many Member States have interpreted best available techniques in manners not intended by the Commission .
Therefore , I very much support the rapporteur 's idea of setting a minimum standard .
The fact that our rapporteur is German perhaps has some involvement in this ; Germany has a very good record in this instance .
I do not see why a Member State that has invested in making sure that its industry is setting high environmental standards should be undermined competitively and environmentally by those Member States that are not prepared to make similar investments .
I want to turn also to the opportunity this recast directive gives us to amend the Directive on large combustion plants .
I am very keen on seeing emission performance standards introduced for large coal and gas plants because of the huge quantities of CO2 they emit .
However , there is much debate taking place as a result of the concern we now have about global warning , concern which perhaps was not felt quite so acutely when we put this directive into law .
To some extent , there is a balance between old , traditional pollutants and the new concern of global warming gases .
In my own country , it is quite likely that we are going to face severe electricity shortages from the end of 2015 with the closure of many old coal-fired power plants that have not been modernised in line with large combustion plant requirements .
Personally , I am prepared to see a trade-off .
I am prepared at second reading to negotiate a derogation - an extension of the large combustion plant requirements - to keep old plants running so long as we do not end up building new coal-fired power plants , locking us into high emissions of CO2 for decades to come .
However , it has to be a genuine trade-off : there has to be a genuine commitment from Member States to make the changes necessary to reduce their CO2 emissions in order to allow the continued pollution from existing plants for a few years longer .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , firstly my thanks to Mr Krahmer , who has been a very constructive and well-organised rapporteur for this directive .
What are we doing here ?
We are promoting best available technologies in Europe for the sake of health , for the sake of the environment , but also for the sake of the competitiveness of European industry .
We should be aware that , in much of industrial production in Europe , labour costs are smaller today than the material costs and the costs of electricity , water and other resources .
We will therefore gain enormously from this directive , which takes us away from looking only at end-of-pipe technologies to push through the best available documents and best technology already used by an industry .
That is exactly where we have to go .
This also strengthens our suppliers of green technology in Europe .
There is a huge world market for green processing , and we should put Europe on the map .
As Greens , we are happy with this European safety net , which will reduce dumping possibilities for certain governments , and we have improved monitoring and access of documents for citizens .
It was a very good process but , unfortunately , I do not understand Mr Vernola .
You have negotiated all these compromises with us in a good way .
Life is about trust - as is politics - so I do not understand why , at the very end , you who have such a good knowledge of this dossier are now giving in to politicians like Mrs Jackson and other politicians who do not care for health or for competitiveness .
I think this is a shame .
It is a shame that the biggest political group in this House is no longer a reliable negotiating partner .
We cannot negotiate for weeks and then have the compromises undermined at the very last moment .
This is not a serious way of doing politics on such an important file .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , although this is a consolidation of several directives and there are therefore limited possibilities for amending the legislative text , this new IPPC Directive is a necessary and useful tool for promoting not only a dramatic reduction in emissions by taking advantage of best available techniques , but also for precipitating a new trend in industrial investments .
With the attention to detail and input of all the shadow rapporteurs and , first and foremost , the staff and the rapporteur , Mr Krahmer , whom I would like to thank for his honesty and patience , we have maintained complete transparency in adopting the BAT , exchanging information and publishing the operative conclusions of these documents on the Internet .
We have ensured that the participative consultation procedure established with the Seville Forum will continue .
It is important that we do not wander from this course ; I would appeal to all the rapporteurs to maintain the consistency we have demonstrated in months of open discussion .
I myself worked on the soil protection directive .
We are unfortunately still awaiting the Council 's opinion on this directive that is crucial for maintaining a natural balance in the release of carbon into the atmosphere , as Commissioner Dimas rightly said recently .
Certain amendments , including in the draft IPPC Directive , aim to undermine the mandatory reclamation requirements for disused industrial land : they do not intend to link the provisions to the other requirements to be introduced by the soil directive .
All this is , in my opinion , unacceptable , and not for environmental reasons , but in order to safeguard public health and prevent any misuse of public resources in the development of business and the life of EU citizens .
In the past , including in Italy , there have been too many such cases of infringement of the permits laid down by the previous IPPC Directive , leading to discrepancies , both from an environmental perspective and in terms of market and industry rules .
My country has already paid a high price for uncontrolled industrial development involving Seveso , Eternit and others , with consequences for the landscape and local people .
To conclude , I welcome the limitation and inclusion of provisions on incinerators .
Regulation in this area must not be watered down , so that we can prepare to move beyond this practice towards a zero waste society .
The amendments discussed by all the groups to permit stricter controls on furan and dioxin emissions are also justified .
I think that in this light we should consolidate this debate with a House vote .
This is an important directive and I hope it will be adopted .
Mr President , our industry is important to our economy , but also frequently causes air , water and soil pollution .
The European Union has been tackling this kind of environmental pollution for decades , and recently all the attention in the environmental field has been focused on CO2 and climate change .
Sometimes , it seems that this is the only environmental problem .
Al Gore has left a clear mark .
There is a danger here , however , of all environmental problems being reduced to climate change ; yet we face many more environmental policy challenges than this .
Creation is also threatened by the emission of atmospheric pollutants , 40-80 % of which originate from large industrial installations .
It is with good reason , then , that we are seeking to achieve sound environmental protection by means of this Directive on Integrated Pollution Prevention and Control ( IPPC Directive ) .
We in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety have considered the proposals in detail and have reached an acceptable compromise on many points .
Only on the subject of emission standards for large combustion plants do I believe the report still falls short .
This is precisely where the greatest environmental gains are to be made .
I have tabled a couple of supplementary amendments , therefore .
For example , the emission standards for power stations must be comparable to those for waste incineration plants in terms of stringency , particularly if we consider that power stations are co-incinerators of waste .
In addition , I propose closing a loophole in the legislation : gasification , which is comparable to regular combustion , must meet the same emission standards .
Recent case law has shown this not to be the case .
The legislation is in need of repair , therefore .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner Dimas , ladies and gentlemen , it is a clear goal of this directive to simplify the current legal provisions in the area of industrial emissions and to incorporate them into a single directive , thereby cutting bureaucracy .
However , as far as I can tell , there is little to be seen of this in the Commission 's specific proposal .
For me , cutting bureaucracy does not mean the creation of new reporting obligations and complicated procedures but rather , above all , the avoidance of duplicated regulation and unnecessary burdens .
For agriculture , in particular , the Commission proposal will bring about a flood of new bureaucracy .
Expanding the applicability would mean that animal husbandry and breeding businesses that are , in no way , comparable to the industrial plants that this directive is actually aimed at will also be included .
What is more , the Commission proposes rules that are already contained in a nitrate directive or the water framework directive or the groundwater directive .
I ask for your support for our amendments in order to prevent such duplicated regulation .
The calculation of the upper limits for animal husbandry must also be reasonable and comprehensible in relation to poultry .
Please vote with me against the division into chickens for fattening , laying hens and turkeys for fattening .
In Germany , we call this kind of nitpicking ' counting peas ' .
There must also be no attempt to use this directive to re-introduce the subject of soil protection by the back door .
Soil protection is important .
There must be efficient national laws to deal with it .
I would like to say to the rapporteur that I , personally , along with other members of my group , very much welcome the concept of a European safety network .
It represents a good compromise .
By setting emissions limits that the Member States must adhere to as an absolute upper limit when granting permits to large industrial plants , we will be putting a stop to the inflationary use of derogations that has thus far taken place in certain Member States .
In that way , we will be guaranteeing a uniform high level of safety .
Member States will then no longer be able to gain a competitive advantage at the expense of the environment .
( SV ) Mr President , this is a very important piece of legislation .
Among other things , it has led to the improvement of a very big problem we had in Sweden with acidified lakes .
However , it is also important not to permit additional derogations or longer time limits in this directive so that we are able to continue this positive development of less fallout of hazardous emissions over Europe .
For this reason , we want to remove these options for further extension of the derogations .
We would also like to see a clear limit for carbon dioxide emissions .
Emissions trading is not an adequate tool for dealing with the climate crisis that we are facing .
This is something we will see now that we are entering a recession , when a considerable number of emissions allowances will automatically become available .
They will be sold at a very low price , which means that we will lose several years of the changeover necessary in order for us to be able to deal with this in the long term and it also means that , after this recession , we will be less well equipped and have a poorer ability to cope with this development if we do not establish such supplementary measures as emissions requirements for large combustion plants .
I therefore think that it is a huge shame that these amendments have been judged impermissible for the vote .
Mr President , I support this measure and its aim of promoting best available techniques for environmental protection , but I do have concerns about Parliament 's methodology on it .
This is essentially a directive for regulating heavy industry , but buried in the text and in the annex are a number of paragraphs that directly affect farmers .
There was no opportunity for the Agriculture Committee to give its opinion and , unfortunately , some of the proposals that affect farmers are quite inappropriate .
In particular , the requirements on manure and slurry duplicate the Nitrates Directive and the Water Framework Directive .
The lower thresholds on poultry drag small family farms into a complex regulatory framework designed to control global industrial giants .
This directive is not the place to regulate small farms .
( PL ) Mr President , in the draft legislative resolution on industrial missions , a strong tendency to limit the important environmental aspects of the current directive is emerging while , at the same time , attempting to push through more extended references to the greenhouse effect .
The numerous motions for amendments have drastically enhanced the standards for thermal energy plants emissions which are not directly toxic in nature , while , at the same time , other more liberal draft amendments only slightly improve the regulations on combustion or co-incineration of waste .
Carbon dioxide emissions are not toxic , whereas dioxin , furan , hydrogen chloride , hydrogen fluoride , heavy metals and other highly dangerous compounds are a real and direct threat to human health and the environment .
Close monitoring , both of the types of waste incinerated and the harmful substances arising as a result of the process , is an important condition for the safe thermal utilisation of waste .
The introduction of lenient threshold values requiring preventive measures to be taken when emissions are exceeded may harm the environment and human health .
The approach proposed shows up unequal treatment for particular classes of installation , with a particularly restrictive approach to thermal energy plants using conventional fuels .
Mr President , at the heart of this directive is the problem of control and of costing .
How can we ensure that laws adopted by the EU as a whole are applied , and how can we legislate without knowing the cost of what we want ?
The rapporteur wants to bring in a universal system of uniform emission limits , which would have to be worked out in a huge bureaucratic exercise that would take at least eight years .
No one knows how much it would cost - it is called the European safety net .
I tabled Amendment 134 on staying outside the high-emission industries with standards based on best available techniques , leaving the implementation of such measures to the discretion of the Member States .
That is realistic and affordable and observes the principle of subsidiarity .
If the European safety net is adopted , I hope the Council and the Commission put pressure on Parliament to have an impact assessment done on the idea .
The question is whether we have the will to make a uniform European Union-wide system - a European safety net - work .
The answer is that all the evidence so far shows that Member States lack that will .
They will not support a European environment inspectorate : they want to stick with national enforcement agencies .
The right answer to our quandary is not to invent a huge new bureaucracy that will never spring into life , but to use our money to bring up the standards of morale of national enforcement agencies to do their job in helping to put EU law into practice .
I commend to you Amendment 129 , which exempts standby generators in healthcare facilities from pollution controls that would treat them as though they were operating 100 % of their time .
That amendment will save money at a critical time for health budgets .
I commend to you the amendments on large combustion plants : unless we get these into the directive , my country will face power blackouts .
People have enough to blame the EU for without that !

My final point concerns compromises and Mr Turmes 's attack on me : the first reading is not a time for compromises , but rather a time when we fire off all our amendments and ideas and discuss them .
We cannot have compromises that prevent discussion .
Finally , I commend to the future Parliament the current Rule 55 , which would allow us to have a renewed first reading of this very important directive .
It seems wrong to have the first reading in the old Parliament and the second reading , without a first reading , in the new one .
( NL ) Mr President , the new Directive on Integrated Pollution Prevention and Control ( IPPC Directive ) will ensure that businesses have to equip all large installations with the best available technology .
This is already compulsory in some countries , and the time has come to align our course and create a level playing field .
So far , so good .
However , ladies and gentlemen , I would especially ask your support for the amendments seeking to lay down requirements for coal-fired power stations in future .
An emission ceiling must be introduced for these power stations , and this can be done by using carbon dioxide capture and storage ( CCS ) or by co-firing 40-50 % sustainable biomass .
An emission ceiling for CO2 is the only way we can continue to use coal whilst also achieving our climate objectives .
Some MEPs argue that the electricity sector falls under the new trading scheme , and that therefore no new requirements are necessary .
This reasoning is flawed , however , as the ETS not only allows exceptions for coal-fired power stations but also permits the energy-intensive industry to be compensated for increased electricity costs .
This removes the cost incentive to reduce CO2 .
Anyone believing that the emissions trading scheme ( ETS ) is the answer to everything does not need to lay down requirements for cars or ban light bulbs , and has no need of a Sustainable Energy Directive .
We have to be consistent .
If we lay down requirements for cars and lighting , we must certainly also lay down requirements for coal-fired power stations , as these are the real polluters .
It is also true that , if we want an easy way to reduce CO2 , we should be looking not at the steel or cement industries but rather at the energy sector .
Mr President , if there are any weaknesses in the Nitrates and Water Framework Directives , I think issues in relation to pig , poultry and dairy activities must be addressed there .
I do think the compliance costs would outweigh the benefits of their inclusion in this particular piece of legislation .
But there are other legislative vehicles for tackling these particular sectors and they must be looked at on that basis .
On the issue of large combustion plants , the EU ETS operation today does not safeguard against design lock-in of unnecessary pollution in many new high-cost and high-emitting installations , particularly in new coal-fired plants which , when built , would expect to operate for over 40 years , thus making it difficult and more expensive to meet overall climate goals .
CO2 emission performance standards would help ensure the electricity sector is decarbonised to a timetable consistent both with limiting increases in global average temperatures to less than 2 ° C and with bringing new , cleaner technologies on-stream .
Industry needs , above all , legislative certainty to make investment decisions on these large , expensive , capital projects .
A 350 g limit would ensure that only the most efficient state of the art gas-fired plants , for example , are built .
CO2 standards that apply from , say , 2020 would mean that new coal-fired plant stations could only be built after entry into force of this proposal , providing they use CO2 capture equipment from 2020 onwards , by when we expect CCS to be commercially available .
Existing installations would have a longer period to comply with the standard , either by adding CO2 capture technology or , indeed , by closing down .
Installations could also comply with the standard in other ways , for example , by co-firing biomass or by using the heat from cogen techniques .
As rapporteur on the recent EU ETS review , I am concerned with the overall level of ambition across all our policies .
The latest science shows us that we need to have stricter emission limits over a shorter timetable if we are to achieve the 2 ° C target which , by our vote on the climate and energy package in December , we as a Parliament accept as necessary for the environmental , social and economic future of society .
The ETS alone will not be enough to cut electricity sector emissions on the scale required .
To conclude , there is comfort in an ESN , but I am still worried that this may be an incentive to the lowest possible common denominator and minimal emission reductions - in other words , a race to the bottom .
Please convince me otherwise .
Mr President , although I support the aims of the proposals to simplify and clarify the requirements of the legislation and ensure better and more even implementation , I have three primary concerns .
Firstly , the Commission has not only sought to simplify and ensure better implementation , it has also greatly increased the scope in certain areas .
I think there is a balance to strike between environmental protection , on the one hand , and on bureaucracy and cost to industry and smaller installations , such as farmers and healthcare installations , on the other .
Secondly , the minimum requirements for large combustion plants present significant problems for parts of the UK power sector .
I am told these concerns are shared by Poland , France , Italy , Spain and some eastern and southern Member States .
The requirements would mean that , without a time-limited derogation , the possibility for short-term continuation of national emissions reduction plans or energy security would be at risk .
Finally , I am greatly concerned by and opposed to the European safety net .
I do not think this is a good idea .
I find that the minimum emissions limit values would become the default values rather than focusing on full application of the more ambitious best available techniques , and could well reduce the level of environmental protection whilst , at the same time , vastly increasing the costs of implementation .
I would ask all Members to consider these points carefully before voting .
Mr President , as a member of the Committee on Agriculture , I will restrict my remarks to the impact of this proposal on the farming sector across the European Union .
I endorse the comments of other colleagues who have concerns about ' spreading the net ' and dragging farmers into the coverage , as industrial polluters .
Agriculture must be monitored for its emissions , but I do not accept that we should do it in this way .
I would suggest that the Nitrates Directive in its current form does much of what we are talking about .
Perhaps we need to look at that directive , which is causing problems in many Member States , at how it is being implemented and at whether it is being implemented effectively .
In addition to that , there are concerns about dragging in poultry , in particular , because that European sector is under huge threat from imports from third countries , where no such restrictions apply . I would support amendments to the effect that this should not happen in the current proposals .
Likewise , the inclusion of dairy farming is of concern , and I would support colleagues in my own group , and others , who have tabled amendments to take these sectors out of the current proposal .
I repeat my suggestion that , when it comes to agriculture , there is a myriad of directives covering emissions and pollution control in this sector , and so maybe it is time we looked at recasting all of those so that farmers who are required to implement them can fully understand and appreciate what they are meant to do .
It is one thing to draft legislation , as we do in this House , but we sometimes have no connection with how it is being implemented , and by whom it is being implemented , and whether that implementation is effective .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the revision of the directive on industrial emissions is long overdue .
A piece of legislation in which all the significant measures to reduce pollution depend on the best available technique should be adjusted at least every five years , rather than after 13 .
After such a period , the techniques have moved on far ahead of us .
At the same time , we must note that , despite the march of technology , the targets associated with our directive from back in the day have by no means been met .
That is why I have such a high opinion of the compromise achieved in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
Its implementation will get us where we need to go .
I find the hysteria when we deal with soil protection or the wishes of the farmers ' unions incomprehensible .
The Socialist Group in the European Parliament wants to achieve environmental targets without impeding economic activities .
Doing so is very much looking to the future and not looking backwards , as the proposals from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats do .
( FI ) Mr President , a lot of effort went into the preparation of the IPPC ( Integrated Pollution Prevention and Control ) Directive last year , and although the directive in its final form is of huge importance for the EU 's industry and its citizens , it has nevertheless been trampled underfoot by the climate and energy package .
This is a pity because the directive will have a considerable economic impact , in combination with the climate package , on measures already decided .
For that reason , they should be in the right proportion to the climatic and environmental benefits achieved by means of the directive .
The measures for improvement proposed under the aims of the directive must , above all , be cost-effective , otherwise it would not be worth taking up the challenge of combining seven different directives into just one .
We need to be able to cut the current costs of bureaucracy and action , although I am disappointed to say that the report by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety fails to do that .
The licensing authorities must be able to consider freely the emissions regulations for installations , taking into consideration an installation 's age and technical standard , its environmental impact and condition , and the costs of measures for improvement .
This would be a way of guaranteeing sufficient flexibility for existing energy production plants , especially peaker and emergency power plants , to function up to the end of their working life .
Similarly , it would be very awkward to adopt a European Safety Net scheme in the form proposed by the rapporteur , for several reasons .
We do not know where or how an ESN would be set which , in itself , is an unreasonable state of affairs .
Secondly , local permit authorities are clearly in a better position to take account of prevailing conditions , such as an installation 's age , location and , for example , its water intake , which is a guarantee of flexibility , in contrast with the totally inflexible ESN .
Permit conditions are already generally very stringent .
Even tighter controls in connection with new permits will incur huge costs without any essential benefit to the environment .
In practice this would even impair standards of environmental protection .
I am pleased that the amendment tabled by my group clears this up .
Here , I would like to say a special thank you to my colleague , Mrs Jackson , for her Amendment 134 , which my group has decided to support .
Once again , we are witnessing the sort of practical wisdom that results from experience .
The amendment finds a compromise on a large number of the hardest questions .


Mr President , since I have limited time , having thanked Mr Krahmer for his hard work , allow me to focus on Amendments 136-139 , where some 40 colleagues , including myself , suggest that this directive should include an environment performance standard for large combustion plants , limiting CO2 emissions in the future .
At this very moment , it is unclear whether these four amendments will be voted on later today .
A recast includes the provision stating that if new developments merit amendments and suggestions , going beyond the original proposal , then that should be possible .
I believe that recent science is enough substantive evidence that we need to be more ambitious than we thought just one or two years ago when it comes to climate change mitigation .
The Emission Trading System ( ETS ) is , in my opinion , not sufficient to reach the 2 ° C target that the EU has agreed on .
As currently designed , the Emission Trading System will lead to a carbon-free power sector only after some 60-65 years .
That is why we have tabled these amendments , where we call for all power plants that are built in the future to limit their emissions to 350 g CO2 from 2020 and onwards and those which are already in existence should be retrofitted by 2025 or closed down .
The proposal is technology neutral and can be achieved by different means .
I would strongly urge the President to agree that we can vote on those amendments , and I encourage members to give their full support .
( CS ) Mr President , I am constantly seeing how the excessive cost of ever higher environmental standards for European manufacturers reduces competitiveness and hits employment as long as similar standards are not also adopted by China , Brazil , the US and other economies .
It troubles me all the more that the Commission has not carried out a study into economic impacts on employment , in order for us to take an informed and responsible decision concerning the new requirements for what is otherwise a very desirable reduction in emissions of nitrogen oxide .
And I am in favour of pressure to modernise factories .
Today , when Member States are implementing crisis measures to reduce costs on companies and factories , I must also point out that the proposals from the ENVI Committee are capable of being fulfilled only by very competitive companies , while small firms would have to restrict or shut down plants and lay off employees .
I will vote against expanding the scope of this directive on reducing emissions to include households , small plants , small farms and even schools and churches and the like at a time of crisis .
This is disproportionate and therefore not sensible .
I would like to thank Mrs Jackson for her proposal for an amendment .
Mr President , I will stick specifically to agriculture .
First of all , I have to admit that I am a farmer but I do not have pigs , I do not have poultry , though I do have a greenhouse in the garden .
I think it is very important that the Commissioner realises that , as has already been said , it is specifically designed for industry .
Commissioner , I beg that you rethink the situation when it comes to the directives on agriculture .
We already know that agriculture is under huge pressure .
We have heard many times in this Chamber the question of food security .
Please reconsider the amendments which are particularly damaging to it .
I think that many of the amendments that are not connected with agriculture are extremely good and I congratulate Mr Vernola on his report .
Commissioner , you talked in your presentation about distorting competition .
I am going to ask you a simple question , and please try to answer it today .
Will you put in place legislation to stop imports of foodstuffs coming into the European Union which are not reared to the same standards as we have in the European Union ?
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank all the Members who have participated in today 's debate .
They have made a constructive contribution to it .
I would especially like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Krahmer , for his excellent hard work .
Before I close , I would like to say a few words on some of the key amendments that have been discussed today .
Firstly , I welcome your broad support for the thrust of the Commission 's proposal and , in particular , for the strengthening of the application of Best Available Techniques ( BAT ) and the status of the BREF documents .
This is the cornerstone of the Commission 's proposal .
There are many amendments that are acceptable to the Commission , at least in part or in principle .
In particular , many of the amendments help to clarify the text of the Commission 's proposal or to improve transparency in the development of the BREFs and in the permitting and enforcement practices of Member States .
Better information and participation of the public in these decisions is very welcome .
I also share the concerns expressed on the need to avoid the misuse of flexibility in setting permit conditions .
As I mentioned earlier , minimum requirements can be very useful and necessary tools to tackle specific problems where certain sectors have not taken the necessary steps to implement BAT .
However , the systematic setting of minimum requirements is not necessary and risks creating an additional administrative burden for little environmental gain .
Therefore , I consider that minimum standards should only be set where needed to achieve a better implementation of BAT .
In considering minimum requirements on large combustion plants , it is important to keep in mind the significant impacts that such operations have on the environment and on the health of European Union citizens .
BAT for large combustion plants was agreed in 2006 and it is the Commission 's view that the minimum criteria should be applied from 2016 .
We need to ensure that the measures put in place for the sector bring it into line with BAT at the earliest opportunity and facilitate the achievement of the objectives set out in the Thematic Strategy on Air Pollution .
Another key element to ensure that the legislation is effective in its objectives is that of the provisions for compliance and enforcement measures .
In the past , we have identified some shortcomings in this regard and it is , therefore , of paramount importance that the new legislation sets clear provisions to ensure the law is properly implemented .
For this reason , the Commission 's proposal introduces minimum provisions for inspection , review of permit conditions and reporting of compliance .
These changes will ensure the proper implementation of BAT and reduce distortions in competition .
The Commission will be extremely vigilant on this issue .
I would like to say a few words about the thresholds for intensive agricultural farms , mainly poultry .
The same threshold is currently applied for all poultry , without taking into account the different types of species .
The rearing of different species leads to different environmental impacts , in particular , due to the different weight of the animals .
The proposed new thresholds have been set on the basis of the environmental impact of the species concerned .
The new thresholds would include a limited number of additional farms compared to the current scope , and would reduce ammonia emissions in a cost efficient manner to meet the objectives of the Thematic Strategy on Air Pollution , in some areas .
I will provide Parliament 's secretariat with a list detailing the Commission 's position on the amendments .
Commission 's position on amendments by Parliament
Krahmer report
The Commission can support fully , in part , or in principle , Amendments 1 , 5-8 , 12-14 , 16 , 18-21 , 27 , 34-37 , 40 , 42-44 , 46 , 48-56 , 58-62 , 64-66 , 68 , 69 , 71-73 , 75 and 79 .
The amendments which the Commission cannot support are Amendments 2-4 , 9-11 , 15 , 17 , 22-26 , 28-33 , 38 , 39 , 41 , 45 , 47 , 57 , 63 , 67 , 70 , 76-78 , 80 , 93 , 97 , 114 , 115 , 117 , 129 and 133 .
Mr President , I want to keep this short .
I would like to offer my thanks for the constructive contributions that I have heard Members make to the debate today .
To conclude , I just have a couple more things to say .
Firstly , I would like to offer my sincere thanks to the Commissioner for not categorically arguing against the concept of minimum requirements for the safety network .
This proposal is no work of the devil , nor is it a bureaucratic monster .
It is an instrument for solving problems and one that we should give a chance to .
For that reason I would like to take this opportunity just to call for your support for it once again .
The other thing I wanted to say I will direct at my British friends , and ' across all the parties ' .
My dear British friends , I do understand , Caroline , I can see your problem .
I can well understand that the energy security of a country will be put above compliance with an air pollution limit for a certain period of time .
I have a lot of sympathy for that .
I am also the last person who would fail to grant Her Majesty additional time when it comes to building new coal-fired power stations .
This is something that we can talk about .
The problem is that that is exactly what we have not done .
At no point in the last four months has this conversation taken place .
I want to urge you , at this point - looking forward to second reading now - to be open-minded once again and to say ' let us talk about a compromise now ' and , to that end , to give up the resistance - which , in my view , is completely irrational - and the fundamental opposition to the minimum standards , which is unjustifiable from the point of view of either competition policy or environmental policy .
I think that a compromise can be reached on this , something I also hope to see at the end of the second reading .
Incidentally , I am not of the view that we should not seek compromises at first reading .
This legislation is too complex for that .
I do not wish to end this parliamentary term as rapporteur and hand on legislation to the next Parliament where the text of the directive that is debated is inconsistent , illogical and contradictory .
I therefore ask for your support for the compromises when we vote in an hour 's time .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 10 March 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
I welcome both the integrated approach ( the consolidation in a single text of seven separate directives on industrial emissions ) and more stringent provisions governing the use of best available techniques aimed at finding innovative solutions for reducing the pollutant effect of production .
The development of certain less polluting products entails the involvement of different parties , such as companies , the competent authorities and NGOs .
This directive offers opportunities for cooperation between the various parties ( local administrations and companies ) , thereby enabling them to encourage innovation .
There are good examples of this in the Netherlands and Denmark , as well as in East European countries such as Romania .
The proposed single directive on industrial emissions , along with all the recommended options of the policy package , will improve the legislation 's effectiveness in achieving its environmental and health objectives in the most cost-effective way .
It will also reduce unnecessary administrative costs ( with an expected net reduction estimated between EUR 105 and 225 million per year ) and minimise distortion to competition within the EU without hampering the competitive position of European industry .
While industrial activity has a fundamental role to play in maintaining and increasing economic well-being , we must not lose sight of the impact it has on the environment .
As part of the review of the Directive on integrated pollution prevention and control ( IPCC ) , the emphasis has been firmly placed on establishing limit values for certain combustion plants and on using the best available techniques ( BAT ) to ensure an adequate level of environmental protection .
I supported the introduction , from 1 January 2020 , of a limit value of 350g of carbon dioxide for electricity-generating combustion plants bigger than 500 MW as these plants cause an increase in the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and , by implication , a deterioration in global warming .
Introducing a limit value would act as an incentive in terms of investing in techniques for cutting emissions , with all plants having to comply with this limit value by 2025 .
I believe that the reduction in pollution originating from various industrial sources will help the European Union achieve its aim of maintaining the rise in global temperature below 2 ºC .
The effectiveness of this directive will be seen following the inspections which will be carried out at all combustion plants , and it will also be reflected in compliance with the terms of authorisation .
The decision about integrated pollution prevention and control ( IPPC ) represents an opportunity for Europe to obtain uniformly high standards of protection .
In the sensitive area of industrial emissions , it is important that European businesses are given an incentive to put in place the cleanest and most efficient technology available .
The ' best available technique ' principle should be reinforced in future .
In its implementation , however , attention must be paid to ensuring that this pioneering project of the IPPC Directive does not become overloaded with bureaucracy once again , leaving Member States and businesses with an impossible job .
We should therefore carefully weigh up how much of a reporting obligation is actually required and to what extent implementing the concept would , if anything , be detrimental .
What is more , the unnecessary burdening of small and medium-sized enterprises also overshoots the objective , as does the overregulation of areas such as soil protection , an area that actually falls within the competence of the Member States .
So , let us instead concentrate on the essentials , namely the harmonisation of environmental standards and the entrenchment of a high level of environmental protection in industrial activities .
Public access to European Parliament , Council and Commission documents ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Cashman , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council regarding public access to European Parliament , Council and Commission documents ( recast ) C6-0184 / 2008 - .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I look forward to this debate , and particularly to hearing from those who are not so keen on enhancing transparency and public access to documents .
I wish to begin by thanking the seven ministers from the EU who have declared their support for my report .
In particular , they are , and I quote : ' therefore , glad to see that Parliament 's Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs adopted a report on 17 February 2009 that shares our vision of a more transparent Union ' .
I find it staggering that , when we are trying to reconnect to our citizens , people do not support transparency and openness .
I find it equally staggering that , when we are trying to connect the institutions back to the public , there is a lack of willingness to enhance public scrutiny and accountability .
Some Members have raised doubts about whether all the amendments that my report proposes are within the scope of the legal basis of the regulation - Article 255 of the Treaty .
I should like to set their minds at rest : the object of Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 is : ' to give the public a right of access to documents of the institution which is as wide as possible .
That right of public access to the documents of the institution is related to the democratic nature of those institutions . '
Do not simply take my word for it - I am quoting verbatim from the Turco judgment of the Court of Justice .
It is in the spirit of that judgment that we must interpret Article 255 of the Treaty .
Take our Amendment 44 on classified documents .
It is simply disingenuous to say , as the Commission has , that the classification of documents as confidential has no link with public access to such documents .
Under the present version of Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 , documents may only be classified in order to safeguard the essential interests protected under Article 4 ( 1 ) .
So the link is already there .
What we have done is to draw the logical consequences from that link and incorporate rules on the classification of documents into the regulation itself .
These rules , which are carefully modelled on the rules the Council and the Commission already apply , define limits on the public 's right to access to documents , just as Article 255 requires , and there is nothing in the Treaty to prevent the institutions adopting these in the regulation .
Take our Amendment 24 , which refers to agencies and bodies created by the institution .
Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 , as amended , will lay down the principles , conditions and limits of public access to the documents of those agencies , but it will not , in itself , create obligations for agencies .
If you read our Amendment 29 , for example , you will see that the regulation applies only to documents held by the institutions , although it does set the standards that agencies will be expected to follow in adopting their own rules on public access to their documents , in accordance , I might add , with the joint declaration adopted by the Council , the Commission and Parliament on 30 May 2001 .
Let me also point out for those who cannot witness it , the sadness that the Council is not here to attach the due importance to this extremely important report .
I know some of you were also concerned that we went too far in seeking to ensure that Member States did not undermine the level of transparency the regulation aims at .
I believe I have come a long way to meet concerns , as you will see from compromise amendments that remind the Member States of their duties under Article 10 of the Treaty not to stand in the way of the achievement of the Community 's objectives , including transparency and democracy .
The amendments by Mr Nassauer may bring some reassurances to his group and other MEPs who are concerned that some private information may get into the public domain .
That will not happen and cannot happen under my report .
There is still the space to think that personal and private data will remain protected , so I will listen with great interest as to why those who oppose this regulation do so .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , thank you for a very substantive report on the Commission 's proposal for a recast of Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 regarding public access to documents .
This is a very important and cherished subject and I appreciate the enormous work that has been done by Mr Cashman , as rapporteur , and also many other active , interested and skilled people in this House .
This is a subject that touches upon fundamental and sometimes conflicting rights of citizens , associations and undertakings .
We need to look very carefully at the necessary changes to be made to this Regulation and we need to remain focused on openness .
All three institutions have agreed that , overall , Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 has worked remarkably well for almost eight years now .
Parliament , Council and Commission are much more open now than ever before .
You could say that the change of rules led to a change of practice and to a change of minds and attitudes .
At the same time , Parliament , Council and Commission also agree that legitimate interests have received adequate protection .
We should not forget that the EU institutions have granted access to a higher number of documents , while a decrease in the number and rate of refusals has been registered .
So I hope you agree that Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 has proven its value .
For this reason , a complete overhaul is not necessary .
Having said this , even a good tool can always be improved .
The legal base we have as our starting point is Article 255 of the Treaty , as has already been mentioned by the rapporteur .
Following that , the Regulation shall define principles and the limits governing the citizen 's right of access to documents .
As regards the report at hand , I note that some amendments go beyond the scope of Article 255 of the Treaty and therefore these amendments cannot be accepted .
But - and this is an important ' but ' - they point to important issues that may well be addressed in another context .
The Commission will certainly look at that with a constructive , pragmatic and open mind .
It is good practice to assess from time to time whether legislation works well and achieves its objectives , and it is in this spirit that the Commission drafted its proposal for a recast of the Regulation .
The use of the recast technique meets the objective of better lawmaking .
Since this Regulation touches upon a fundamental right of citizens , it is of the utmost importance to adopt a single , clear and readable legal text .
The recast technique does not tie the hands of the legislator more than the traditional way of amending legislation .
Irrespective of the choice of legislative technique , the Community legislator may not go beyond the aim of the proposal .
We are committed to continuing to enhance transparency and openness , and I firmly believe that this is a good way to do it .
In this context , however , I have to mention that a number of the amendments concern provisions of Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 which the Commission did not propose to amend .
We are not in a position to accept them because they go beyond the scope of the Commission 's proposal .
Having said this , the Commission is , of course , willing to take on board good ideas , although we are at the moment still in the early stages of the procedure .
I would like to confirm that the Commission is willing to have discussions with the two co-legislators and that we want to try to find common ground in order to reach a balanced and workable compromise text .
However , the Commission prefers to come forward with an amended proposal when the two co-legislators have stated their position .
We cannot and will not prejudge or anticipate discussions or negotiations .
We should also bear in mind the changes that the Lisbon Treaty - if and when it enters into force - will bring about on this important issue .
Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 will then apply to all institutions , bodies , agencies and offices of the European Union , albeit to a limited extent for the Court of Justice , the European Central Bank and the European Investment Bank .
For citizens , the Lisbon Treaty will mean real progress when all EU bodies will apply a common set of rules on access to documents .
Such a single set of rules ensures consistency but , at the same time , it must be tailored to fit the great number of bodies with very different mandates and competences .
I would also like to repeat what I have said on previous occasions in this House and elsewhere .
Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 is the cornerstone of a policy on transparency , but we also need to think about what we can do proactively outside the formal legislation .
That is why I announced at the joint committee meeting of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs of 20 January that I am taking the initiative to prepare an openness action plan .
Improved registers , greater user-friendliness and accessibility , active dissemination , and quicker publishing of documents are some examples of what I want to address in this action plan and , of course , continue to discuss with the other EU institutions .
This is a pragmatic and efficient way to mainstream transparency into all our policies .
We need to lead by example .
In this spirit , we should also look at ways to make our institutions and the way they operate more understandable to citizens .
We need an active policy of informing citizens and making them aware of how Europe-wide policies affect their everyday life .
Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 is , of course , an important tool but , beyond the legal text , it is how we put this into practice that really counts .
To sum up the Commission 's position on Mr Cashman 's report at this stage of the procedure , I would like to say the following .
There are some amendments the Commission cannot accept because they go beyond the legal base of Article 255 of the Treaty .
There are other amendments we cannot accept because they go beyond the scope of the Commission 's proposed changes , but in some cases , such amendments nevertheless point to important issues that may well be addressed in another context .
Also , the Commission is always willing to take on board good ideas in whatever context it may be .
Once we have Parliament 's and the Council 's positions , you will have the position from the third corner in the institutional triangle .
I look forward to an interesting and thought-provoking discussion to come .
The subject deserves that , and our citizens are entitled to expect clear and well-functioning legislation on public access to our documents .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have one minute for the Committee on Legal Affairs and one for the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance .
Therefore , I would like to combine them , since the two things have much in common in this case .
Mr President , we in the Committee on Legal Affairs have discussed the recast issue at length .
I will say straight away that we are not at all pleased : indeed , we think that the use of the recast procedure for this kind of act was not a particularly bright decision , not least because , as the Commissioner said , the real task here is to understand how a regulation that has worked fairly well , but could be perfected , can , in fact , be improved .
So , the outcome , whether through the use of this procedure or through the practical proposals that have been made , is surely a step backwards compared with the current situation .
Something must therefore be done about it , and it is more difficult to do this with the recast procedure than with a full legislative mandate .
The second thing I would like to say is that there is no point in beating about the bush : I am pleased that the Commissioner is announcing welcome initiatives on transparency and openness , but the fact remains that the Commission 's proposal excludes documents that are currently open and transparent from the scope of this legislation .
That is the truth of the matter , and it is also true that a number of Member States , including her own , have said as much quite clearly and have said that it is unacceptable .
Today , the problem is that if we want to improve a piece of legislation , we cannot all simply defend the status quo because if we do , we run the risk of being less transparent , less comprehensible and even , may I say , less democratic .
Mr President , transparency is the basis of democracy .
Unfortunately , the European Union can hardly brag about its transparency .
Directives need to be changed , but so do attitudes .
What can you say about the statement by the Council that outsiders should not be given documents relating to legal advice in connection with legislative procedure ?
Outsiders , citizens if you like , should not be given them then .
I cannot understand how European Union citizens can be outsiders .
Attitudes , therefore , have to change .
Legislation has to change to make the legislative documents of the Council , Parliament and Commission transparent , and the emphasis here is on legislative documents .
If I make a comparison with my own country , for example , and the Finnish Parliament , we could not imagine the statements of its Constitutional Law Committee being secret .
That would mean the people would not be told the reasons why this or that law is being enacted ; and the Council says we should not say anything because the public are outsiders .
In legislation , in the formulation of directives , in everything , we need to work on the assumption that we should increase transparency , and there is also room for improvement in voting procedures .
We should have electronic voting ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , Commissioner , we should not waste the opportunity presented by this excellent report to reach agreement at first reading - I mean , during this Parliamentary term - so as to create legislation ensuring greater transparency in access to documents .
Excuses are not acceptable , and I hope we have the time and the common sense to reach such agreement on this excellent report .
In the report , we in the Committee on Petitions express our concern at the fact that , where infringement proceedings are brought against a Member State as a result of a petition by citizens , the Member State has the right to deny access to the public documents used in those infringement proceedings , thereby shutting the door on citizens ' participation .
We are also very concerned at the lack of interoperability and the technical block that exists in the European Parliament regarding the use of interoperable documents , that is to say , open-standard documents , which are not compatible with the software and IT platform that Parliament is currently using , which is specific to a single company .
The fact is that the European institutions do not guarantee citizens genuine access to the content of documents without imposing discrimination of a technical nature .
That is unacceptable , because people cannot access the documents that we are creating .
As I speak at this moment , no one can access my words without a technical platform provided by a particular firm that has a monopoly on this information .
That really is something that goes against transparency and access to information .

Mr President , we fully share Mr Cashman 's aims and commitment to transparency , but we must not forget that there is a regulation that is being recast here .
Together , we have pushed the current transparency legislation through .
The four Nordic Member States have written to the committee about this regulation , stating that it increases citizens ' trust in the EU and that it provides the greatest possible degree of transparency .
Mr Cashman and I have always worked very well together , but this time we did not have enough time to sort out all of the issues that were unclear .
In other words , it is quite early on in the process , but I welcome many of the proposals and look forward to our continued cooperation .
When the Transparency Regulation was adopted , the ' yes ' votes from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats were decisive in winning the vote .
This time , too , the PPE-DE votes will probably be significant for the final outcome , which will presumably come during a new Parliament .
The PPE-DE Group will use its votes to strengthen legal certainty , predictability and clarity when the rules are formulated as the process continues .
We want increased transparency and citizens must be able to follow the democratic debate .
We believe that the matter requires more preparation , so that there are common impact assessments with regard to the institutions ' way of working , for example .
A number of amendments , around 40 to 50 of them , which relate to the Commission 's right of initiative , have caused some discussion .
The only thing I would like to add is that it should not result in a greater lack of clarity , as that would run counter to the aim of the recast .
What is on the table today will probably be modified after the elections .
The PPE-DE Group wishes , then , to achieve a degree of transparency that can receive the support of all EU citizens and Member States .
This requires those involved to know what the rules are - that being the aim of the proposal .
Sanctions cannot be used , either , if there are no clear instructions .
As regards sanctions , there is already existing legislation to be taken into account .
We therefore see the proposal as an as yet unfinished product , but we fully agree with Mr Cashman that it should lead to increased transparency and that is what we have indicated in our amendments .
Transparency is an important part of democracy .
I have five minutes for the PPE-DE Group , so could I just say my last few words ?
( SV ) We say ' yes ' to transparency , but we want to avoid the naivety that can expose people to danger or abuse .
Will the PPE-DE Group lose the three minutes , or what ?
I do not know what to say .
The agenda specified two minutes , but I am sure that you will have a further opportunity to speak .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , I will speak in English in honour of our rapporteur .
With this very interesting report , Parliament is doing three things .
First of all , it is taking realities into consideration .
We are speaking now about privacy in the era of the Internet and not privacy as an abstract notion .
We are taking into account the use of Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 which has , for some time , been applied to problems but also with good use .
We are taking into account the Charter of Fundamental Rights , the proposals by the Ombudsman and other agencies , and the case-law of the Court .
We are also taking into account the Commission 's real proposal with its possibilities and its drawbacks - and I think there are some drawbacks .
The second point - and this is very interesting - is that this report is based on principles and not technicalities ; a balance between access to documents and the safeguarding of private life ; a generalised access to documents but with very precise rules ; a very important distinction between public and private interests and this notion of European public interest which is very important to those of us who love Europe ; a distinction between legislative and non-legislative procedures which is also interesting ; parity between EU transparency and Member State transparency .
Lastly , the most important thing is that this report tries to establish a complete system of transparency - not transparency for every institution separately , but transparency on an interinstitutional basis where all the institutions are taken into account and where the principles of good administration and the Charter of Fundamental Rights are also taken into account .
There is also a very common set of classified information , albeit with spy movie names such as EU Confidential , EU Top Secret , but it is important to have a common set of rules in this matter also .
What we are trying to achieve here is transparency as a general rule , with exceptions where those exceptions are justified by the protection of other rights , but to have a common set of rules whereby transparency is the most important one but other exceptions are also taken into account .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , excuse me if I am not able to stay to hear the Commissioner 's answer .
I believe there is something significant missing from this debate and that something is the Council which has , in truth , been absent from the entire debate , including at committee stage .
This , moreover , is the material point : there exists , particularly within the Council , a concept of Europe as the sum of the governments of national states .
Consequently when these governments meet together as legislators , these affairs are , shall we say , confidential ; citizens must then await the final outcome .
This simply cannot be tolerated when we know that the European Union has legislative powers and citizens have a right to information throughout the entire legislative process .
As confirmed and demonstrated by the judgment in the Maurizio Turco case , citizens have a right to information on the positions of national delegations within the Council as well as on legal opinions .
That is why we pledge our full support for Mr Cashman 's report , which embodies a different idea of Europe ; that of European democracy .
I believe that Mr Cashman should also be supported in his attempt to put forward proposals that go above and beyond those made by the Commission .
The European Commission would be mistaken if it were to ask us to limit our activities as a legislative body to the proposals put forward by the Commission .
I believe that our right to extend the mandate is even enshrined in the treaties .
I hope that Mr Cashman will accept our proposed amendments , particularly on greater financial transparency , and I believe that as the European Parliament , we should set a good example .
I read today in the press that our decision to publish parliamentary attendance - this has nothing to do with this report - a decision taken in this House , has , however , apparently run up against technical problems that will prevent it from being implemented before the European elections .
There is no technical problem , this job can be done quickly and easily , and I hope that as Parliament we will set a good example on this as well as on the rapporteur 's necessary and positive changes to the Commission 's proposal for improved access to documents .
We hope to hear something from the empty Council benches sooner or later , if only a public explanation of their reasons for opposing our proposals .
They must have the courage to publicly defend the idea of a Europe that must make its decisions on legislation in secret , something I regard as wholly unacceptable .
Mr President , transparency and public access in respect of everything to do with legislation and political decisions is one of the most important factors behind being a democratic society .
Transparency and public access create a sense of participation and confidence in the political system .
The opposite - secrecy and the withholding of documents - creates mistrust and a sense of not being involved , and can sometimes aid in the development of corruption and the abuse of power .
An increasing amount of national legislation , with the principle of public access we have in Sweden , for example , is now being made at EU level .
The decisions have been transferred to EU level , but transparency and public access have not followed .
Our citizens see this , of course , and that is one reason why we have a low turnout for elections to the European Parliament .
Citizens find it difficult to penetrate and understand the decision-making process within the EU system and feel , quite rightly , that decisions are taken and legislation is created at EU level without them having any real opportunity to study all of the documents .
They therefore have no opportunity to discuss , debate or influence the decision makers .
We all want to increase the turn-out for the Parliamentary elections , but , if we are to succeed in this , campaigns and exhortations to go and vote are simply not enough .
In order for this to be meaningful , we need to do everything we can to provide citizens with information and awareness .
We must establish a dialogue with the citizens instead of the one-sided provision of information from above .
Public access must be the main principle , secrecy must be an exception .
There must be a specific method for permitting secrecy in specific cases and there must be strong grounds for doing so where that is the case .
The Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left and I have submitted amendments to , among other things , broaden the definition of documents , make more documents accessible to the public and prevent any individual Member State from being able to submit a veto .
Commissioner Wallström said that a good tool can always be improved .
Unfortunately , this report will not bring improvements , but will , in fact , make things worse .
However , it can be improved by supporting the amendments tabled by myself and the GUE / NGL Group .
Therefore , for the sake of democracy , vote in favour of the GUE / NGL amendments and increase the citizens ' ability to get involved .
Thank you , Mr President , Mr Cashman has written a good report , for which I would like to express my support .
The Commission 's revision of the 2008 Transparency Initiative will make public access to EU documents more difficult .
If this report is adopted , it will go a long way towards rectifying that .
However , we still lack access to the advisory working parties within the Commission .
According to a statement from the organisation Alter-EU made just before Christmas , we have satisfactory listed information on only two thirds of the members of the working parties involved in producing legislative proposals within the EU .
This is completely unacceptable .
As a citizen , I need to know whether it is tobacco industry lobbyists or health organisations that are advising the Commission when an initiative to improve public health is to be produced .
I also need to know whether it is the chemicals industry or the environmental organisations sitting round the table when an aquatic environment plan is drawn up .
( DE ) Mr President , one reason why we fell into the trap of globalisation is specifically that we failed to avoid the Europe trap .
The Europe trap essentially lies in our failure , then as now , to act according to the tried and tested principles of transparency of the Scandinavian and other states .
I have now been a Member of this Chamber for 10 years and it was not by chance that , when I arrived here - not with this intention , but it came to me very quickly - I found myself saying , ' oh my word , transparency is the crucial issue ' , and for that reason , I set up the European Transparency Initiative back in 2000 .
The initiative was adopted by the Commission word for word , it is just that there is still little by way of substance .
Commissioner , you can read up on what I said to your fellow Swede Anna Lindh - in a long speech at the Nice Summit - in this area .
You , as a Swede , understand what this is about .
You do know what should really be done .
In the European Union , however , the reality when it comes to transparency issues is that the task we face is like trying to clear an avalanche with a shovel .
We are not getting through , and new snow keeps on coming .
There is only one way to rescue this European Union , and that is to have real transparency on the Swedish model plus that of the US Freedom of Information Act right now , immediately .
Without it , you will experience yet more avalanches , and this time they will hit populated areas .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we decide laws at European level for several hundred million people , and that is why transparency is required .
We all agree on the objective - transparency is important , and I also think that we , as the European Parliament , have no need to hide .
We are under the media spotlight , we are watched by journalists , our work is already transparent .
We all agree on the objective , but we must be allowed to argue about the methods of achieving it , and just because someone disputes and wants to get to the bottom of those methods that does not necessarily mean that he or she wants everything to be done behind closed doors .
Rather , such people are often just people who ask questions .
Here in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , we have a lot of critical questions , such as about the competition procedure in the Council , such as on the issue of whether we need to make all the legal service 's documents public , such as the question of whether the private affairs of an MEP should now be the subject of public discussion .
We fight for data protection for our citizens , yet MEPs are to be expected to make everything public .
Asking questions like this is allowed .
The key point , the reason why there is also a lot of scepticism in our group , is the question of the legislative process .
When we vote , everyone can look up how individual MEPs have voted .
All MEPs must also bear responsibility for the way they vote .
This is already in evidence as things stand .
In a legislative process , though , in the trialogue , when we discuss things amongst ourselves , there also has to be a place for carrying out negotiations .
We know that , if everything were public , the form of negotiations that we have today would no longer exist because you would be putting your head above the parapet as soon as you tried to seek out and to bring about political compromises .
That is why there is still a large amount of scepticism in this group about this proposal .
We will clarify the final position of our group tonight .
I would like to make one thing clear on behalf of my group , however , which is that we do want transparency , but the methods of achieving it must continue to be up for discussion .
We do all agree on the objective .
Looking at the individual European institutions , it is not Parliament that is the problem .
It is , rather , the Council , which is not represented here today , that represents the problem as , alas , we have no idea what goes on in the Council 's working groups .

( SV ) Mr President , Commissioner Wallström , I would like to begin by thanking Mr Cashman and others who have contributed to the fact that we will soon be taking a new and long-awaited step towards making our work more accessible to our citizens .
Vice-President and Commissioner Wallström has also fought hard and long .
When Sweden joined the EU , many people were worried that documents would leak out via that country , which has a very strong public access principle , but this has not happened at all .
Mr Cashman can tell us about this , because if someone is in favour of transparency and accessibility , that person will also know where the limits are for working material , secrecy and disclosure .
In the Committee on Civil liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats abstained from voting .
I hope that you are now in favour of increasing public access within the EU , so that the Swedish Presidency , together with the rest of us , will be able to take this important and key democratic issue further for all EU citizens .
However , I can understand the PPE-DE Group 's hesitancy - after all , it was your group that ensured that we were forced to have a secret vote when Turkey was to begin accession negotiations .
Is that what you want ?
I hope that Parliament will now stand united and that we can proudly say to our voters in the EU elections in June that the EU will become increasingly open - that we have no hidden agendas and that we want to be scrutinised on and judged by what we do - and with a transparency of which we can be proud .
We do a lot of good things and it would be good if the citizens were better able to follow the work that we do .
( PL ) Mr President , it is clear to everyone that the decision-making process of the Community 's institutions and bodies must take place openly and publicly .
That is the basis of democracy .
Based on this principle , citizens and elected authorities should have the broadest possible access to the documents held by the European institutions , which includes this Parliament .
This will enable citizens to truly participate in the political process and to ask the public authorities for clarification .
Despite the efforts made by the European institutions to increase openness and transparency , the situation is , unfortunately , far from satisfactory .
The Committee on Petitions has stated that citizens are aware of the deficiencies and failures in the implementation of this right .
It is extremely important that in rights infringement procedures , which are often brought as a result of citizens ' petitions , citizens are assured of full access to all documents at each stage in their pursuit of their rights .
This should also apply to the documents with which the European institutions are provided by the Member States .
This has been a major problem , even for the Commission in the German Jugendamt case , where access to information was highly restricted , even though it was public information .
I would like to underline once again , that easy access by petitioners to the information they need should be the foundation for the success of the European transparency initiative .
The principles of democracy demand it .
( DE ) Mr President , the problem of the estrangement of the public from politics in the EU is something that is well known , which is why we attempt to demonstrate our citizen-friendliness over and over again .
This includes regularly recurring initiatives to simplify access to the documents of Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
The Internet is , of course , a cheap and simple tool to achieve this .
The EU 's homepage has been revised and has , at least , been made more logical and easier to navigate around than it was in the past .
In its Internet presence , the EU also highlights the importance of multilingualism as a significant factor in achieving greater transparency , legitimacy and efficiency within the Union .
Yet it does not , in reality , live up to what it asks of itself .
In practice , the consistent use of the three working languages German , English and French would , in fact , make it possible to reach the majority of the population .
Even the Internet presence of the current Presidency , which is in English , French and Czech , takes no account of the fact that German , with an 18 % share of mother-tongue speakers in the EU , is the language with the most native speakers in the Union , while a further 14 % of EU citizens speak it as a foreign language .
I believe it is time that more attention was finally paid to this state of affairs .
Mr President , access to information is one of the cornerstones of democracy .
People have to have the widest possible access to all information at the early stages of the decisions taken by the institutions , or on the background to these decisions , so that they can fully participate in the formulation of policies .
The EU aspires to be more democratic and accessible to its citizens , so granting the widest possible access to EU documents is crucial to the Union 's efforts to increase citizens ' confidence in its institutions and to the whole legitimacy of this institution .
That is why I was rather disappointed at the Commission 's proposal regarding this regulation , although I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on the very good , dedicated and skilful work he has done in this context .
I would also like to thank Mrs Jäätteenmäki for her great efforts in this matter .
Both of them have held to the guiding principles of openness and transparency where denying access to any document held by an institution is a definite exception .
Such exceptions are , in some cases , necessary , but they should be limited to the smallest number on a clearly defined basis .
I also welcome the initiatives to push for the more proactive and clear disclosure of documents through improved Internet databases .
Accessing documents is also a question of finding them .
Often , information exists online but is hiding behind complex databases and here , we certainly need a lot more development .
Colleagues , we are defenders of democracy and , therefore , should have been more active already .
We have to be very bold in defending broad access and transparency to all documents .
I think that this is not the time to start compromising , or else we may compromise our status as good decision makers in the eyes of our voters as well .
( PL ) Mr President , first of all , I should like to congratulate Michael Cashman on an outstanding report which affects one of the most important aspects of European democracy .
The European Union is undergoing systematic changes and transformations .
Unfortunately , communication between the European Union and its citizens is not keeping up with these changes .
The situation is similar with access to documents and information destined for the citizens themselves .
Transparency is a fundamental principle of the European Union , set out in Article 255 of the EC Treaty .
Every citizen of the European Union and any natural or legal person residing or established in a Member State has the right to access European Parliament , Council and Commission documents .
We can only get the citizens of Europe interested in and build their confidence in the EU institutions , in MEPs and national politicians if we provide complete and honest information .
It is therefore our duty to increase the transparency and effectiveness of the institutions of the European Union to the greatest degree possible .
We must focus on making it easier for users to access information and on continuing to simplify the system and its tools .
Although it could do with some improvement and streamlining , the regulation which affects this report provides a sound legal basis .
I am therefore sorry that the Commission gave no consideration to the rapporteur 's 2006 proposal on transparency .
Mr President , access to documents is one part of the process of transparency , but there are many other issues .
The use of documents and information is key , and one of the big problems we have - and we acknowledge it , and the Commissioner in the Chamber currently is one of the best practised - is to get knowledge of the EU 's decision-making process out there , because people do not understand the process .
During the Lisbon Treaty debate in Ireland , people came up to me and said : ' you are urging us to vote ' yes ' and you are going to lose your job ' .
They thought I was the Commissioner - perish the thought !
It is not enough to say that we give people loads of information , because in one sense , that would lead to a lack of transparency : it just covers things up with mountains of paper but no clarity .
I would prefer that people fully understood how this place works and therefore could engage with it .
I dare say that there are many in this House who do not fully know how this place works .
I rest my case .
( LT ) In an attempt to solve the Baltic countries ' energy island problem , in particular with the growing threat to Lithuania 's energy security following the closure of Ignalina Nuclear Power Plant at the end of this year , the European Commission has drafted the European Union Strategy for the Baltic Sea Region .
I called on the European Commission 's Directorate-General for Energy and Transport to provide an opportunity to see the document .
I was told that there had been no discussion with the high level group drafting the strategy on the possibility of publicising information and documents , as formulated in the answer : Sharing with the outside world .
The European Parliament is being classed as the outside world , to which information is not provided .
Time and again we have discussed the opportunities available to society to see documents held by EU institutions , have we not ?
If a Member of the European Parliament representing citizens does not have such a right , this is a disastrous situation .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I should like to thank the Members for an interesting debate and for their many valuable comments .
Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 will now be updated to ' version two ' , one might say .
It is important to point out again that we are not starting from scratch : we already have a good basis , and it is just a matter of improving on that .
This will also be a version for the age of the Internet , as was mentioned in the debate .
Electronic registers will now be included , and add to that active dissemination , as examples of these improvements .
The ideal situation would , of course , be for us to disseminate information so actively that no requests for access have to be made since everything is already out there - with some exceptions , of course .
I can give you one example of what can be done , which is that I have already made my own correspondence register available on the Internet , so you can see my correspondence and documents .
It is not possible for me to go through all the comments that were made during the debate , but I want to comment briefly on a few crucial points , one of which concerns the definition of documents under Article 3 .
This is one of the articles of the Commission 's proposal that have been most discussed and , I admit , most criticised .
We maintain that the current definition leads to ambiguity and a risk of unpredictability and bad practice .
Is this Post-It note a document , for example ?
Mr Cashman is saying it is , and according to the wide definition in the Regulation , it could very well be so - as could the other scribbles I have here .
Sometimes it is not helpful to make a definition too broad .
We still maintain a wide definition , but we will reduce the discretionary non-disclosure of documents .
The definition that we propose is much wider than the notion of official documents often used in national legislation .
It comes very close to the concept of information in the UK Freedom of Information Act and in the Dutch law on transparency , for example .
The registration of documents is an obligation under internal Commission rules , but these do not determine whether a document falls within the scope of the regulation .
So we clarified and helped with the definition of documents .
This will also help citizens to know what is it you can and should ask for in order to get full information .
A more precise definition of documents means safer administration and more clarity for citizens .
The Court has ruled that documents relating to an ongoing investigation are manifestly covered by an exception to the right of access and , therefore , that those files are currently not acceptable and this does not constitute additional restriction of the right of access .
In no Member State do citizens have access to the files of the competition authorities - I just wanted to make that point .
I also acknowledge that we could have explained and phrased things better in Article 3 .
I believe we share the same goal , and thus it should also be possible to find a clear and unambiguous wording .
This is an example of an area where we should be able to achieve a good compromise text .
Another fiercely discussed point is Article 5 ( 2 ) concerning access to Member States ' documents .
Let me be clear that the Commission 's intention has been to implement what the European Court of Justice has ruled , and Member States must effectively justify why they refuse access to one of their documents , just as the institutions do regarding all other documents .
The bottom line will always be the rules in Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 .
However , it is equally important that the Commission can have correspondence with Member States , for example , in the field of infringements of EU law .
We need to have the possibility to quickly find satisfactory solutions from the perspective of both the Commission and EU citizens , as codified by EU law .
Those kinds of contacts need to remain confidential , and that is also what the Court has said .
Finally , I shall just comment on the ' space to think ' under Article 4 ( 3 ) .
If we think carefully , I guess most people would agree that Parliament , as well as the Commission and the Council , needs a certain space to think .
Documents related to decisions that have not yet been taken , or reflecting internal discussions , are not the same as other documents .
What about the records of political group meetings or preparations ?
You have yourselves identified a number of problems and limitations arising from refusing a space to think , considering , again , what would benefit citizens most and what would be most helpful .
I must say that I would have preferred the Council to be here - as many of you have said - just as I would have preferred a fuller House , because these are absolutely crucial issues for all of us .
The big task for us all in the next few weeks or months is to find common ground .
That is also true within this House , and today 's debate has shown that it is not always that easy .
The more divisions there are , the more difficult it will be when the three institutions hold discussions .
Parliament , the Council and the Commission each have their role , which should be respected , and I hope Parliament will speak with one strong voice , because that will benefit us all and benefit the end result , which I hope will be a balanced and workable compromise text .
rapporteur . - Mr President , those were interesting remarks , but I am afraid they have very little to do with the contents of my report .
I would point out that we have nothing to fear from public scrutiny and we have absolutely everything to fear as institutions from hiding information .
We become more vulnerable .
Commissioner , it is official documents which are accessible . Go back and look at the report .
The space to think .
Official documents .
Within the notion of a space to think , that will not be official .
Go back to the report .
Accept our principles .
It has been an interesting debate but I have to say that the recast - which you defend - is not in the spirit of the interinstitutional agreement and it is not enough .
You say it has worked well , but I am afraid the recast ignores vital jurisprudence on what actually needs to be done .
My reasons for delaying the final vote are so that we have absolutely maximum flexibility to negotiate with the political parties and with the institutions .
I would further point out that there is nothing to prevent the Commission from amending its proposal at any time after the vote tomorrow , except perhaps institutional and political reluctance .
I find it somewhat patronising to be told that we will get action plans .
Commissioner , I do not doubt your personal commitment to openness and transparency , but I do not want action plans for our citizens .
I want rights enshrined in law which cannot be taken away - not gifts , but rights .
Parliament must therefore put political pressure on the Presidency to negotiate and it may be that we will have to negotiate without the Commission .
Yes , Commissioner , I know the Council is not here , but I do not give up on one Council .
I have been in politics long enough to know that you fight and you fight .
Let me finally quote this President , if you will allow me : ' My Administration is committed to creating an unprecedented level of openness in Government .
We will work together to ensure the public trust and establish a system of transparency , public participation and collaboration .
Openness will strengthen our democracy and promote efficiency and effectiveness in Government ' .
So said Barack Obama on 21 January 2009 .
I await a comparable announcement from the Commission or , indeed , from President Barroso .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 11 March 2009 .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.45 a.m. and resumed at 12.50 p.m. )

Written statements ( Rule 142 )
The amendments by the European Parliament to the regulation on public access to the documents of the European institutions , especially to documents relating to the legislative procedure , are a catalytic step in safeguarding transparency and participatory democracy in Europe .
Particularly important in my opinion is the requirement that every initiative or document designed to somehow influence the decision-making procedure must be published .
We are all aware that various lobbies frequently try to influence the legislative procedure by putting forward their arguments .
European citizens have every right to know what these arguments and interventions are .
They must be able to judge the essence of them and evaluate the final stance taken by their governments , the European Commission and , of course , their MEPs .
At least the same level of transparency should also be provided at national level by the Member States for their citizens on the basis of an express requirement in the European Parliament report , a call which we hope will very shortly be adopted by governments and national parliaments .
1 .
EC-Armenia agreement : air services (
2 .
Agreement between the EC and Israel on certain aspects of air services (
3 .
Additional protocol to the Agreement between the EC and South Africa , to take account of the accession of Bulgaria and Romania to the EU (
4 .
Next steps in border management in the EU (
5 .
Cross-borders transfers of companies ' registered offices (
6 .
Future of the European Common Asylum System (
7 .
Commission action plan towards an integrated internal control framework (
8 .
Cooperation between the courts of the Member States in the taking of evidence in civil or commercial matters
9 .
Implementation of Directive 2006 / 43 / EC on statutory audits of annual accounts and consolidated accounts (
10 .
Equal treatment and access for men and women in the performing arts (
Before the vote :
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , careers in the performing arts are not immune from the continuing existence of major inequalities between men and women .
As I have responsibilities in the arts , this is a subject close to my heart , as discrimination against women in the performing arts is still rife , particularly when it comes to senior positions : there are so few female directors in theatre , dance , opera and so on .
For example , it is important to widen the practice of holding auditions behind a screen in recruiting orchestral musicians , by analogy with the existing business practice of viewing anonymous CVs , partly because it is the only way that women will get jobs as orchestral soloists and also because it is a good way of combating racial discrimination .
Moreover , the balance between professional and family commitments is even more difficult for women in this sector , due to the unusual working hours connected with their profession , hence the need to have specific opening hours for crèches that meet the needs of artists .
Ladies and gentlemen , Europe , as the ancestral home of culture , cannot continue to do nothing in the face of these problems that make it suffer .
11 .
Type-approval requirements for the general safety of motor vehicles (
12 .
Integrated pollution prevention and control : industrial emissions , titanium dioxide industry , use of organic solvents , incineration of waste , large combustion plants (
Before the vote :
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , if I understood you correctly , you are indicating that the presidency does wish to apply the recast procedure to the Krahmer report today and the Cashman report .
In that case , my group requests that we delay the vote until tomorrow so that we can study the implications of this .
Mr President , as I said earlier , I am in favour of this proposal , although I would like to point out that if amendments had not been tabled that go somewhat beyond what was adopted on the basis of a general compromise within the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , this problem would not have arisen , since the compromise amendments were completely in keeping with the nature of this revision , namely a recast .
If this had been the case , then we could have voted today , but we accept the deferral as it makes sense .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . -Mr President , it behoves Mr Watson , if he is making a suggestion that we should consider the recast implications , to explain to us now what the recast implications are .
He might like to have a word with Mr Corbett before answering .
I am fairly relaxed about this , but it would be much more sensible , since we are teed up to vote on this and we are unlikely to change our opinion on the actual voting - plus , minus or abstention - in the light of the recast procedures , to vote now when we have the time rather than hurry and add this vote to the list tomorrow when we have a lot of other things to do .
Therefore , I am opposed to moving it .
Mr President , I am very pleased that the President has finally given the floor to the rapporteur .
I am also quite surprised !
At this time , we are still getting used to the recast rules .
I would , however , like to draw attention to the fact that the application of these rules is no surprise , even just before a vote .
We have already applied these rules consistently in committee and it is only logical for them to be applied consistently in plenary .
If we were to vote now , there would not be a single amendment and not a single compromise up for voting that have not been discussed .
Everything is itemised on the voting list .
For the same reason as Mr Sacconi , but with a different conclusion , I see absolutely no reason to postpone .
We can vote now !
( Applause )
Mr President , as we have decided to vote , maybe you could indicate why so many amendments were ruled to be inadmissible .
That is the problem , and that is the point originally raised in relation to the recast versions under review .
We do not understand why some amendments are inadmissible .
Could you clarify that as we proceed to the vote ?
I know in general terms what the issue is about , but I regret that I am unable to inform you of the specifics .
We are now , however , voting on amendments which have gone through committee , which are regarded as admissible , which are substantive and which may or may not represent the view of the House .
( IT ) Mr President , I would just like to say that today 's episode clearly shows that the recasting agreement does not work and that it will affect our powers as a sovereign authority .
That is the problem with this procedure , as we are now demonstrating so well .
Mr President , I am sorry to prolong this discussion , but may I build on what was just said by my colleagues , Mrs Doyle and Mrs Frassoni ?
As one of the authors of several of the amendments , I was in contact with the President 's office until 11.50 and could not obtain a clear ' yes ' or ' no ' as to whether the amendments we tabled - 136 to 139 - would be voted upon or not .
It was unclear , and the last word was that the vote would probably be postponed .
As Avril Doyle said , we simply cannot understand why these amendments are inadmissible .
In the interests of clarity , we should have some more time and have clarification from the President 's office .
I am advised that it has been ruled on and only certain amendments have been declared admissible , as is normal in any House .
I think it might be helpful if a statement is made tomorrow by the President taking the vote so that there is clarification .
But we must proceed to the vote now .
I am sorry for those who are disappointed .
Before the vote on Amendment 88 :
Mr President , on most of our voting lists , Amendments 88 and 89 are down as inadmissible and there is no indication as to how we should vote .
Whilst you might well be wanting us to vote , we have a small problem with this , because we do not know what we are voting on and we do not know which way we should be voting .
May I suggest that some more thought be given to this new procedure we are using for recast , because there seems to be a lack of coordination and communication around the different political groups .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I can help you out here and even point out to the President what he himself decided .
We now have Amendments 106 , 139 , 88 and 89 .
The President has ruled Amendment 88 admissible .
You all have a note to that effect in the voting list .
If not , you will have to speak to those responsible within your group .
I am sorry for that .
Mr President , some of the amendments you ruled inadmissible were also ruled inadmissible by the Chair of the Committee on the Environment , Public health and Food Safety under the recast procedures .
This Parliament has no right to introduce legislation .
Its chance of influence is in amending legislation put before us .
It seems that , in the way we have interpreted the recast procedures , we have castrated ourselves .
Could you inform the President that if this Parliament is to demonstrate its true virility , we need to review these ?
13 .
Statute for a European private company (
After the vote :
Mr President , in my judgement , the introduction of this beautiful high technology here was intended to save our time and increase our efficiency .
You know my respect for the manner in which you preside here , but could you spare us the enumeration of the results in such detail .
You can declare ' adopted ' or ' not adopted ' .
This is enough .
We have everything on our screens .
14 .
Guidelines for the 2010 budget procedure - Section III , Commission (
Before the vote on paragraph 13 :
rapporteur . - Mr President , for the sake of conciliation , I should like to table an oral amendment , which has been distributed , to paragraph 13 .
The text should read : ' [ ... ] as well as internal security , particularly the fight against terrorism ; immigration , demographic challenges [ ... ] ' , instead of the old version ' [ ... ] as well as internal security , meaning particularly immigration , the fight against terrorism , demographic challenges [ ... ] ' .
I would ask Parliament to support this oral amendment .
Mr President , in the text on the voting list , there is a comma between ' terrorism ' and ' immigration ' , when we had agreed a semi-colon .
You could not hear this when Mr Surján read his text .
We would like to have that semi-colon between ' terrorism ' and ' immigration ' .
Mr President , what we are talking about here are ' diversified gas transport routes ' , and I would also add ' and resources ' , because :
It is not only the gas routes , but also the gas sources that should be differentiated , and that would include here .
If this amendment is rejected , that should be included in the original text .

rapporteur . - Mr President , I have no objection to this oral amendment by Mr Swoboda , which refers to the original text .
In any case , I was told by the Tabling Office that this amendment is valid only for the amended one .
If that is not so , I am in favour of this oral amendment being part of the original .
Therefore , those who are following my advice will vote against the first part in this fifth vote and then we shall have an extra vote , which is not on the voting list , on this oral amendment , which I support .
Mr President , the oral amendment applies in both cases , but I know that the PPE-DE Group will vote differently on the split vote , so that does not change anything , I agree .

Mr President , we were not voting on Mr Swoboda 's oral proposal , so if Parliament wishes to support his oral amendment , we should vote that this is still valid for the original text .
Otherwise , we will have had four votes and rejected it , which requires five votes .
The oral amendment was incorporated in the first of the four votes .
That is what it says on the voting list .
It was incorporated in the first of the split votes and was rejected .
Mr President , no : in the voting list without the oral amendment , we were voting on the first part of the PSE Group amendment and that was rejected .
In addition to the original PSE Group amendment , Mr Swoboda tabled putting the word ' sources ' .
I am neither against nor for .
I am not complaining if the PSE Group is not complaining .
I just want to clarify that according to my knowledge , the word ' sources ' is not in the text .
That is correct .
Mr President , so we should have had a vote on whether we wanted it or not .
No .
I asked if there were any objections to the oral amendment .
There were none so it then formed part of the amendment which was voted on in the first roll-call vote and was rejected .
That is the situation .
Before the vote on paragraph 31 :
Mr President , that will be very simple .
I suggest replacing ' fears ' in the original text with the word ' concerns ' .
15 .
Guidelines for the 2010 budget procedure - Sections I , II , IV , V , VI , VII , VIII and IX (
Before the vote :
Mr President , we do need to make progress , but I see that there has been the most absurd inflation of roll-call votes .
The last report to be voted - the Herczog report - has a roll call on every single amendment .
Could we call upon Mr Corbett and other luminaries to devise some rationing system so that we can actually get to lunch ?
16 .
Integrity of online gambling (
17 .
Ensuring food quality : harmonisation or mutual recognition of standards (
18 .
Commission Reports on Competition Policy 2006 and 2007 (
19 .
Small Business Act (
Before the vote on paragraph 8 :

Mr President , I just want to point out - since hungry Mr Beazley made a point about the roll-call votes - that , on the following report , every roll-call vote was requested by the PPE-DE Group .
So much for that one !
And Mr Beazley is a very devout member of the PPE-DE Group !
( Laughter )
That concludes the vote .
Voting time
Before we start the vote , I should like to inform Members that we are today introducing a new information system for the votes in the Chamber .
The main feature is the display , on one of the large screens , of the official voting list prepared by the Tabling Desk .
The display will highlight each single vote as it is announced , thereby making it easier for all Members to follow the vote .
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see minutes )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I seek clarification .
Is it the case that the President has ruled that we will apply the recast procedure to the vote on the Krahmer report today and the vote on the Cashman report tomorrow ?
If that is the case , my group requests that we delay the vote on the Krahmer report until tomorrow , so that we can investigate the implications of the application of the recast procedure to that vote .
The President is considering these two points .
When we get to the Krahmer report , we will take your procedural motion .
( DE ) Mr President , I congratulate the House on this new information system .
It would seem , though , that a couple of bits of information in the everyday routine do not work .
I am very pleased , meanwhile , that , on the 50th anniversary of China 's occupation of Tibet , many of us have managed to display Tibetan flags .
It has come to my attention , however , that the Bureau had said in advance that certain flags may not be put up , meaning that MEPs are unable to display them on this important day .
Is there any up-to-date information on this issue ?
I understand that there has been some confusion about this point , but the President has said that for the sake of good order today - and I am pleased to see so many flags in the Chamber ; I am actually wearing one in my pocket here - the Tibetan flag may be displayed .
This gives me the opportunity to welcome to the Chamber Mr Tashi Wangdi , the representative of His Holiness , the Dalai Lama .
( Sustained applause )
Mr President , I would like to say a few serious and important words , if you will allow me .
We have just passed the anniversary of the barbaric murder , by a shot in the back of the head , of 20 000 Polish officers and intelligentsia in Katyń in 1940 on the order of the ' Father of Nations ' , Joseph Stalin .
This meant the elimination of the leaders and elites of a nation fighting for its own , and Europe 's , freedom .
Four years ago , I asked for a minute 's silence to commemorate them , but the House refused .
Therefore , I will not ask for this today and will free the presidency from what appears to be such a difficult decision .
Instead , I want to remind us of this tragedy and to express the wish that our common efforts can prevent genocides of this kind on the European continent in the future .
( Applause )
Thank you , Mr Zaleski - the applause speaks for itself .
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
Mr President , it is curious that , whatever the crisis , the answer in this House always seems to be greater European integration .
Most people beset by the economic squalls we have had in the past six months respond by seeing the situation as scary and possibly painful .
However , in this House , we see it as an opportunity for more regulation , more unification and more harmonisation at EU level , as this report shows .
The problem with this is that the people making that decision will be shielded from the consequences of it .
Living in their palaces and chancelleries , surrounded and cocooned in their motorised convoys , their chauffeured cars and their official banquets , they will not be paying the price that our constituents will as a result of these economic policies .
It seems to me axiomatic that we should respond to the economic crisis with more flexibility and by allowing countries to tailor their interest rates to suit their needs .
Instead , we are doing precisely the opposite .
( MT ) I voted in favour of this report because it places heavy emphasis on the importance of solidarity , on the fact that a common asylum policy needs to be built upon solidarity .
However , I would like to underline the fact that there are certain paragraphs in the report that I cannot go along with and that I would have voted against had we been given an individual vote .
I would particularly like to highlight the issue regarding detention policy .
I believe that we must be very careful when referring to the detention of asylum seekers because it is not simply a question of deciding to put a stop to detention once and for all and to have it apply to everyone .
There are certain specific circumstances whereby the use of detention policy is , and will , always remain important .
( NL ) Mr President , I voted against the Catania report , as I totally and utterly disagree with the Commission 's recent proposals on asylum policy , which the rapporteur welcomes in this report .
My particular fear is that the new directive , which provides asylum seekers with even easier access to the labour market and would even give them a large allowance on top , will create a pull factor similar to the collective regularisations that were carried out in Spain , the Netherlands , Belgium and Italy , the consequences of which were simply disastrous .
Indeed , I should like to remind the House that , according to recent censuses , there are still more than 20 million unemployed in the European Union - the figure has most probably reached 25 million by now - which means that attracting even more asylum seekers is , in fact , a kind of collective suicide .
In addition , I believe that this whole area must remain an exclusive competence of the Member States .
( NL ) Mr President , I voted against the Catania report , as it clearly reflects an extreme left-wing bias aimed at rendering any efficient asylum management system simply impossible .
All abuses of the existing systems in the Member States are defended and , if possible , cast in stone in legislation .
One example is the toleration of bogus asylum seekers who use minor children as a way of getting themselves a residence permit , and another is the opposition to closed reception centres for people who fail to meet the conditions for recognition as refugees and abscond upon their release .
Clearly , every effort is being made to make life easier for actual and potential illegal immigrants .
The rapporteur is pleased that the Court of Justice rejects a list of safe countries , even though such a list is essential to keep the flow of refugees under control .
The strategy of the left wing thus aims to overload the system such as to render any possible efficiency impossible .
However , this is not what the majority of Europeans wants , and so this will be featuring prominently in our election campaign .
( DE ) Mr President , I am in favour of a common asylum policy for the European Union that would lead to quick and certain decisions .
That said , I am against this report , as it contains elements that are absolutely unacceptable , such as the broadening of the term refugee way beyond what the Geneva Convention currently states ; rejecting the regulation of safe third countries that we had already managed to reach a positive agreement on ; giving Frontex tasks that have absolutely nothing to do with it ; allowing asylum seekers a free choice of which country is to be responsible for the procedure - which represents the abandonment of the Dublin Convention ; and easier access to the labour market for asylum seekers .
We want quick procedures and not the integration of asylum seekers who will possibly have to leave the European Union again after 14 days because they will not be granted refugee status anyway .
Overall , the development in the Union is heading in the positive direction of a common policy , but what has been proposed in this report is completely counterproductive .
It is for that reason that I voted against the report .
Mr President , and so the European Union carries on acquiring one by one the attributes and trappings of nationality : a legal system , common external borders and now a common policy on who is allowed to cross those borders and settle within its territory .
One by one , it has taken on all of the characteristics that international law recognises as definitive of statehood .
I wanted to compliment you , Mr President , on your ruling that it was acceptable for MEPs to demonstrate - as my neighbour did - little Tibetan flags on their desks .
It stands in marked contrast to the way we had our placards snatched off us when we dared to display the word ' referendum ' in this Chamber .
I would like to ask you - because I know you , and other Members of this House , are interested in this subject - to ponder the hypocrisy of being in favour of national self-determination in Tibet but against national self-determination within the European Union .
If you think I am being extreme by drawing a parallel between an authoritarian State in China and the European Union , prove me wrong by putting your Treaty to the people in the referendums that you promised .
Pactio Olisipiensis censenda est !
Mr President , I shall be brief .
I voted in favour of this report because anything that improves road safety has to be welcomed .
I have an additional point .
We have concerns in Ireland about road safety issues .
When roads are being maintained by local authorities , we have had some terrible tragedies on these roads , and this is an issue that perhaps needs to be looked at from a European point of view and standards put in place .
Mr President , first of all , I would like to welcome the report and thank the rapporteur for his good work .
I have to admit that it is very rare for me to be lobbied , in Northern Ireland , to vote on an EU directive in a positive way , but I was on this one , and I was delighted to see such a positive vote today .
For once it will bring some good news to my province , which certainly needs it .
Better safety and more environmentally sensitive and sensible proposals are always welcome .
In the longer term , I hope it will also save existing jobs and maybe create new ones in the area .
This is something that we can all welcome as far as Europe is concerned , being positive , good thinking , rather than holding the economy back .
Mr President , amid all the confusion about casting and recasting , this was a very difficult vote for many Members .
In the end , I abstained on this vote because of my concerns about soils in particular .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has concerns about a soils directive and this is an issue that needs to be carefully examined .
We made some progress in the amendments in relation to agricultural issues in general , but my vote in the end was to abstain , rather than vote against , because there is much in this report around the environment , about power generation and emissions of which I am in favour .
( DE ) Mr President , I very much welcome the central element of the Krahmer report , the European safety network .
Maximum emissions limits are being laid down which the Member States must adhere to as an absolute top limit when granting permits to large industrial plants .
There is , then , a rough framework , so that everything moves flexibly and so that there is a level playing field .
This will put a stop to the inflationary use of derogations that has thus far taken place in certain Member States .
This means competition on an equal footing throughout Europe .
In that way , we can together establish a high standard at the European level .
I must make it clear , though , that I vehemently reject the regulations on soil protection .
I am of the opinion that more account should be taken of the subsidiarity principle .
Regulations on soil protection have no cross-border effect .
Soil protection is not a cross-border issue .
I therefore continue to believe that the Member States can regulate soil protection themselves .
There is an attempt here , however , to use the IPPC Directive as a back door through which to bring in parts of the soil protection directive , which we successfully fought off in the past .
I very much regret that my motions to delete the relevant parts were rejected by a very narrow majority , in one case by only six votes .
I have therefore decided to vote against this report as a whole , despite the fact that I very much welcome the European safety network .
Mr President , I am not entirely happy with this report and the manner in which we dealt with it here today , but I did nevertheless vote for the report because I believe it reduces red tape .
Industrial installations make a significant contribution to pollutant emissions in Europe , but heavy industry is one of the drivers of our economy and needs to be encouraged to produce greener emissions .
This is a major issue for my region of the West Midlands , which is one of the most industrialised in the UK .
The integrated approach is welcome , but the stringent rules in this report are of concern , and I am concerned that the implementation costs should not be so heavy that they undermine the environmental protection provisions .
We need checks on the European safety net and we need to look at issues such as the spreading of manure and slurry which , I believe , would be disproportionate to the environmental benefits we get .
Administrative burdens and costs have to be proportionate to the environmental benefits , because if that is the case , we will have a win-win situation which would help businesses meet their environmental commitments , bring significant support in the fight against climate change , and have the potential to improve health conditions for young and old people across my region .
Mr President , I voted against his report .
While there may well be good points in it , it eventually went too far .
I am in favour of streamlining European Union regulations , but not if you make it more bureaucratic , difficult to operate and unfavourable to industry .
The attempt to bring agriculture into this legislation is , to me , totally unacceptable and is a step too far .
It must be rejected .
To bring in soil protection is not the responsibility of the European Parliament , nor can it be done throughout the whole of the European Union .
That should be the responsibility of the national governments .
I have to ask why the Committee on Agriculture was not consulted on this particular issue .
You cannot bring in regulations that are destructive and make pig and poultry farmers go out of business .
The truth is that we are bringing in regulations in Europe , and restricting production in Europe , whilst allowing imports into the European Union that are not produced to the same standards as they are in Europe .
I cannot accept that .
Mr President , there was some controversy about the recasting procedure and my name was mentioned in this context .
I would like firstly to point out that the rapporteur who introduced this into our Rules of Procedure was Marylène Renault , not me .
Perhaps a word of explanation is necessary concerning the correct actions of the President of the Parliament .
We often have pieces of legislation amending for the 15th , 16th or 17th time some existing pieces of legislation .
That is very confusing for people who have to deal with this legislation .
We have , rightly , embarked on a procedure for codifying such legislation - putting it in a single , readable , manageable text .
We frequently have that before us and , because it does not change the substance , we have a simplified procedure for that .
However , when it comes to recasting , we have a difficulty .
There , the Commission is putting forward a proposal to change one element of a package of existing legislation and to simply codify the rest without changing it .
We have voluntarily restricted ourselves to tabling amendments of substance only to the part that the Commission is proposing to modify , and not to use the codification of the remaining part as an opportunity to reopen the substance .
Maybe we should , as has been suggested by one of our colleagues .
However , there would be a problem under the Treaty with regard to the demarcation of the right of initiative between us and the Commission .
It is certainly not , however , an issue where colleagues were right to complain about the actions of the President .
Under our existing Rules - which we gave ourselves as a Parliament and which we approved by an absolute majority of our Members - the correct procedure has been followed .
Mr President , I voted against this report because of its attempts to totally unnecessarily entwine agriculture into the huge burden of regulation which it would import .
I recently met with some producers in my constituency .
I saw the paperwork that has been heaped upon a particular producer because he is already within the ambit of these regulations .
I shudder to think what is going to happen to ordinary producers of very modest proportions when they , too , are subjected to this huge and totally unnecessary burden of regulation .
I think it is a report that takes us very much in the wrong direction and , at the very least , I am happy that I was here to vote against it .
Mr President , I did not ask to give an explanation of vote on the Maňka report , because I was going to combine it with this one , because the two deal with how we are going to look at the budget in the following year , and I am not going to be here in the following year because I am disappearing off in June .
I know that there is great upset across the other side of the Chamber about this matter .
I just wanted to lay down a few ground rules that have been ignored so far in these reports .
We should watch out for how much money we are funding NGOs and agencies , where huge problems exist with how European taxpayers ' money is being spent at this time .
I give the example of the European Fundamental Rights Agency , which is currently under investigation by OLAF .
In general terms , at a time of huge economic downturn and hardship , maybe we should be looking at ourselves to tweak our budget so we can send more monies back to national exchequers where it is desperately needed and where the pain is being felt .
And certainly at this time when big - almost irrational - decisions are being made by businesses and government departments around the world in employment matters , we should concern ourselves with having only one seat for this Parliament .
( NL ) Mr President , I voted against this report .
Although it is to be welcomed that illegal immigration and the fight against terrorism are prioritised and that this House is finally calling on the Commission to monitor closely the implementation of funds in Kosovo and the Balkan states too , bearing in mind the hasty enlargement to include Bulgaria and Romania , it is regrettable that no action is suggested in response to this , nor any conditions attached to it .
Incidentally , my party advocates a halt to enlargement after the accession of Croatia .
Returning to the report , though - as has just been touched on , why did this House not take the trouble for once to advocate the abolition of a few of the superfluous non-governmental organisations ( NGOs ) and European agencies that are not subject to any democratic control , often interpret their powers too broadly and call upon European taxpayers ' money for nothing ?
( NL ) Mr President , it is excellent that Parliament is stressing equal access to language facilities for all the Members of this House .
Parliament must become genuinely multilingual .
It can certainly be said that the working conditions of persons employed by contractors should be in line with the language rules .
On the other hand , in the chapter on buildings , this House neglects to take a clear stance on the monthly travelling circus to Strasbourg that costs approximately EUR 200 million per year .
This does not send out a good signal to European citizens , to taxpayers , which is one of the reasons why I voted against this report .
Mr President , in relation to the two budgetary votes , may I point out that a lot of people are asking : what contribution can the European budget make in terms of a fiscal stimulus in times of economic crisis ?
The answer is : very little .
The whole of the European Union 's budget amounts to less than 1 % of GDP and it has been a declining proportion of GDP in recent years .
It is , in macroeconomic terms , a very small budget and this is something that many of the Eurosceptics would do well to remember .
On the other hand , in certain areas , it can be of huge structural significance and gradually improve the structure of Europe 's economy .
On research and development , on some aspects of regional fund spending and social spending , we can help prepare our economy for the recovery .
I am glad that those aspects of the budget are gradually representing a greater proportion of the budget , and agriculture and some others are declining .
However , I think that trend needs to be accelerated and we need to continue much more rapidly in that direction of shifting resources to where they can make a real difference .
( MT ) I voted in favour of the alternative motion on this report and I abstained when it came to the principle motion .
There is no doubt that integrity in the online gaming sector is extremely important .
We must ensure that we fend off all criminal activity that could affect it .
However , this does not mean that we must turn to protectionism .
We must keep in mind that the liberty of providing services within the European Union is a basic , recognised Union principle , and therefore we must not resort to protectionism .
Moreover , it is worth noting that the Internet , considering that we are talking about online gaming , already provides us with a range of security measures that we can build upon , such as the obligation to sign up before one is allowed to play , or the tracing of certain activity which could be fraudulent in nature , or even the identification of the credit cards that are used .
Therefore , we must say ' yes ' to integrity and ' no ' to protectionism .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , the growth of gambling on the Internet is a new phenomenon which does not recognise national boundaries , and which has negative consequences that we must confront without delay on a unified EU basis in order to provide effective protection for children and young people .
Member States must introduce a common set of regulations on payments as quickly as possible , including checks on identity and age .
The key issue of course is prevention and I am therefore pushing for a Europe-wide ban on gambling advertisements which are targeted at young people , just as we have for alcohol and tobacco .
We must also monitor the other negative effects of this branch of the entertainment industry , including money laundering and organised crime in general .
And as far as these areas are concerned , I am fundamentally opposed to a free market .
( IT ) Mr President , I was unsure as to how to vote on Mrs Schaldemose 's report on the integrity of online gambling and for what reason .
So I asked my pensioners .
Yesterday I met a pensioner named Ugo Rossi , a retired craftsman .
He told me : ' Oh , online gambling , I have lost EUR 10 000 ' .
A little later I met a retired lady , Lucia Annone .
She told me : ' Do not talk to me about online gambling , I have lost EUR 100 000 ' .
I decided , however , how to vote when even my mother , who is 94 , said to me : ' You gave me a computer and I have lost my entire pension for March 2009 , EUR 450 ' .
So no , Mr President , at that point , I decided that , in order to protest against gambling and so that it is eradicated throughout Europe , I had to vote against this report for that reason .

Mr President , in the case of online gambling , there must be clear and unambiguous laws that serve to limit , control and account for the nearly EUR 3 billion in annual gross revenue realised by the gambling industry .
However , according to Mrs Schaldemose , that EUR 3 billion is only 5 % of the total gambling market in the European Union .
Therefore , the importance and influence of this industry is obvious - as are its dangers .
Gambling is often correctly associated with crime at international level , and cross-border gambling rings which are much easier to run via the Internet jeopardise the laws of various nations and harbour risks to national sovereignty .
It is also important to note the negative effects on health associated with gambling .
As a medical doctor , I am well aware of the damaging characteristics of obsessive or addictive gambling .
These are not issues that the European Parliament can underestimate .
When it comes to tackling fraud , criminal behaviour and financial and medical issues that correspond to online gambling , I call on the European Parliament to vote repeatedly on better and better solutions in future .

Mr President , I voted in the same way as Mr Busuttil on this particular report , and was concerned at the level of argument .
In fact , the bilge that was coming up in this debate was unbelievable , exemplified by my colleague who has just left , Mr Fatuzzo .
It is complete rubbish to say that , because three old people lose some money in a voluntary way , then we have got to ban online gambling across a continent .
This debate showed up many national differences , and there was no honesty in the debate at all .
The Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Affairs commissioned a study which showed that online gaming had no more damaging effect than ordinary gaming in a place run by a national lottery .
There was one reasonable part , which was the part about fair return to guarantee integrity in sport .
Alas , this debate has driven the online gamblers and the sporting governing bodies further apart than they have ever been before , rather than drawing them together to try and work out a common solution .
It has absolutely shown the need for some forum where those two groups can come together and discuss this matter .
Alas , this is obviously not that place .
Mr President , we all know that gambling is a very emotive subject .
You only have to listen to the speeches that have been made before me .
There are those who believe that gambling is the work of the devil and that those who take part deserve to be cast into hellfire and deserve all the losses they have on this earth and in the afterlife .
Now that is an extreme view , granted , but if you were to look at some of the language used in this report - the issues of a transparent sector that safeguards the public and consumer interests , tackling fraud and other criminal behaviour , prevention of consumer detriment - those same emotions are expressed , albeit in a far more toned-down way , in this report when it comes to online gambling .
However , consider the hypocrisy of this report .
It talks about online gambling in this negative and detrimental way , but it says nothing about the state monopolies that are hiding behind the emotive language to continue to drive out private innovative competitors .
Let us be honest in this debate as to what it is all about .
It is about keeping state monopolies , and we know where that leads to : it leads down the road to serfdom .
Mr President , quality food is not an aspiration in Europe : it must continue as a reality .
But its production requires a fair and competitive return .
Our agricultural producers must be able to earn enough to cover the extra cost generated by EU food safety , animal welfare and environmental requirements .
When faced with cheap and inferior imports , the competitive advantage that quality should give is often not enough : hence the role that needs to be played by CAP funding in keeping our producers competitive .
That has to be the quid pro quo for meeting the high costs imposed by EU regulation .
I also deplore the continuing exploitation of producers by the major distributors who now dominate the European food markets .
Their abuse of their position of dominance continues , with producers exploited at every turn , even to the point of having to pay for their promotions .
Mr President , thank you for giving me this opportunity to explain how I voted .
It may come as no surprise to you that I actually voted in favour of this report , given that the author was a very good Conservative , British colleague of mine .
What we need to be wary of in these times of economic difficulties is the call for ever more protectionism and the call to suspend our normal rules on competition and state aid .
We see the call for protectionism from President Sarkozy , arguing that taxpayers ' money should be used to protect the French car industry .
We see similar packages in America .
I was interested when I saw an advertisement the other day in an American magazine sponsored by the American car companies , which said , ' You did not want to buy our cars .
Therefore we are going to take your money anyway through your taxpayers ' money to keep our companies alive ' .
This is what it seems to have come down to .
Because the companies were not supplying the goods and services that consumers wanted to buy , we are now throwing aside rules on state aid and keeping up companies that may not survive in the long term .
We understand the importance of jobs , but let us make sure that we are making good economic decisions .
( CS ) Mr President , SMEs , unfortunately , still do not comprise the backbone of the economy , especially in the new Member States , and yet they represent hopes for a certain degree of employment security .
Of course , we need more flexible employment laws so that these small firms can also react flexibly to new demands and reward specialists more easily in line with new objectives .
We need to make it easier to set up companies but also to liquidate them .
And most important of all , we also need to have easier access not only to credit , but also to drawdowns of financial resources from European funds .
All this we know .
We have done a good deal of work over the past five years here in the European Parliament , but it is up to the Member States to take these things seriously and put them into practice rather than just talking about them .
Now , at a time of crisis , it is abundantly clear what has been neglected in this area , especially in the new Member States .
I have voted in favour of Mrs Herczog 's report but the whole exercise is pointless unless the Member States are willing to work on it .
( SK ) Mr President , I voted for Mrs Herczog 's report .
We have 23 million SMEs in the European Union .
They represent up to 99 % of all firms and provide work to more than 100 million EU citizens .
In the current time of crisis , they therefore play a key role in economic growth , social cohesion and especially job creation .
SMEs are dynamic and have a great ability to innovate and develop .
The make a significant contribution towards implementing the Lisbon objectives .
Credit and loans are the main sources of finance for SMEs in Europe .
The fact that SMEs are usually considered more risky makes it difficult for them to get access to finance .
It is particularly necessary to provide favourable conditions for SMEs to obtain sources of finance , both through loans and from EU funds , and thereby to ensure the long-term sustainability of their business activities .
Mr President , I supported this report because - as we have already heard - small businesses are the backbone of our economy .
Many Member States ' plans for economic recovery stress the important role small businesses can play in bringing us out of the present crisis .
99.2 % of my region 's businesses employ fewer than 49 people .
The West Midlands has the highest proportion of small businesses of any region in the UK .
Providing that proper consideration is made of Member States ' competences in areas such as collective bargaining rights , this report will go a long way towards making sure that we all think small first .
I especially welcome the emphasis in this report on the difficulties that small businesses are facing in accessing credit , time and resources for education and training , and - most importantly - for research .
National borders , increasingly , are irrelevant to small businesses , which are doing more business with partners across Europe .
However , we do need to protect them when they engage in cross-border trading through measures such as my recovery of debtors ' assets report .
The EU also has a key role to play in ensuring that SMEs have access to funding , which means we should ensure that non-bank microcredit is made available .
We can do this by using structural funds and developing microcredit institutions without taking money from the taxpayer .
This initiative can curb unemployment and restart our economy .
Mr President , I welcome this report , with just one or two small reservations .
We have heard from my colleague , Mrs Gill , how important small businesses are to the economy and how they are bearing the brunt of the difficulties at the moment .
The trouble is that the European Union is geared entirely for big businesses , whether it is about legislation , access to markets or funding .
We often talk about better regulation , but what we really need is proportionality .
We have to ensure that our legislation is proportional to the problems we are dealing with , and particularly in the IPPC , which we have talked about today .
It is really about big business , not about small businesses , and we should reflect that .
I welcome initiatives like JASMINE , which I think are moving us in the right direction , but we need to think in terms of funding , market access and legislation and about the specific needs of small business .
Let me make one particular plea : we have a single market but we do not have a single Community patent .
We have been at this for years and years now , and it really is a disgrace that we cannot sort out this problem .
It could , by itself , be the biggest help for businesses in the European Union .
Let us have some action .

Mr President , I should like to thank the interpreters for staying around , because they did not have the option that Mr Beazley took a long time ago of going for lunch .
I should explain that being in a big group is not everything it seems .
It is very difficult to get speaking time in some of the key debates if you are not in agreement with the big group 's line , without either dramatically compromising your position or kissing backside in endless mind-numbingly boring meetings , and that is why , for people like me , explanations of vote are very important .
I suppose , in general terms , I should be welcoming the Small Business Act , or indeed any attempt to recognise the needs of small business .
In fact , it was bad regulation when I was running my own small business that got me into politics in the first place - just trying to change one particular thing .
However , I am pretty sure that any regulation that comes from this place will certainly be creating more small businesses .
Alas , they tend to be big businesses at the moment , which , when you add a lot of European regulation , gradually turn into small businesses employing smaller numbers of people , because they reduce their turnover because of that regulation and move jobs from our continent .
We in this House have to be very careful that we encourage individuals to start up new businesses and do not encourage jobs to move continents because we are regulating jobs out of existence .
Mr President , like the previous speaker , I would also like to thank all the interpreters for having to listen to our speeches .
I am sure it gives you much less pleasure than it gives us .
Two of my personal mottoes , for reasons which may not be obvious , are ' small is beautiful ' and ' size does not matter ' .
I represent London , which I think is the greatest city in the world , capital of the greatest country in the world .
Even though we no longer have our smokestack industries , we are full of small , innovative businesses in the creative industries and fashion industry , creating jobs all the time in a real growth area .
As the previous speaker said , we see a lot of European regulation aimed at supposedly helping business , but quite often it is the result of lobbying by large businesses who want to keep small businesses out .
There was one notable large business I had dinner with a few years ago that described small businesses as freeloaders .
It is that sort of attitude that we need to tackle .
We also need to help small businesses when it comes to public procurement and competing with large businesses but , especially in the current times , in dealing with the shortage of credit to make sure that viable businesses continue to grow and create wealth and jobs in the European Union .
Written explanations of vote
Mr President , I voted in favour of Mr Costa 's report on the amendment of certain provisions of bilateral agreements in force on air services between the Member States and the Republic of Armenia .
I think that a designation clause should be added so as to avoid discrimination between Community carriers and those of the European Economic Area and Switzerland .
Furthermore , I support the amendment , added in Article 5 , relating to air transport tariffs , whereby carriage wholly within the European Community should be subject to European Community law .
I believe that these amendments benefit businesses operating in the air sector as well as citizens , through the bureaucratic simplification of procedures and the resolution of the legal conflicts that usually occur in cases where Community regulations and bilateral agreements coexist .
in writing . - I realise that the Costa report deals with technical aspects of air services between the Union and Israel .
Nevertheless , I voted against the report as a sign of my protest at the Israeli Government 's outrageous actions in Gaza , even if there is no excuse for the rocket attacks on Israeli settlements orchestrated by Hamas militants and one can understand that Israel reacts .
The problem is that the recent invasion of Gaza was totally disproportionate and largely indiscriminate , with casualty rates one hundred times higher amongst innocent Palestinian men , women and children than amongst the Israeli army .
I am voting in favour of the report on the Agreement between the EC and Israel on certain aspects of air services .
I agree with the rapporteur 's proposal that the agreement be signed .
I believe that the amendments regarding the designation , the taxation of aviation fuel and the pricing clauses are appropriate with regard to the bilateral agreements currently in force .
I hope that basing ourselves on mutual trust in the opposite party 's systems will help the implementation of the agreement .
Mr President , I voted in favour of the report by Mr Costa on the agreement between the European Community and Israel on certain aspects of air services .
I agree with the rapporteur that economic cooperation should be encouraged with the State of Israel for some services , such as air services , not only because of the mutual benefits , but also the positive external effects throughout the surrounding area .
I myself am rapporteur for the report on developing a common aviation area with Israel , within the framework of the Commission 's proposal on a global agreement on aviation with this important partner of the European Union in the Middle East and in the context of the European Neighbourhood Policy , and one of the main trading partners in the Euromed area .
Moreover , for a long time , Israel has been a member of the International Civil Aviation Organisation , has met its obligations and adopted policies that are in line with international legislation in this area , especially with regard to security and protection , but also environmental protection and the welfare of airline employees , all of which means that the aforementioned comprehensive agreement should be implemented at Community level , while paying close attention to the environmental repercussions of increasing traffic and to equality of access conditions .
I voted in favour of the additional protocol to the Agreement between the EC and South Africa , which is intended to take into account the accession of Romania and Bulgaria to the EU .
As a result of the accession of Romania and Bulgaria to the EU , the European Parliament will give its assent to the Council 's draft decision concerning the conclusion of the additional protocol to the Agreement on Trade , Development and Cooperation between the European Community and its Member States , of the one part , and the Republic of South Africa , of the other part , to take account of the accession of the Republic of Bulgaria and Romania to the European Union .
I think that it is particularly important that all the agreements signed by the EU with third countries include Romania , as an EU Member State .
Romania is a member of the European family with full rights and must be included in all documents relating to the EU .
Romania must enjoy all the rights and obligations of an EU Member State .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I abstained from the vote on Mr Borrell Fontelles 's report on the additional protocol to the Agreement between the EC and South Africa , to take account of the accession of Bulgaria and Romania to the EU .
I find , in fact , that I do not entirely agree with the work carried out by my fellow Member .
Thank you , Mr President , a great deal of progress has been made since the Schengen Agreement was implemented .
The treaty radically changed the lives of many European citizens by focusing on a new approach to border management .
The new phase , dedicated to integrated border management , started in 2002 , which led to the creation of a common corpus of legislation , a common coordination mechanism , operational cooperation , common integrated risk assessment , trained staff and burden sharing between Member States in the run-up to a European Corps of Border Guards .
Now that this phase has been completed , it is time to look ahead so as to achieve truly integrated border management to meet the two objectives of enhancing security and facilitating travel for third country nationals .
To that end , I am in favour of the proposals presented by the Commission to Parliament , many of which have already been addressed in my report on the Community Code on the rules governing the movement of persons across borders .
In this case , it seems inevitable that we will continue along this path and give our favourable opinion on the creation of a system of entry / exit registration , facilitating border crossing for travellers and the introduction of an electronic system of travel authorisation .
Member States are still responsible for controlling their respective borders , but only a general agreement and a common policy will allow us to tackle the fundamental challenges of managing borders and migratory flows .
An area without internal borders cannot function without shared responsibility and solidarity in managing its external borders .
The main reason for this should be borne in mind : the EU 's external borders are crossed every year by more than 300 million travellers .
Truly integrated border management must work towards two basic objectives : enhancing security and facilitating the crossing of borders by those who are intending to enter legally and for legitimate reasons .
We cannot , however , continue to adopt separate new initiatives without a comprehensive master plan for the EU 's border strategy .
It is also important to evaluate existing systems so as to weigh up whether there is a real need for new instruments to be created , as well as their viability , reliability , interoperability and cost , and also whether the protection of individuals ' fundamental rights is being given sufficient consideration .
I support Mrs Hennis-Plasschaert 's report on the next steps in border management in the European Union .
Faced with the challenge of enhancing internal security at the same time as facilitating travel for third country nationals , the Commission has proposed three solutions : registration of entry and exit , essentially in order to deal with the phenomenon of people overstaying their visas ; facilitation of border crossing for bona fide travellers ; and the introduction of an electronic system of travel authorisation , following the example of the system that has been in place in the United States since January .
On the latter point , I would emphasise the importance of the Commission 's policy study analysing the effectiveness , impact and practical feasibility of a system of this type : we need to have access to an objective assessment of its usefulness and of its real , not just assumed , added value .
We must not forget that there are two preconditions before we can introduce this impressive tool : we need to speed up the implementation of SIS II in order to enable biometric checking of passports and visas , and we need to examine the impact of the system on the protection of personal data , to ensure that the measure is proportionate .
Such a rare event deserves to be highlighted .
This own-initiative report on the future of the management of the EU 's external borders is a reasonable one , and it is tinged with a degree of realism in that it proposes , as a first stage in re-examining border management in the EU , a critical , in-depth analysis of the operation and effectiveness of the existing systems and how they interact .
Without being gullible , we can be optimistic , and then perhaps we can have a debate .
Just as an example , to help us understand the state of mind of the authors of this text , here are two passages from it .
The first recognises that ' striking a balance between ensuring the free movement of a growing number of people across borders and ensuring greater security for Europe 's citizens is a complex exercise ... ' .
That much is true , but in another place we read that ' measures to enhance border security must go hand in hand with facilitation of passenger flows and the promotion of mobility in an increasingly globalised world ' .
This level of schizophrenia is quite beyond us .
Right from the start , I , as shadow rapporteur for the Socialist Group in the European Parliament for this report , have had serious reservations about the usefulness and the effectiveness of the entry / exit system mentioned in the European Commission 's communication .
Implementing such a system , which is directly inspired by the ' US-VISIT ' Programme , would mean making huge investments only to see very uncertain results obtained with regard to the fight against both illegal immigration and crime .
This is what the US experiment shows , in any case .
Moreover , the planned measures , which are based on the massive collection of personal data , pose risks to the protection of privacy in my opinion .
This view is shared by the European Data Protection Supervisor .
The adoption of a number of my amendments , which were aimed at highlighting doubts concerning the need and the proportionality of the system and at criticising the culture of suspicion that increasingly pervades decisions relating to external border management , have led me to endorse the report in plenary .
At a time when the global economy is plunged into crisis , there are , without doubt , other priorities for the European budget .
The own-initiative report on EU border management is important as it will act as a guide for the legislation which the EC will propose in 2009 .
As the PPE-DE rapporteur , I believe that the text must provide clearer support for preparing the next steps in integrated border management .
With regard to the EU entry / exit system , part of the data required to create this system was already collected by systems such as VIS , SIS and EURODAC .
The Commission must manage the interconnection of these systems and expand their functionality in order to streamline costs .
The option for EU citizens to use automated gates as part of the Registered ' Bona Fide ' Traveller Programme is welcome as it will help speed up traveller flows and prevent congestion .
However , I have suggested changing the term ' bona fide traveller ' to ' frequent traveller ' to prevent the remaining travellers being considered as ' high-risk ' .
Creating the Electronic System of Travel Authorisation is not justified financially .
This is why I have suggested its replacement with the compulsory use of biometric passports by third country citizens not requiring a visa when entering the EU .
In order to achieve the EU 's strategic objectives , the Commission should not start developing new tools from scratch until the existing ones are fully operational and reliable .
The security of external borders is an area which has not been looked into sufficiently , either by us in the European Parliament or by other Community institutions .
I supported this report because I strongly believe that the importance of better identification of third country nationals lies not only in the fact that it will keep out people who should not be given entry , but rather it will facilitate access for those travelling legitimately .
Among the numerous necessary recommendations and observations made in this report , I would like to dwell in particular on how important it is to have a comprehensive master plan in place for border management .
Even though , at the moment , other priorities are dictating institutional changes in the EU , it is becoming essential for us to integrate the numerous border programmes , either proposed or existing , in order to avoid unnecessary duplication and costs .
I also want to emphasise the importance of coordinating this potential plan with the experience and objectives of the Schengen area , which is the clearest example of the type of open area all of us want in Europe .
We do not need temporary procedures , let alone a host of mutually incompatible mechanisms .
I voted in favour of this report because I feel that removing internal EU border controls is a major step in the process of European integration , but it also involves new problems which we need to take into account .
I welcome the Council 's initiative in preparing legislation proposals for the 2009-2010 period on introducing an entry / exit system , a Registered Traveller Programme ( RTP ) and an Electronic System of Travel Authorisation ( ESTA ) .
Although I believe that these programmes must be implemented as soon as possible , and operate as efficiently as possible , they need to be prepared properly .
The correct operation of the entry / exit system will depend from both an equipment and operational perspective on the success of the systems VIS , SIS II and EURODAC .
I believe that it is absolutely essential for a comprehensive master plan to be drafted which sets out the general framework for the EU 's border strategy and ensures coordination and cooperation between the various systems and authorities with responsibilities in this area .
We must also take into consideration the experience in the US in this area .
I agree with the author that a programme like US VISIT may work from a technical viewpoint and that the programme is not therefore , by definition , an obstacle preventing normal traveller flow .
A legal system that is vulnerable to fraud , hard to impose and frequently not put into practice is an invitation to infringement - when not simply to ignorance - of the law .
Taking into account the available information , it must be believed that this is one of the difficulties of the different European legislation on immigration .
It is well-known that the dissuasive effect of a law depends more on how likely it is to be applied than on the sanctions that it carries .
These concerns imply recognition of the need for the European authorities to collaborate on applying existing legislation and also on seeking to adapt the legal framework to the reality described in various reports .
Finally , in the name of both solidarity and equitable justice , it must be stressed that there is a need for consideration to be given to the burden that managing external borders represents to the Member States in question .
I voted in favour of this report on the next steps in border management in the EU .
I would , however , like to draw your attention to a number of important aspects that should be taken into account in future .
An area without internal borders will not work if there is no responsibility for managing those borders .
Increasing border security , which should proceed in tandem with improving the free movement of people in an increasingly unified Europe , is an important element in this .
However , the ultimate objective should be to strike a balance between ensuring the free movement of people and providing greater security for the citizens of Europe .
The key element should be an approach based on the goal of protecting privacy in such a way that the personal data of travellers are not abused and the travellers themselves have confidence in the authorities holding that data .
The use of personal data is beneficial to public safety .
However , let us remember that public confidence in the activities of the authorities must form the basis of any legislative activity in this area .
To achieve this , personal data needs to be strictly protected and properly supervised .
Mr President , I intend to support Mrs Hennis-Plasschaert 's report on the important issue of the next steps in border management in the European Union and similar experiences in third countries .
I agree with the rapporteur that it is essential to evaluate and assess existing measures within the framework of border management before investing further resources and developing the systems that the Commission seems to prefer , namely an exit / entry system for all third country nationals , a registered traveller programme ( RTP ) also open to them and a framework for the development of local registered traveller schemes and automated border controls .
These procedures have great potential but it needs to be stressed , and in this respect , I welcome the rapporteur 's work , that absolute priority must be given to guaranteeing the protection of personal data and the development of technology that is minimally invasive from the point of view of people 's confidentiality , not forgetting , finally , a thorough cost-benefit analysis .
Bearing in mind the importance of free movement as part of the European project , the purpose of the measures adopted over the years has been to ease controls at internal borders .
However , these steps must be mirrored by measures which tighten controls at external borders .
In a situation where , for instance in 2006 , up to 8 million illegal immigrants were registered in the EU , I consider that the Commission 's initiative to introduce an entry / exit system , a Registered Traveller Programme and an Electronic System of Travel Authorisation during the 2012-2015 period is necessary .
A European area without borders , turned from a wish into reality , can only operate if we assume joint responsibility and if we show solidarity in managing the external borders , a task in which Member States located at the EU 's borders , including Romania , will play a major role .
However , we must not lose sight of the fact that there are already border protection systems available , such as EUROSUR and FRONTEX .
It is therefore vital in terms of their functionality to assess to what extent the new initiative can supplement them , without creating the risk of duplication .
Furthermore , our concern must be constantly focused on respecting a person 's right to privacy , as well as on developing new , less invasive technologies .
I would like to say first and foremost that I completely disagree with one of the main conclusions of the report , which is that the removal of border controls on internal EU borders is one of the greatest successes of European integration .
The removal of border controls is merely an inevitable consequence of the EU neoliberal project and its vital interest in the free movement of capital , goods and persons ( in other words , workers ) .
The EU should be chalking up successes first and foremost in the areas of peace and social policy , but unfortunately , of course , these are always far fewer in number .
The report also takes it for granted that in the area of administering the EU 's external borders , we should copy the systems introduced in the USA .
This is simply wide of the mark , bearing in mind the very real and strongly enforced ' iron curtain ' between the US and Mexico .
With regard to the external borders of the EU , I would also like to stress that the recent past in Europe has clearly shown that political and social problems cannot be solved through police or routine measures .
in writing . - ( SV ) In this explanation of vote , we Swedish Social Democrats in the European Parliament aim to explain why we chose to vote in favour of Mr Lehne 's report on the cross-border transfer of the registered office of a company .
We believe that this is an important complement to the Lehne report on the European private company statute .
We believe that the lack of a common set of regulations for the transfer of the registered office of a company creates problems for companies wanting to move across borders within the internal market , as they are currently forced to liquidate the company and thus wind the business up in order to be able to move their registered office .
We also think it good that the European Parliament is proposing that the transfer of a registered office must not involve the circumventing of legal , social or tax conditions .
We also welcome the fact that the European Parliament emphasises that the transfer of the registered office should be tax neutral .
However , we do not agree with all of the conclusions of the committee in connection with the discussions of the report .
For example , we do not agree with the wording in recital G to the effect that the European Parliament cannot issue legislation that runs counter to the case law of the European Court of Justice .
We would like to point out that it is the European Parliament , together with the Council , that makes the law , and it is then the job of the European Court of Justice to interpret that law , not the other way round .
Furthermore , we would like to see the words ' the European Parliament emphasises the positive effects of tax competition on economic growth in the context of the Lisbon Strategy ' deleted from the report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted against Mr Lehne 's report on the cross-border transfer of the registered office of a company .
In fact , I believe that company cross-border migration should not be regarded as one of the crucial elements in the completion of the internal market but , as is often the case , as a way of bypassing national laws on various subjects ( not least taxation ) .
I am therefore against this report because there is a real risk that the cross-border transfer of registered offices will circumvent the legal , social and fiscal requirements of the European Union .
Mr President , I supported Giusto Catani 's report .
In my opinion , we need to revise the Dublin regulation so that the decision of the country responsible for considering an asylum request takes account of the individual needs of the asylum applicant .
We need to emphasise the integration of asylum seekers into their new environment and to ensure that they are given the opportunity to learn the language of the country they are staying in , as this will increase their chances of being assimilated into their new culture .
I voted in favour of this own-initiative report by the Italian Member of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , Giusto Catania , on the future of the European Common Asylum System .
The text of this report focuses on the situation of asylum seekers , whose fate is really something of a lottery depending on the country in which they land , and whose detention conditions are , at times , only just about bearable .
This is a situation that affects border countries in particular , but which needs to be taken into account at European level .
The fundamental rights of asylum seekers are at stake , as is the ability of certain countries to cope with these migratory pressures .
This is a joint responsibility .
This report has the merit of providing a clear account of the situation and of specifying the challenges to come for the European Union in the context of this debate .
Through this vote , I am joining the French socialists in denouncing a situation which is no longer acceptable and which Europe , as a democratic institution and human rights protector , must remedy .
in writing . - I am opposed to moves towards a common immigration and asylum policy in Europe .
I believe that a harmonised asylum system will undermine the UK 's sovereign right to decide for itself who should and should not be allowed to claim asylum in my country .
Furthermore , I believe that a common asylum system will weaken the accountability of British ministers and parliamentarians to the citizens who elect them .
I accept that developed countries like my own have a humanitarian responsibility to people from third countries who have faced or would face persecution , torture or death if they were to return .
However , I am worried that by taking away the UK 's independent ability to monitor and regulate asylum entrants , we would potentially be exposing ourselves further to the threat of terrorist attacks .
I support Mr Catania 's report on the future of the European Common Asylum System .
All political refugees have the right to enter the European Union and , once their status has been recognised , to reside on European territory .
Unfortunately , this right is not currently applied uniformly by the Member States : recognition of this status may vary from one Member State to another from 0 % to 90 % .
If we are to establish a uniformly high level of protection throughout the EU , we must be able to introduce a number of elements quickly .
These include establishing a single asylum application procedure and single standards for qualification as a refugee , introducing a legal and effective mechanism for solidarity between the Member States - some countries are flooded with applications , while others escape more lightly - improving reception conditions for applicants , particularly for minors , and reducing the use of detention , and creating a European Asylum Support Office .
This is what is at stake in the whole of the ' asylum legislative package ' , which we have just started to look into as we reach the end of this Parliamentary term .
The thinking behind Mr Catania 's report is that applicants for international protection are necessarily bone fide , but in fact , everyone knows that asylum is often nothing but a pretext used by prospective economic immigrants to avoid being turned away .
The Member States , for their part , are allegedly necessarily deaf to their distress , repressive and too slow to take decisions .
Nobody points out , though , that it is the abuse of the procedure for illegitimate purposes that slows down the assessment of genuine asylum applications .
It is no doubt these beginnings that have given birth to some of the report 's proposals , such as the suggestions that the country responsible for consideration of an asylum request should take account of the applicant 's wishes , that this country should ultimately be determined by a European body , that applicants should have the same rights as long-term residents , that they should have freedom of movement within the territory of Europe , and so on .
We agree that there is a need for cooperation with those European countries that , due to their geographic location , are in the front line for migration flows and have difficulty dealing with them , but this absolutely must not result in a European policy that tells the States whom they must welcome into their territory , based on the whims of the asylum applicants and a supranational administration .
in writing . - We are in agreement with the main thrust of the compromise report and are therefore voting for it .
Having said that , however , we do not agree with certain clauses , such as those dealing with detention .
I feel that they do not fully reflect and precisely interpret the complex and difficult situation of small Member States like Malta .
Malta is facing a disproportionate flow of illegal immigrants compared to its geographical limitations ( 121 sq. miles ) , small population ( 400 000 people ) and other limited resources ( administrative , financial , etc . ) , which should be taken into consideration when regulating , debating or legislating on this subject .
In reality , there is only one objective behind this desire to create a common European asylum system , namely to give the Member States of the European Union the legal option of receiving as many potential immigrants as possible , more easily and without restrictions , which were deemed to be useless and contrary to human rights .
Europe has thus reaffirmed its position as a host for all migrant populations , and considerable emphasis has been placed on full respect for the principle of non-refoulement and on the duty to render assistance as enshrined in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea .
Hence - and this is indeed understandable for these pro-immigration types - the simple fact that each Member State still has sovereignty and its own procedures in asylum law inevitably leads to disparities in the acceptance of asylum applications and is thus a barrier to the general acceptance of asylum applicants .
Faced with almost 26 million internally displaced persons and more than 12 million refugees in the world , what we need to do is not find more reception solutions , because it will never be enough to deal with the exponential growth in demand , but rather allow and encourage these people to stay in their own countries , to find work there and to base their families there .
The report by the Communist Member , Mr Catania , recommends the establishment of a European pro-immigration policy .
Essentially , under the pretext of defending human rights , he wants to turn Europe into an open community that is prepared to take in all the misery in the world .
To this end , he proposes a top-down harmonisation of asylum law , the principle of non-refoulement , the avoidance of detention , and even the extension to refugees of the Directive on the status of third country nationals who are long-term residents .
Mr Catania is pretending to have forgotten that most of the illegal immigrants arriving in Europe - 75 000 of them in 2008 on the Mediterranean coast alone - are not political refugees but economic refugees , fleeing poverty in their countries .
This abuse of the right to asylum , contrary to the Geneva Convention , is not mentioned at any point in the report , and with good reason : it is convenient to make the ' white man ' feel guilty by reminding him that he was a terrible colonialist and that he now needs to pay for that in every sense of the word .
Legends die hard .
By trying to transform asylum law into a normal branch of immigration , Mr Catania is paving the way for a variety of abuses and is turning illegal immigrants into scapegoats .
I welcome the fact that the Commission has proposed a regulation updating EU asylum law since , given current circumstances , this is urgently needed .
The number of refugees is constantly rising , and the current regulations and directives governing asylum are no longer coping with the situation .
I therefore believe it to be essential that the Commission 's reforms are implemented as soon as possible , and I would categorise the following points in those reforms to be of particular importance .
There must be a common asylum system , and one that leads to ' uniform and reasonable time limits ' .
The rights of refugees must be bolstered - because of their status as particularly ' in need of protection ' , refugees cannot , as a matter of principle , be taken into custody .
There must be uniform border controls so that people who have a right to international protection can get access more easily .
The Dublin system currently in force , under which the wishes of asylum seekers , for example , their choice of a European country , cannot be taken into consideration , must be revised to the effect that people who are recognised as being in special need of protection are also able to live in another EU country .
The individual Member States must always retain the ability to decide independently who and how many people they accept , and why they do so .
I support the Commission 's proposal and the own-initiative report , but I would point out , once again , that , on this issue , rapid and uniform implementation is crucial .
in writing . - ( NL ) Mr President , I voted against the proposal by Mr Catania today on the future of the European Common Asylum System .
My party , the Dutch Socialist Party , does not believe that harmonising asylum policy and dressing up an agency to govern this in future would lead to a more even distribution of the number of asylum applications among the various Member States .
Asylum applications are determined more by the presence of family members and acquaintances in certain Member States , which attracts new asylum seekers .
I also take the view that harmonisation would lead to lower-quality asylum policy in countries where this policy is relatively well regulated at present , as Member States would use this standardisation to seek out the lowest possible level .
Such a race to the bottom is undesirable and , ultimately , would only hit asylum seekers .
As much as I appreciate Mr Catania 's efforts , I cannot support his conclusions on this .
in writing . - ( DE ) While cooperation on asylum issues , given the massive streams of refugees , is important , the good sense of the proposed European asylum agency is dubious .
Further upgrading can be arranged without the need for such an agency , while some of the measures envisaged fall within the competence of other organisations such as Frontex .
It is absolutely not acceptable for this new agency to produce risk analyses that the Member States are then compelled to use , which is to say it would be prescribed which asylum seekers the Member States must accept .
This is a profound intrusion on the sovereignty of the Member States , and the only response is to reject it .
Even though , in some cases , the reasons that make someone decide to emigrate may be similar to those which drive asylum seekers , the two systems must be sufficiently distinct , whether in legal terms or in terms of administrative procedures .
With this important proviso , a point that must be considered is the fact that , because borders within the Schengen Area are effectively open , decisions taken within one Member State may have implications for another .
At the same time , the idea of Europe could be understood as a whole in the eyes of an asylum seeker who views the ' European Union ' as an area that is homogenous and , in their understanding , the antithesis of the danger that they are fleeing .
Finally , it will be difficult for an asylum seeker fleeing from a real threat to his or her life to choose their point of entry to Europe , or to be able to carry out the administrative processes that are necessary and required for a candidate for immigration .
All these considerations make coordination and collaboration between Member States necessary , without the above meaning that asylum should become an alternative means of gaining entry to immigration , or , even less so , a means of getting round the illegality of certain migratory flows .
Mr President , I cannot agree with many of the points in Mr Catania 's report on the future of the European Common Asylum System and , for that reason , I must vote against it .
While I agree with Mr Catania on the fact that the institution of asylum is an essential part of democracy and protection of human rights , in order to ensure that it remains , so it is absolutely necessary to avoid any kind of possible abuse .
To that end , rather than a common asylum system in Europe and rather than building a ' Europe of asylum ' , to use the words of the European Pact on Asylum and Immigration , adopted by the European Council last October , it would be more desirable to build a ' Europe of rights ' , which is to say , a Europe that combats the causes behind the increase in the number of refugees as pointed out by the rapporteur , which adopts a stronger international role to resolve conflicts in certain countries , which exerts pressure more decisively so that respect for dignity , human life and fundamental freedoms is guaranteed , wherever that is not yet the case .
Combating the effects of these serious violations of rights does not resolve and will never be able to effectively resolve the underlying problem , for which other instruments should be used .
In recent years , the number of refugees in the EU has grown to 12 million , in addition to which there are 26 million internally displaced people .
A common European asylum policy is necessary , as the asylum policies of the 27 EU Member States are too different - which , in practice , means playing with people 's futures , and that is preposterous .
During the first phase ( 1999-2005 ) , the EU attempted to harmonise the approach of Member States ' policies on the basis of common minimum standards .
The second phase has been working on a common asylum procedure and a uniform status for those granted asylum or subsidiary protection .
The report we shall be adopting today welcomes the establishment of a European asylum agency but regrets the slow progress on implementing the second phase ; for which , of course , the non-entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon is to blame .
I support the call for the improvement of the existing legislation with regard to both the Asylum Procedures Directive , the Directive determining the conditions for reception , and the Directive that grants or withdraws refugee status .
The report has my support , as it is important that a standard of protection be introduced for refugees and that all Member States show solidarity in shouldering their responsibility and cooperating purposefully .
Mr President , I voted in favour of Mrs Stauner 's report on the Commission action plan towards an integrated internal control framework of the Union 's budget .
The principles of sound financial management and budgetary transparency are fundamental , not only in order to obtain a positive statement of assurance from the European Court of Auditors , by means of simplifying legislation on controls and the resultant potential reduction in associated costs , but also , in the medium term , in order to monitor more effectively the use of the resources of the citizens of the European Union and , as a result , to enhance the legitimacy of EU action .
For this reason , I believe it is fundamental to begin cooperation with the Member States and with independent audit institutions , as , moreover , already pointed out by the rapporteur .
Courts are dealing with international and cross-border evidence law on an increasingly frequent basis .
Such cases may relate to Austrians who have accidents in Germany , defective goods or services procured from another Member State , witnesses who live at the other end of the EU or defendants who move abroad .
The right to legal redress absolutely must not cease because evidence is located outside the Member State in which the court in question is located .
Those on the ground tell us that , just as in the past , there are unsolved questions in connection with the cross-border taking of evidence in civil and commercial matters .
Since these matters do still require solving , I have voted in favour of this report .
Mr President , I voted in favour of Mr Medina Ortega 's report on cooperation between the courts of the Member States in the taking of evidence in civil or commercial matters .
It is clear that , in order to promote efficiency and hence avoid any unnecessary waste of time and money , direct contacts between courts and full cooperation between them should be promoted .
Moreover , more use should be made of information technology , in particular , secure e-mail communications and video conferencing , since they are , at the same time , more effective in terms of results and more cost-effective .
Lastly , I agree with the rapporteur when he welcomes what is being done in this respect in the context of the e-Justice programme .
Mr President , I voted in favour of Mr Doorn 's report on implementation of Directive 2006 / 43 / EC on statutory audits of annual accounts and consolidated accounts .
I completely agree that it is necessary to urge the Commission to promote national quality assurance structures , in close collaboration with the Member States , which ensure independent and external quality assurance for accountancy firms .
Moreover , I feel that it is right and necessary to monitor and report on how far the goals of the Directive have been met , or are expected to be met .
in writing . - British Conservative MEPs are in favour of equality of treatment and access for men and women in all aspects of society , including the performing arts .
We have supported this report today on that basis .
However , we wish to record that we disagree with the concept of quotas as implied , for example , in paragraph 12 of the report .
Thank you , Mr President , I voted in favour of the report .
A few days after International Women 's Day , here we are again in this Chamber discussing social inequality between the two sexes .
Even the world of performing arts , as clearly highlighted by the Commission , is not spared these problems .
Throughout the performing arts sector , women are still struggling to achieve a fully developed role , rarely reach positions of senior responsibility in the major cultural institutions , and are often paid less than their male colleagues .
In particular , the untypical hours that typify working in the arts make it difficult to reconcile the female roles of worker , wife and mother , often forcing women to choose between career and family .
I would like to conclude , then , by stressing the need to guarantee an equal gender mix in the decision-making and consultative bodies involved in recruitment , promotion , rewards and funding , as well as in the other branches in the sector , in order to introduce statistical monitoring to produce comparative analyses of the working situation faced by women in the various countries of the Union
I voted in favour of the report on equality of treatment and access for men and women in the performing arts because inequalities in career prospects and opportunities between women and men in the performing arts are very much present and persistent .
There is also an absolute need to put into practice the democratic notion that ' equal work must be matched by equal pay ' , which , in the arts as in many other sectors , is still not the case .
in writing . - Performing art has flourished for thousands of years and in every society on Earth .
It is therefore questionable as to why the EU feels the need to impose its will on what is otherwise a sector that flourishes precisely because it is largely free of interference from Brussels .
I do not think it is my place as an MEP to tell those involved in the performing arts how they should regulate their own affairs .
In fact , I think it is my job to ensure that performing artists and organisations that facilitate performing arts are as free as possible from well-meaning , but misplaced and naïve , initiatives like this one .
I am all in favour of the equal treatment of men and women in the eyes of the law .
However , I believe that political pressure should never be allowed to interfere with artistic decisions .
We stood firm in this House with regard to the reaction provoked by depictions of the Prophet Mohammed in Danish newspapers .
My fear is that by eroding artistic freedoms , even slightly , we are also eroding the values of free speech and expression .
We voted in favour of this report because it underlines the scale and persistence of the inequalities between men and women in the performing arts and their impact on society as a whole .
It also emphasises the absolute necessity of promoting and encouraging women 's access to all the artistic professions in which they are in the minority .
As is stressed in the report , the percentage of women employed in artistic professions and in the official culture industry is very small .
Women are also under-represented in positions of responsibility in cultural institutions and in the academies and universities where some arts are studied .
That is why we agree with many of the proposals presented here , emphasising the need for promotion of women 's access to all the artistic professions and other professional activities related to performance in which they are in the minority .
Member States also should be encouraged to remove any impediments to women 's access to management positions in cultural institutions , as well as in academies and universities .
We also emphasise that discrimination towards women is problematic for the development of the cultural sector because it deprives the sector of talent and ability .
We also recognise that talent needs contact with the public in order to be given recognition .
in writing . - ( SV ) It goes without saying that we in the June List stand for equal treatment , equal pay for equal work and the fundamental principle of the equality of men and women .
We have therefore voted in favour of this report .
However , this is a ' yes ' vote with a clear proviso .
We are opposed to the European Parliament attempting to determine how the individual Member States should , for example , structure their national childcare or apply a quota system .
The present report is a typical example of the meddlesomeness and zeal for regulation that characterise the European Parliament .
Instead of acting as a forum for the pressing challenges that require cross-border cooperation , it is continually interfering in issues that are , and should remain , national matters .
in writing . - This report highlights the persistent inequalities in career prospects and opportunities between women and men in the performing arts sector .
I support this report which urges Member States to take specific measures to encourage and promote women to further their careers where they are under represented .
in writing . - I believe that gender inequality should be phased out of our lives .
In today 's civilised world , the disparity between men and women , and majorities and minorities , must be done away with .
The European Parliament must observe its past legislation and uphold the values of universal solidarity .
There must be a gender mix in the decision-making process for the performing arts and various other areas .
In order to find true talent , the most capable performers and deserving applicants , women must be given equal status with men in the same fields .
Where men are favoured over women , or vice versa , there must be serious corrections and viable protection to end this inconsistency .
Depriving a group on the basis of sex or any other characteristic will not be tolerated by the EU , and it is our duty to ensure this applies across the field of the performing arts ( and others areas as well ) .
For this reason , it is my duty and that of the PPE-DE Party to give a vote of confidence to any legislation that supports equality , corrects wrongdoings , and better preserves cohesion between members of the opposite sex .
I voted for this report and Mrs Gibault and I cooperated very well .
We must not forget that women in the performing arts in general are still under-represented , and specifically in management positions in this area .
We must not forget either that we are talking about a sensitive area with a large multiplier effect , conveying a powerful message to its audience and society .
We do not have sufficient nurseries and crèches .
There is also the fact that working hours in the performing arts are long and non-standard .
If these aspects are improved , the objective proposed in the report of having a representation level of 30 % in the arts can be achieved .
Mr President , I voted in favour of Mrs Gibault 's report on equality of treatment and access for men and women in the performing arts .
I agree with the aims of Mrs Gibault 's report : to recognise the way in which identities are constructed socially and culturally in the performing arts and to propose specific solutions which could correct the imbalances associated with existing unequal situations .
All available skills sources should be used for the good health of the sector as well as for the personal development of men and women .
Lastly , I feel that it is imperative to find solutions very quickly for opening crèches in cultural undertakings with hours adapted to rehearsal and performance times .
Mr President , I support Mr Schwab 's report on CO2 emissions and improving road safety .
It is essential that the efforts to reduce CO2 emissions do not undermine other equally important aspects of car design , and do not negatively affect road safety .
I believe that stimulating and investing in the development of an innovative European motor industry will effectively enable us to protect jobs in this sector , which has been worst hit by the financial crisis .
Now there are new technologies to fundamentally improve transport safety ( e.g. electronic stability control systems ) or to reduce the amount of CO2 emissions ( e.g. low rolling resistance tyres ) , if such technologies are fitted as standard in new motor vehicles .
in writing . - MEP Schwab has proposed a report which aims to increase car safety through the introduction of increased safety measures requirements for car manufacturers .
All new vehicles manufactured in the Union will be subject to compliance with the technical requirements and measures which will reduce their environmental impact , decrease associated noise pollution and increase their road safety .
The regulation combines advances in European manufacturing and technology and increased levels of safety protection that the European consumer can expect .
These innovations will help to reduce CO2 emissions , fuel consumption and noise pollution .
I am delighted to support this report which will benefit us all .
I have voted in favour of this report , as consumers need and want safer and more environmentally-friendly vehicles .
As for car safety , I particularly welcome the mandatory fitting of ESP ( electronic stability systems ) in passenger cars from as early as those built in 2011 .
As far as tyres are concerned , I believe the efforts to reduce CO2 emissions through the use of better tyres with less rolling resistance , as well as the introduction of electronic tyre pressure monitoring systems , to be worthwhile .
The reduction of CO2 emissions must not , however , be at the expense of the safety of the tyres , which is to say , their wet grip .
I am also pleased that existing stocks will not - as originally planned - have to be taken off the market within 12 months , but instead only 30 months after the introduction of a new standard .
This avoids the need for tyre stocks to be destroyed , which would cause additional damage to the environment .
Furthermore , we are allowing our supply businesses , hard hit , as they have been , by the economic crisis , a sufficient transitional period to get to grips with the high level of requirements made of them .
Any citizen on the planet who is aware of the magnitude assumed by global warming can act to halt the progress of this process endangering Earth .
In the case of drivers and the vehicles which they drive , these efforts are set out in the report voted on today .
' Green driving ' means reducing fuel consumption .
The EU is advocating a possible reduction in these costs of EUR 20 billion by 2010 .
It is also advocating a possible reduction in CO2 emissions of 50 million tonnes .
It goes without saying that the effects of these measures will only be evident in the long term .
However , it is helpful that their implementation is coming into force one year ahead of the Commission 's proposal .
in writing . - I support this regulation which will make cars and roads safer by bringing in new technologies . These include tyre pressure monitoring systems , wet grip requirements and lane departure warning systems .
This report reduces CO2 emissions through new standards which tyres must reach , which will improve fuel efficiency and cut fuel bills .
Mr President , I voted in favour of Mr Schwab 's report on type-approval requirements for the general safety of motor vehicles .
The aim of the report , which is excellent , is to ensure the proper functioning of the internal market while , at the same time , providing for a higher level of safety and environmental protection .
These type-approval requirements have been harmonised at Community level in order to avoid differing systems from one Member State to another , and to ensure a high level of road safety and environmental protection throughout the Community .
I therefore fully agree with Mr Schwab , since the proposed Regulation aims to significantly simplify the type-approval legislation in the field of motor vehicle safety and tyres with one Council and Parliament Regulation .
in writing . - ( SV ) The original IPPC Directive , along with the other six directives , has not been fully implemented in the EU Member States and therefore , these directives do not fulfil their purpose .
It was therefore decided to recast these directives and we have voted on them in Parliament today .
We Swedish Social Democrats are in favour of a recast and we can see that it contains certain improvements on the current rules .
However , we chose to vote against the directive in the final vote , as we believe that some of the amendments that were voted through will make the directive considerably less good than the Commission 's original proposal .
For example , we were unable to accept additional exemptions for large combustion plants .
Another reason why we felt compelled to vote ' no ' is the fact that we are missing an opportunity with this directive to seriously reduce the emissions of greenhouse gases .
By voting down the amendments that our delegation was involved in tabling , advocating limit values for carbon dioxide emissions for new large electricity generation plants , this House has shown that it does not take the work of reducing emissions of greenhouse gases seriously .
We cannot support such a proposal .
in writing . - We strongly support the original IPPC Directive .
Industrial activities covered by existing Directives emit 55 % of the EU 's CO2 emissions , 83 % of SO2 and 34 % of NOx .
Under the current directive , permits are issued by the Environment Protection Agency which require industrial plants to apply ' Best Available Techniques ' .
During the vote this morning , there were a number of problematic amendments regarding the new IPPC proposal .
1 .
Minimum Requirements .
Ireland is against the minimum requirements amendment , as this will penalise Irish industry and the work recently undertaken to achieve the status of the current directive .
Resources would be better spent enforcing the directive in those Member States which are non compliant .
2 .
Poultry and Manure and Slurry .
There were a number of amendments seeking to bring more poultry and manure spreading within the scope .
I have voted against this amendment to avoid double regulation , as the Nitrates Directive suffices on manure and slurry .
On poultry , the IPPC already controls 40 000 poultry places .
An amendment would reduce the threshold values from 40 000 to 30 000 for laying hens , 24 000 for ducks and 11 500 for turkeys .
There is nothing stated in the impact assessment about how these numbers came about and on what scientific basis they were established .
2 .
Instalments .
I also voted in favour of flexibility for instalments
in writing . - ( DA ) The Danish Liberal Party 's MEPs , Anne E. Jensen , Karin Riis-Jørgensen and Niels Busk , have voted in favour of Amendment 96 , proposed by the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , to delete Article 16 , paragraph 4 , because the spreading of livestock manure is contrary to the objective of IPPC , which is to combat emissions from large industrial installations .
Moreover , this matter is already included under the Water Framework Directive ( 2000 / 60 / EC ) and the Nitrate Directive ( 91 / 676 / EEC ) .
in writing . - The initial provisions of this report would have left National Health Service hospitals in my region of north-east England and elsewhere in the UK facing massively increased costs for their heating boilers .
NHS hospitals need to have a significant amount of spare boiler capacity to cope with emergencies and in case there are technical failures .
The directive would have assessed the hospitals ' boilers on the basis of their potential emissions , rather than their actual emissions - thus causing them to incur substantial costs to obtain a permit .
I supported the tabling of amendments to exempt part-time stand-by boilers from the scope of the directive .
Notwithstanding these concerns , we must act in concert to address the common threat of climate change and environmental pollution .
This proposal for a directive seeks to revise and bring together , in a single text , seven separate directives on industrial emissions .
The Commission 's proposal states that it provides for an integrated approach with the aim of ensuring that environmental aspects are taken into account , in the most comprehensive and balanced way possible , when permits are issued for installations .
The aim is to impose effective limits on emissions through the employment of best available techniques ( BATs ) , which must be applied more consistently than to date .
As the report states , this legislative process could have implications for 52 000 industrial plants in Europe .
That is why we support some proposed derogations for micro , small and medium-sized enterprises , which should not be subject to the same obligations as large industrial units .
However , we support greater intervention in industrial units that have incinerators and co-incinerators and more inspection than is being proposed by the European Commission .
The amended text attaches some value to public consultation and the role of environmental NGOs , takes into account the interests of micro-enterprises and SMEs and reclaims some decision-making power from the European Commission .
For these reasons , in the end , we voted for the proposal , in the hope that in Portugal , there will be more government intervention in supporting and monitoring air quality .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted against Mr Krahmer 's report on industrial emissions .
I do not agree that competent local authorities should have to lay down measures to limit emissions for individual installations , and hence attain an emission level which , on average , meets the requirements laid down in the BAT reference documents , with some leeway so that proper account can be taken of local circumstances .
This task should be wholly assigned to a Community authority , not a local or national one .
The specific characteristics of a region must not be a discriminating factor in this field , since different minimum thresholds result in extremely variable costs and returns , which then inevitably affect the true competitiveness of businesses .
The recently adopted climate and energy package demands decisive action on our part to meet its targets .
Previous efforts by the EU to reduce industrial emissions have been hampered by lack of cohesion and coordination , and by high levels of disparity .
I therefore warmly support the Commission 's initiative and the rapporteur 's suggestion .
Replacing numerous directives on industrial emissions with a single , coherent act is definitely a step in the right direction .
I am also prepared to support any initiatives aimed at cutting red tape , increasing the flexibility of regulations regarding the inspection of installations and increasing transparency .
I fully support the rapporteur 's proposal to increase the role of the European Parliament in working on future regulatory changes .
The proposal for a directive by the European Commission on industrial emissions and the amendments by the European Parliament reveal , once again , that the real objective of the ' green economy ' is not to protect the environment , but to safeguard the profits of capital .
The pronouncements by the European Commission about limiting emissions of greenhouse gases are misleading and disorientating .
This directive concerns more than 52 000 industrial plants which account for a large proportion of emissions in the Member States of the EU and are even jointly responsible for the failure to achieve the targets set by the European Commission itself for reducing atmospheric pollution .
The most important amendments by the European Parliament considerably limit the scope of the directive and introduce elements of ambiguity and uncertainty which always operate for the benefit of the plutocracy and strengthen the unaccountability of capital .
At the same time , industrialists themselves are reduced to a decisive factor in defining emission levels , which will be set in accordance with their needs and priorities , in other words , on the basis of the profit motive .
The impasse in environmental protection is being included in the anti-monopoly , anti-imperialist fight by the workers against the economic sovereignty of the monopolies and their political power and against the EU and the parties which support the European one-way street .
in writing . - The Commission 's proposal on a Statute for a European private company allows an opportunity for non-serious companies to circumvent the rules on worker participation .
If the private European company has its registered office in a Member State with low or no workers ' participation and performs its activities in another Member State with high participation , the company can circumvent the rules .
The Socialist Group in the Parliament has however , together with the ETUC , reached a compromise which improves the Commission 's proposal substantially .
The compromise now states that when the companies have a certain quota of their employees in another Member State with higher worker participation compared to the Member State where the company has its headquarters , the more favourable rules for worker participation will apply .
Although the compromise is far better than the original proposal , we have not succeeded fully .
The levels to trigger worker participation are still high compared to the rules in some Member States and there are also problems with the definition of what is regarded as being a higher level of worker participation .
We - the Danish and the Swedish delegations in the Socialist Group - have therefore decided to abstain our votes in the final vote .
This afternoon , we voted on the Statute for a European private company .
In the end , I voted against the proposal , for the following reasons .
Firstly , I take the view that this proposal increases the legal uncertainty in the European Union .
The relationship between the national private company and the European private company , between the applicable national law and the text of the regulation , is not made sufficiently clear .
How is circumvention of useful national legislation to be prevented ?
How does the proposal accord with consumer protection ?
No satisfactory answers are provided to such questions .
We also voted on another report by Mr Lehne today , in which he makes recommendations for improving the cross-border transfer of company registered offices .
I actually think this a much better idea than the European private company .
If the Commission were to endeavour to facilitate the cross-border transfer of company registered offices , reducing red tape , the whole proposal for the European private company would be redundant .
in writing . - Mr Lehne has proposed an own-initiative report proposing a Council Regulation that aims to make it easier for small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) to facilitate cross-border transfers within the Community of the registered office of a company formed in a Member State of the Community .
The aim is laudable .
However , we must be cautious that this facility is not abused to undermine national company law while ensuring that the Statute ( Societas Privata Europea ) represents a viable alternative for businesses .
There are many proposals among the numerous amendments which remain highly contentious , including references to minimum capital , checks on registration , references to national law , cross-border components and employee participation .
Certain amendments proposed by the ECON committee have called for uniformity in certain areas by 2010 , including tax , effectively restricting the application of national law .
While accepting in principle the proposal of a European company operating according to the same principles EU-wide , the scope of this proposal should not extend to restricting national taxation decisions , which remain firmly the preserve of individual Member States .
in writing . - ( SV ) I voted against in the final vote with regard to the Statute for a European private company ( SPE ) .
The basic idea of introducing a common European company form for private companies is a very good one .
It is a reform that is definitely needed .
The Commission 's proposal is very poor .
The boundary between when national law is to be applied as opposed to the statute for a European private company is very unclear .
A large proportion of companies ' rules and regulations are to be dealt with in their articles of association .
Even if this may be a positive step for some companies , some issues are such that they must be clearly specified in the statute : for example , the boundary between the competence of the company as an entity and protection of minority shareholders .
Moreover , the degree of employee representation within management is poor .
The SPE statute has been significantly improved during the Council 's ongoing negotiations , and I am still hoping that the final result will be good .
However , it is not that proposal that we are to adopt a position on today .
It is the Commission 's proposal , as amended by Mr Lehne , and that makes my decision quite simple : the lack of clarity and the problems contained in this proposal overshadow the positive aspects of the reform , and there is an imminent risk of us having a statute that will run counter to its purpose .
Furthermore , in view of the positive progress that the Council has already made , support for this report would throw a spanner in the works with regard to the Council 's work .
It is not the Council 's proposal that we are voting on , it is essentially the Commission 's proposal .
I have therefore chosen to vote against it .
in writing . - This initiative creates a new European legal form intended to enhance the competitiveness of SMEs by facilitating their establishment and operation in the Single Market .
I support the report which will lead to greater protection for workers and the information they are provided with by their company .
The German Social Democratic ( SPD ) delegation has voted in favour of the option of establishing a European private company .
We would like to issue the following explanation , however .
Worker participation is a cornerstone of a democratic and social Europe .
For that reason , the right to information , consultation and worker participation , without restrictions , must take the same form as in the existing rules on the European company ( Societas Europae - SE ) and the European cooperative society ( Societas Cooperativa Europaea - SCE ) .
The version of a European private company now agreed represents an improvement on the Commission 's proposal in this regard - which is the reason we have voted in favour - but fails the objective of adapting to the existing rules .
The risk of circumventing workers ' rights to participation has not been completely averted .
The process is not yet over .
We call upon the Council of Ministers to improve the proposal in the following ways :
the addition of clear references to the Directive on a European company ( SE ) , in particular , to its standard rules in respect of the election of members to the administrative or supervisory board ,
the simplification of the impracticable provision of Article 34 ; the significant lowering of the thresholds ,
the stipulation that a European private company really is active across borders .
We call on the Commission to finally get the 14th Directive on the cross-border transfer of the registered office of a limited company moving , as the rights of worker participation in the cross-border transfer of registered offices can only sensibly be ensured by a Europe-wide directive on worker participation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of Mr Lehne 's proposal for a Council regulation on the Statute for a European private company .
I support the work he has done to lay down autonomous rules on points that are crucial for the ' daily life ' of the SPE , such as minimum capital , employee participation and checks on registration .
Lastly , as far as references to national laws are concerned , I believe that the aim of the regulation on SPEs , namely to create a uniform form of undertaking throughout the Community , is thoroughly welcome and worthwhile .
At a time of a raging economic crisis , developing the SME sector is a highly desirable thing .
We must strive to raise the administrative and legal barriers that are preventing anyone who wants to from starting up in business .
Procedural requirements , red tape and high costs of registration should not get in the way of people who want to develop their business idea .
New firms mean new workplaces , and hence economic recovery .
The European Union consists of 27 Member States with different legal systems and different systems for setting up companies .
Creating an EU-wide form of business establishment - the European private company - will definitely make life easier for anybody who wants to start up in business , and will help to make the principle of the free movement of capital more effective .
Uniform requirements on establishing and carrying on an activity , a low share capital requirement and simplified registration methods will definitely make the European private company a success .
It will provide an attractive alternative to national regulations .
It will be fast , cheap and free of unnecessary formalities , but ensure a proper degree of legal certainty .
in writing . - ( SV ) This report calls for yet more financial resources for area after area within the EU , while in the Member States , savings need to be made in areas such as healthcare , schools and social care .
Furthermore , several areas indicated in the report , such as the financial crisis , climate change and energy policy , are associated with huge costs that are completely out of proportion to the EU 's budget .
These are matters that need to be dealt with in the individual Member States under their domestic political processes , which will result in a democratic basis for the sacrifices that need to be made .
We have therefore chosen to vote against this report on the Commission 's budget for 2010 .
Faced with the worsening economic and social situation in various Member States , to date the EU has not taken any effective initiative that has not been aimed at protecting financial capital .
We urgently need to adopt immediate Community measures which will help to effectively respond to the needs of workers , the productive sector , and micro , small and medium-sized enterprises , by mobilising the necessary financial resources .
However , the EU has debated and adopted a budget for 2009 as if nothing were happening - a Community budget which , in relative terms , is the lowest since Portugal 's accession to the EEC - once again showing its class nature .
Faced with evidence of the depth of the capitalist crisis ( in its policies ) , the EP has failed to conceal the true situation .
The resolution now adopted therefore timidly says that the Community budget for 2010 must be closer to the limits set out in the Multiannual Financial Framework 2007-2013 - which , in addition to being clearly inadequate , is not even observed - and also recognises that the category of expenditure is ' insufficient ' .
As we are ' once bitten , twice shy ' , we hope that this proclaimed concern and intent are not merely short-lived wishes , bearing in mind the forthcoming European Parliament elections , and that this is not , as always , simply a case of good intentions .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , having carefully read Mr Surján 's work on the Guidelines for the Budget 2010 procedure , I decided to vote against the report .
I do not believe that the European Parliament 's credibility comes from promotion or from establishing links to budget items . In this way , the real motivations prompting the European institutions to act are lost sight of .
Moreover , while I agree with the principle of maximum transparency , I believe that the funds to be allocated to the various sectors should be shared out without any discrimination in terms of efficiency or results .
Sectors that have performed poorly must also be subsidised .
In fact , perhaps they are the ones that are most in need of Community institutional support .
in writing . - ( SV ) At a time when cuts are being made in healthcare , schools and social care within the public sector , savings should also be made within the EU institutions .
We believe that the budget should most definitely be cut for the Committee of the Regions and the European Economic and Social Committee .
The EU 's taxpayers would not notice any difference if a strict savings plan were to be imposed on these two institutions .
We are also opposed to the increase in staffing levels in the political groups in the European Parliament .
This is not a necessary cost given the current situation .
Opening a museum of European history , as the Bureau of the European Parliament has decided to do , is also a bad idea .
Experience shows that such a museum will be designed as propaganda for an increasingly federal EU .
We have therefore chosen to vote against this report concerning , among other things , the European Parliament 's budget for 2010 .
We welcome the fact that linguistic issues are now regarded by the EP as a ' fundamental principle ' in its priorities for the Community budget for 2010 :
' Cannot stress enough the fundamental principle that all Members should be equally provided with full and quality services allowing them to work and express themselves and to receive documents in their native language ... ' ;
' Considers that 2010 should be a year when the utmost effort must be made so that Members of all nationalities and languages are treated equally in terms of their possibility to carry out their duties and all political activity incumbent upon them in their own language if they so choose ' ;
' stresses , ... , the principle of democratic legitimacy through all its composite Members and their right to full multilingualism ; therefore considers that this budget can and should be used to work towards this goal ... '
However , we cannot forget that the proposals presented on the budget by the MEPs from the Portuguese Communist Party - which called for all the official languages of the EU to be available at meetings ( both those held within the Community institutions and external meetings held as part of Parliament 's work ) - have successively been rejected over the years .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I do not endorse Mr Maňka 's report on the guidelines for the 2010 budget procedure , and I therefore voted against it .
In point 5 of the motion for a resolution , in fact , mention is made of a complete adaptation in view of Croatia 's accession to the European Union . However , as is written in the resolution , in situations such as these , with 27 Member States and one potential entrant , it should be the newest arrival that adapts , not the rest of the countries .
Furthermore , I do not feel able to support the extension for a second year of the pilot programme on enhanced cooperation between the EU 's Bureau and the Committee on Budgets , since I do not consider it worthwhile or effective .
in writing . - This report addresses significant weaknesses in the current regulatory framework .
In particular , I have been concerned about the lack of accountability of EU-based companies trading in the UK which are able to advertise in the UK , but do not need to apply for a licence .
Indeed , the UK vice tax has only encouraged this worrying pattern of companies establishing themselves overseas and thus avoiding the need to apply for a UK licence .
I therefore welcome this report , which should go some way to tackling this problem .
in writing . - Consumer protection is of paramount importance to all Member States .
It is also an area in which Member States can cooperate to ensure protection for consumers availing of cross-border services .
Mrs Schaldemose 's report on the integrity of online gambling is an example of how a pragmatic , cooperative approach from Member States can result in an approach that has consumer protection at its core .
The report recognises that the integrity of online gambling is best dealt with by recognising the principle of subsidiarity in this area and allowing Member States to regulate the industry themselves .
However , it calls for cooperation and coordination on combating fraud and crime and addressing social and public order problems such as addiction and personal data protection .
Central to the report is the safeguarding of the integrity of sports and sporting events .
It is absolutely essential that sport is first and foremost recognised for its social , entertainment and health values and that these values are in no way threatened or manipulated for financial gain .
Online gambling is enjoyed by many European citizens .
We must ensure that these citizens are protected and I believe that Mrs Schaldemose 's report is an important step in that regard .
in writing . - I support a more open gaming environment in Europe .
For too long now , national monopolies controlled by governments have prevented new entrants from offering gaming services in Europe .
Online gambling offers a new way for consumers to enjoy their gaming experience .
I have no problem with responsible gamblers participating in online gaming activity offered by responsible operators .
This report seeks to ensure a high level of consumer protection and to ensure a fair and transparent gaming environment in cyberspace .
It is also important in my view to take all reasonable steps to prohibit minors from gaming online .
Of course , there are concerns about the social effects of gambling and these are concerns that I share .
However , I think that in the past , far too much responsibility has been put on gaming companies and not enough on individuals .
Ultimately , the decision on whether or not to gamble is a personal decision and the individual must be responsible for the consequences .
Mr President , I am very satisfied with the result of the vote on Mrs Schaldemose 's report on online gambling .
It shows that the vast majority of Members of Parliament consider gambling to be an economic activity of a very special nature , to which the rules of the internal market cannot be applied exclusively .
The social impact of gambling and its effect on health , as well as the risks of crime associated with it and its special cultural aspects , must all be taken into account .
That also applies to the many studies that show that the Internet as a tool multiplies these risks .
Obviously , no one single authority alone could control online gambling throughout the whole of Europe .
Mrs Schaldemose 's report also mentions the positive effects of gambling , which I think it is very important to preserve .
In many countries in Europe , the proceeds from these games amount to significant sums of money that go , for example , to the arts , science , youth work and hospitals .
Thousands of NGOs benefit from the funding that they provide , besides which gambling games are the biggest source of income for EU-wide sports organisations and , in particular , grassroots sports activities .
The fact that a majority in Parliament are keen to preserve the current national laws on gambling policy and do not simply want to replace them with a code of practice , which would afford consumers far less protection , does not mean that the market should not be liberalised .
It simply means that liberalisation has to be on the Member State 's own terms .
Furthermore , if there is a desire to maintain national monopolies , the system must be non-discriminatory and legally justifiable .
in writing . - I voted against the report on the integrity of online gambling as I believe the alternative motion , which was rejected by the plenary , would have better reflected the up-to-date position in the online gambling sector .
I share concerns about citizens being ripped off and the worries about gambling addiction , but note that gambling is controlled in the majority of Member States in order to protect citizens against gambling addiction and fraud and to prevent money laundering .
We need to prevent problem gambling and under-age gambling , in addition to fighting fraud and crime .
I believe that the alternative resolution would have addressed those concerns more effectively .
Consumer protection is vitally important to all the Member States .
This is also an area where cooperation between Member States is desperately needed , particularly from the point of view of cross-border services .
This report on online gambling shows that a pragmatic approach , based on cooperation , can ensure that consumer protection is at the heart of European Union policies .
This report recognises that the best approach for dealing with gambling matters on the Internet is to recognise the principle of subsidiarity in this sector and to leave regulatory matters to each individual Member State .
That said , the report recognises that it is through cooperation and coordination that European Union Member States will best be able to combat fraud , crimes and social problems .
At the heart of the report is the importance of sport and the need to preserve its integrity and honesty .
The social and cultural value of sporting matters must be protected and it must be ensured that sport is not mismanaged for the sake of money or for other similar reasons .
Many people in the European Union enjoy online gambling .
We must ensure that these people are safe from harm on line .
Mr President , I voted in favour of Mrs Schaldemose 's report on the integrity of online gambling .
I am firmly convinced that in this sector , which , incidentally , generates a very important source of income for sports organisations , there must be complete transparency that safeguards public and consumer interests .
Lastly , I feel that uniform legislation , and not diverse legislation such as that currently in force , can be very helpful in order to avoid online gambling being signalled as a social problem .
in writing . - Unfortunately , I was unable to participate in the votes on Christel Schaldemose 's report on the integrity of online gambling .
However , I would like to use this opportunity to agree with the rapporteur , as the report points out several important and dangerous aspects concerning online gambling .
In 2004 , online gambling accounted for roughly 5 % of the total gambling market in the EU and the numbers have been increasing rapidly over the past few years .
It is important to understand that different illegal activities such as credit card fraud , minors having access to gambling , match fixing , etc. are currently inevitable parts of online gambling .
Also , the number of people addicted to gambling is likely to rise , as for many , online gambling is very convenient .
The impact of online gambling , as the rapporteur points out correctly , has not yet been examined in depth .
Therefore , in order to protect citizens , it is crucially important that all Member States perform intensive research on the effects of online gambling as well as improve the monitoring and regulation of gambling markets .
in writing . - The Schaldemose report on the integrity of online gambling sets out Member States ' responsibilities in regulating their gambling markets so as to protect vulnerable consumers , especially children , to tackle crime and to protect sporting events from risks such as match-fixing .
Gambling was removed from the Services Directive by MEPs on account of its special status , and there is clearly no willingness to create EU-level legislation .
Labour MEPs therefore strongly support the report 's call for Member States to regulate their gambling markets to protect consumers .
The report also makes clear that such regulation must be proportionate and non-discriminatory , as set out in the EU Treaties .
As such , Labour MEPs believe that the UK Gambling Act represents Treaty-compliant legislation that aims to ensure fair and open access to gambling services , while preventing crime and protecting children and the vulnerable .
A number of Member States are currently reviewing their legislation on gambling to ensure it is compliant with the EU Treaties .
Labour MEPs emphasise that authorities across the EU must remain vigilant and cooperate against all risks of crime , match-fixing , and threats to young people and the vulnerable from all forms of gambling .
Labour MEPs welcome continued efforts by reputable operators of online gambling services to take action to ensure such concerns are met .
The operation of gambling and betting is not the same as other economic activities , as some in this House believe .
In its case law , the European Court of Justice has confirmed that it is Member States themselves who determine what level of protection they consider appropriate to protect their citizens against the hazards associated with gambling .
The subsidiarity applicable here means that Member States must be able to control and to regulate their gambling markets in accordance with their traditions and cultures in order to protect consumers against the hazards of addiction , fraud and money laundering .
In view of the additional risks involved in online gambling , I am convinced that national legislation cannot be replaced by pan-European self-regulation of the gambling industry .
Therefore , I join the substantial majority of my colleagues on the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection who believe that a purely internal market approach to gambling is not applicable .
I have therefore chosen to wholeheartedly endorse the Schaldemose report .
Mr President , I voted in favour of Maria Petre 's report on ensuring food quality .
I would , however , like to express my concern that the average consumer is unaware of the difference between protected designations of origin ( PDO ) and protected geographical indications ( PGI ) .
I believe that conducting an information campaign on this issue is essential .
Member States need to promote those quality assurance systems which are already well known to European consumers .
These systems should not be made uniform or merged into one .
In order to ensure minimum standards for quality certification in the Community , they must be assessed and recognised on a European scale .
Therefore , the Commission must have an office which would be responsible for approving and allowing the use of these systems on a European scale and which would ensure uniform and effective control at European and national levels .
I voted for this report as I agree with the introduction of a mandatory indication of the place of production of primary products based on a country of origin label , reflecting consumer desire to know more about the origins of the product they are buying .
A system of this kind should also be applied to processed food products , indicating the origin of the main ingredients and raw materials , and specifying their place of origin as well as the place of final processing .
in writing . - ( DA ) The Danish Liberal Party 's MEPs , Anne E. Jensen , Karin Riis-Jørgensen and Niels Busk , have voted in favour of Mrs Petre 's own-initiative report on ensuring food quality , having weighed up the pros and cons and because there is only an overall vote .
We feel able to support most of what is contained in the report , although there are also several things that we do not fully support .
in writing . - I was disappointed to have to abstain on this report , which should have followed up on the Commission 's Green Paper in looking at how farmers across Europe get the maximum benefit in the marketplace from the high standard of their produce .
It does focus on important issues such as country of origin labelling , developing the organic market , where European products are the finest in the world , and exploiting the strengths of farming in Europe to give our farmers an advantage when taking their products to market - and this part is welcome .
Unfortunately , however , the report has been hijacked by the protectionist elements in the Committee on Agriculture , and particularly by those who seek to justify massive market-distorting CAP subsidies and who want to make it harder for produce from third world countries to be imported to the EU .
Allow me to congratulate my colleague , Mrs Petre , for this excellent report .
There are a few points which we need to bear in mind when we are talking about European product quality :
1 .
Implementation of ' qualified market access ' offers a solution for guaranteeing that the products available to European consumers , whether produced domestically or imported , meet the same standards .
2 .
The costs incurred by European producers in guaranteeing food safety and demands linked to cross-compliance , which should be covered by CAP funds .
3 .
The promotion of specifically European agricultural and food products .
As I also requested in the report on the amendment of Regulation No 3 / 2008 , the European Union 's cofinancing rate must be increased .
At the same time , however , we need to simplify the administrative procedures for the system of Traditional Speciality Guaranteed and offer better protection for products with a geographical indication or designation of origin .
I hope that the recommendations we are going to adopt will be implemented as soon as possible by the European Commission and Member States because we cannot afford to waste time in such circumstances when European citizens are being hit by the effects of an extremely serious economic recession .
Despite its good intentions , the report continues and even extends the policies which are at the root of problems experienced by many small producers , particularly in Portugal .
Invoking what they call ' promoting the quality of European agricultural products ' , they increase production costs for those who are already having difficulty keeping themselves in production .
This is especially true for small producers , as is the case for many small cheese dairies producing Serra da Estrela cheese of undeniable quality .
It is unacceptable that producers should have to meet new requirements in order to continue producing , without the financial compensation that is due to them , whilst also having to support the costs of the ' official control ' requirements .
Contrary to the claims made , production of real quality is at serious risk of disappearing .
Applying harmonised production and marketing standards to both small producers and agro-industry is unacceptable .
The application of these standards is destroying the diversity , in terms of production and of culture , of countries like Portugal .
It is important to reverse this trend and promote production and consumption at the local level .
Agriculture must be considered a sensitive activity , incompatible with this model of commercial liberalisation that is environmentally unsustainable and poses enormous risks to human health .
I agree with the report as I consider the reduction of bureaucracy and of the complexity of the standards system to be essential . That way , regulation and quality control for agricultural products will become easier .
The result of this simplification would be a reduction in administrative costs for public entities .
I also welcome the special attention given to designations of origin and the call on the Commission to ensure that this issue is included on the World Trade Organisation 's agenda .
We cannot but endorse the intentions behind this report : to guarantee the quality of European food products , the competitiveness of producers , simple but comprehensive information for consumers regarding the origin of products , compliance with designations of origin and quality labels , a better definition of traditional or organic products , and so on .
The rapporteur is quite right to stress that we need to stipulate that agricultural and food products imported into Europe must meet the same standards as are required of European producers , which is unfortunately not always the case at present .
He is also quite right in his wish to implement conditional access to our markets .
There are , however , still some problems that need to be solved , including that of unfair intra-Community competition , where one Member State lays down stricter standards than are provided for at Community level , primarily for reasons of public health or environmental protection .
In such cases , the State must , whether you like it or not , be able to apply the same rules as you are calling for at WTO level .
Another problematic aspect is consistency with this Parliament 's environmental concerns - we should be concentrating on reducing food miles ( eating locally produced , seasonal products ) rather than on a necessarily imperfect adaptation to the global market .
in writing . - ( SV ) This report , which does not form part of any legislative process , recommends a number of costly proposals , such as an EU agency for product quality and new sales promotion and sales supporting measures within agriculture .
We would also like to point out that this report contains wordings that could lead to a more protectionist policy for agricultural goods on the part of the EU .
As usual , the June List observes that , in this situation , it is fortunate that the European Parliament does not have powers of codecision in respect of the EU 's agricultural policy .
Otherwise , the EU would fall into the trap of protectionism and of heavy subsidies to various groups within agriculture .
In the vote , I was in favour of Maria Petre 's report on ensuring food quality .
The issue of harmonising and mutually recognising standards with regard to food is very important for ensuring human health .
Awareness of the relationship between the incidence of various diseases and the quality of food consumed is becoming increasingly common today .
Only , the term ' healthy food ' does itself appear to be paradoxical .
Can anything that is not healthy to humans be described as ' food ' ?
The quality of food products has a fundamental significance to the safety of food for our citizens .
These products must meet clearly-defined criteria based on current knowledge and the principles of hygiene , and these criteria should also contribute towards protecting the environment and respect the principles of the proper treatment of animals for slaughter .
Food products must also be properly packed , transported and stored .
To ensure good food quality , consumers must also be given complete information on the products they buy , the ingredients , any genetic modifications , the place of manufacture , the storage conditions , how to prepare it and the use by date .
The rapporteur favours the introduction of a European service responsible for certification and food quality at Commission level to ensure that minimum certification requirements are met .
This would provide a uniform system of control at EU and Member State level .
On the basis of an earlier resolution , the report also favours the introduction of a special quality mark for European products .
The global financial and food crisis means that people are saving on consumption , and that means a rise in market share for discounters .
In addition , we are laying down restrictive production regulations for our domestic food producers and promoting quality seals and similar schemes .
At the same time , we are importing products that do not meet domestic quality standards and for which compliance with such standards cannot be checked .
This means that domestic farmers find themselves severely squeezed and we must ensure that , especially in this difficult situation , the rate of farms going under does not escalate and that we do not lose our capability , across the EU , of self-sufficiency in food production .
People who are prepared to pay for the quality of their food can all too easily lose their ability to keep on top of what is what amongst the jumble of quality seals and symbols - not everything that is labelled as ' organic ' is produced in the domestic market and not everywhere where a particular country is given as the country of origin do all the ingredients actually come from that country .
There is some playing fast and loose here , and food scandals and labelling scams are repeatedly being uncovered .
Ultimately , consumers have to be able to rely on labelling .
This initiative appears to be taking us in that direction , and that is why I have voted for it .
The report which my colleague , Maria Petre , presented to us today contains a series of recommendations which I confidently support .
These range from simplifying the administration involved in guaranteeing quality standards and reducing the financial burdens on producers to supporting traditional products , as well as those with a designation of origin or geographical indication .
At a time when we are facing a serious economic crisis , it is our duty to take measures to support European farmers and processors and ensure that consumers have access to the best products at the most favourable prices .
I believe that we must ensure that we provide consumers with correct information about the origin of products in order to support European agriculture .
However , we must not confuse these provisions relating to a European quality mark with protectionism aimed at blocking access to the Community market .
I rather think that the purpose of introducing this mark must be to promote European products and the benefits which they enjoy over those from third countries and to provide European consumers with better information .
At the same time , a system recognising the origin of products will help reduce fears about ' contaminated products ' .
Mr President , I voted in favour of Mrs Petre 's report on ensuring food quality and harmonisation of the relevant standards .
I believe that the subject is extremely important , since food quality has an ever-increasing effect on the quality of life of European citizens .
Indeed , the EU needs to insist that all food products comply with its production standards , especially as regards health and safety .
In addition , the Union must ensure a level playing field between locally produced and third country products .
Lastly , I share the rapporteur 's opinion when she states that , with regard to PGIs ( protected geographical indications ) , PDOs ( protected designations of origin ) and GTSs ( guaranteed traditional specialities ) , Community technical assistance should be provided for the implementation of the above systems in the Member States and the related evaluation of the products concerned .
in writing . - ( SV ) I chose not to support Mrs Petre 's report on promoting and increasing the labelling of food .
The report contained good proposals with regard to the simplification of the rules and shorter handling times .
However , these were , in my opinion , outweighed by protectionist wordings on conditional market access and the desire to set up a supranational authority for product quality .
When food is produced on the basis of the profit criterion rather than to satisfy grassroots requirements and the production and sale of food are concentrated in fewer and fewer hands and are determined by food multinationals and cartels ( choices which characterise the policy of the EU and of the governments of the Member States ) , then food can be neither cheap nor of good quality .
The supposed return to quality food is not intended to increase farmers ' incomes or satisfy grassroots requirements .
It is intended to increase the competitiveness and profits of the multinationals , to increase the exploitation of rural manpower , to concentrate land ownership even further and to control production .
The introduction and cultivation of GMOs and the series of food scandals show that the quality and safety of food in the EU are subordinate to the interests of big business .
The classification of food on the basis of quality is food differentiation on the basis of class in keeping with the market rationale ' first-class food for high incomes and second-class food for working class families .
Farmers of small and medium-sized holdings have every interest in opposing the CAP and the EU and their being sold off to big business , as well as in joining the Greek Communist Party and the Workers ' Rally , the workers and the self-employed in the social alliance , to overturn the sovereignty and power of the monopolies .
Updating the Competition Policy is a particularly important factor in the preparation of the new security structure and operation of the EU competition policy .
The essential elements of this process are cooperation between national competition institutions and coordination through the European Competition Network .
The European Parliament has expressed serious concern that without an effective ECN , updating the policy would , in essence , really only be a renationalisation of the competition policy , and that would obviously undermine the idea of assuring uniform competition policy throughout the EU .
Based on the criteria of flexibility and pragmatism , the 2006 and 2007 reports give a favourable evaluation of the effectiveness and development of the ECN 's work .
The efforts to fund training and judicial cooperation between state judges to interpret EU competition law and ensure its implementation are also welcome .
in writing . - This report highlights the importance of the free trade and fair competition principle and affirms the importance of what was signed in the Treaty of Rome .
We must ensure effective anti-trust measures so that we will be protected against restrictive trade abuse .
We voted against the report because they did not even accept a proposal relating to concern about the abuses of market domination by big business , particularly with regard to the big supermarket chains .
These abuse their purchasing power to force down prices paid to suppliers in the European Union and in third countries .
Nor did they demonstrate the necessary determination to investigate the impact that the concentration of the supermarket sector is having on small businesses , suppliers , workers and consumers .
In particular , they failed to evaluate the abuses of purchasing power which may follow from such concentration .
The resolution adopted continues the pattern of intervention in defence of competition and against public services .
It follows in the footsteps of the notorious Bolkestein Directive , always insisting on the need to comply with the rules of the internal market .
Also , regrettably , even as it speaks of the crisis and the difficulties faced by economies , it insists on the Commission being vigilant so that competition is not called into question .
In other words , faced with the crisis caused by neoliberal capitalism , the solution is more of the same .
That is unacceptable .
Mr President , I voted in favour of Mr Evans 's reports on competition policy 2006 and 2007 .
Huge progress has been made in the field of competition over recent years .
Indeed , if we think of merger control between enterprises and state aid ( a problem that became of prime importance following the financial and economic crisis on the markets ) , the Commission has done an increasingly large amount of work .
That is why I share the rapporteur 's view when he says that it is necessary to modernise the legal and institutional framework in the field .
in writing . - Given the state of the economic crisis which grips the European Union and which has a global reach , it was important for Parliament to find agreement .
This report has finally found a route to agree between ourselves in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
Obviously , concerns about state intervention are of the highest ranking but , given the nature of the damage caused by under-consumption and a shrinking manufacturing base , some relief at the level of government expenditure is necessary .
in writing . - Small businesses are the backbone of the European economy , accounting for 98 % of all European businesses and employing up to 60 % of the EU 's workers .
The European Commission is to be applauded in its initiatives to date and its continuing work aimed at eliminating red tape for small businesses .
Ms Herczog 's report recognises the work done by the Commission and calls for further steps in this direction .
While I certainly support many of the comments contained in the report on the Small Business Act , I was very disappointed that the report that emerged from the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy contained a paragraph calling for a common consolidated corporate tax base .
I would have hoped that there would be global recognition at this stage that the CCCTB proposal is badly thought out and ill-advised .
This issue is of such importance to Ireland , especially in these economic times , that I had to vote against this proposal .
Doing so will have no adverse affects on the commendable work that is being done for small business but will send out a strong message that we must take a stand against unproductive , unwieldy and ill-conceived proposals that will be of no benefit to the European economy .
in writing . - This act proposes various measures , some of which might be of assistance to small businesses , but whose overall effect is to promote EU control , churning of the population , feminist agendas and infiltration of businesses by EU officials ' on work experience ' .
These elements make it impossible for UKIP to support this proposal .
The global financial crisis and slow economic growth are having a negative impact on the level of entrepreneurship .
Therefore , we welcome the following measures embedded in the SBA , the implementation of which would be most effective for economic growth : to create the most favourable conditions for SMEs to obtain funding ; to simplify business transfer conditions ; to provide honest entrepreneurs who have experienced bankruptcy an opportunity to start a business a second time .
The initiative to create the most favourable conditions for SMEs to obtain funding ( risk capital , micro-credits , etc . ) is very important .
With energy and raw materials rising in price , SMEs are becoming particularly vulnerable .
Therefore , implementing the SBA strengthens the aspect of competitiveness .
Only complex measures , i.e. promoting higher standards of manufacturing processes and ecological standards for products within the EU , and popularising these same standards throughout the world , as well as enhancing supervision of the EU market , can contribute to common global challenges , such as climate change and diminishing fossil fuel reserves .
in writing . - Every initiative that supports SMEs or improves their conditions should be applauded , and this report has many valid arguments that will be of great value to SMEs throughout Europe .
We must capitalise on the major benefits of the current progress and ensure that we include the creation of a superior operational business environment for SMEs , including a more effective regulatory culture taking root across Europe .
in writing . - This report proposes various measures , some of which might be of assistance to small businesses , but whose overall effect is to promote EU control , churning of the population , feminist agendas and infiltration of businesses by EU officials ' on work-experience ' .
These elements make it impossible for UKIP to support this proposal .
Although 99 % of the EU 's businesses are SMEs ( 23 million ) - responsible for the creation of 80 % of the new jobs in the EU in recent years - the majority of the rules normally created are aimed at the 41 000 large European companies .
This fosters obvious inequalities in terms of competitiveness .
The time has come to reverse this trend and make a commitment to the sectors of the economy in which wealth is truly created , with a policy based on rewarding merit .
This would put European SMEs on a par with their counterparts in the rest of the world .
Furthermore , because of their flexible nature , SMEs are companies that are accustomed to being at the forefront of innovation in their areas , making the Small Business Act an important step forward in realising the Lisbon Strategy .
That is why the Members representing the Portuguese Social Democratic Party ( PSD ) are supporting this report , which is , as a matter of fact , coherent with the measures proposed in Portugal by the leader of the PSD , Dr Manuela Ferreira Leite .
in writing . - The Commission 's proposal for a Small Business Act is part of a communication containing legislative proposals , guiding principles and measures to be implemented to help SMEs in Europe .
I welcome the articulation of ten guiding principles which focus on the needs and requirements of SMEs and aim to help them realise their full market potential .
The provisions for legislation that is fully aware of the needs and requirements of its intended recipients are welcome , as is the adaptation of public policy tools to the needs of SMEs .
Vitally important is the introduction of means of using the present crisis to respond to the environmental crisis by increasing efficiency , through thorough environmental management systems .
As the Rapporteur on EU-ETS , I am aware , as I hope we all are , of the need to act and act promptly if we hope to solve this challenge .
While I agree with much of this report , I am wary of proposals for a corporate consolidated tax base and voted against accordingly .
Despite all the big talk and apparent good intentions of defending SMEs , the report has other objectives , namely : encouraging free competition and the internal market or , in other words , supporting the large economic and financial groups ; insisting on the liberalisation of services , including public services ; and also , behind a façade of pseudo-help for small and medium-sized enterprises , aggravating the exploitation of workers .
In fact , in the name of the 91.5 % of businesses in the European Union that employed less than 10 workers in 2003 , they want better conditions in order to destroy essential public services , deregulate the labour market and call into question social and working rights .
This is neoliberalism in its most visible form .
That is why we voted against this report : in defence of real measures in support of micro , small and medium-sized enterprises , and in defence of other policies that safeguard their role and significant contribution to production in the industrial , agricultural and fishing sectors , and to employment with rights , trade and meeting the public 's basic needs .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have approved this report , which lists , in the form of desires that will no doubt remain unfulfilled for a while , the ways and means of making life easier for small businesses in the European Union .
However , I have some comments to make .
The admittedly discreet call for a kind of positive discrimination in favour of SMEs , I quote , ' owned by under-represented ethnic minorities ' is pointless , incomprehensible and completely ideological .
Access by SMEs and , in particular , local SMEs , to public procurement contracts , which the rapporteur intends to promote further , was hindered by the texts adopted 15 years ago by this very House , despite the warnings that they would have adverse effects .
These texts effectively promoted access to public procurement contracts by large companies , particularly foreign ones , that had the information and the administrative and legal resources to bid for these contracts , while local SMEs did not have those resources .
It is an extraordinarily complex business for SMEs to access existing national and European aid , due to the requirements of European legislation itself .
In short , one once again gets the impression that we are having to adopt European texts to deal with the foreseeable problems produced by other European texts .
I voted in favour of the Herczog report on the establishment of a Small Business Act .
Our SMEs are the first victims of this current economic and financial crisis , having seen the banks restrict their access to credit , and the motor driving their growth must be restarted as a matter of urgency .
Introducing a European Small Business Act will make it possible to strengthen SMEs ' competitiveness so that we can finally turn words into action .
The European Parliament has sent a clear signal to the Council and to the European Commission in order to ensure that the Small Business Act is actually implemented , namely ' priority for SMEs ' , so that these new measures can be understood and applied by all such enterprises , particularly by including the following actions : avoiding unnecessary burdens , promoting the emergence of innovative medium-sized companies beyond the Community definition of SMEs ( 250 employees ) , and making it easier for SMEs to get access to funding and public procurement contracts so as to increase their growth potential .
I nevertheless find it regrettable that this action plan is not a legally binding instrument .
I voted in favour of Edit Herczog 's report on the Small Business Act , as I regard it as important legislation which affects the smallest organisms of the economy , which are currently responsible for around 100 million jobs in the EU .
They account for almost 99 % of all enterprises in the EU .
In this context , and because the present crisis threatens severe economic disruption , we need to implement legal regulations at EU level which will help these enterprises to function .
This should , in particular , cover issues such as the transfer of ownership in enterprises ( particularly in the case of the illness or retirement of the owner ) and for harmonised time limits for the payment of transactions ( to avoid ' credit crunches ' ) .
The document also accentuates the importance to these enterprises of innovation , scientific research , patents and inventions and protecting intellectual property , and e-commerce .
SMEs should also be assured access to sources of finance , including European funds and credits .
A separate , but no less important issue , is reducing the red tape which plagues many SMEs .
Also worthy of mention are the ten principles to guide policy towards small enterprises , both at EU and at Member State level .
I also believe that underlining the need to support and promote the activity of SMEs at a cross-border level in the internal market is essential .
The Commission 's communication on the Small Business Act takes on a particular significance in the current circumstances , as it sets out the basic principles that should underlie the development and implementation of policies , at both European Union and national level , in order to create equal conditions for all SMEs operating within Europe .
On a more operational level , it also includes a package of more than 50 separate measures , including four legislative proposals that translate these principles into action .
Support for SMEs must be a top priority , particularly in this period of serious economic crisis .
Investment by SMEs is one of the key factors in the keenly awaited recovery .
Given that most of these actions fall within the competence of the Member States , we need to find ways of involving the Member States and Community bodies in order to guarantee that SMEs can gain added value from the measures affecting them .
Certain amendments tabled by my group aim to make the ' think small first ' principle an essential part of all future legislation .
I also support the idea of having a specific budget line for SMEs ...
( The explanation of vote was cut short pursuant to Rule 163 of the Rules of Procedure )
in writing . - Paragraph 68 of this report contains a reference to a common consolidated corporate tax base , stating that there should be a common basis for company taxation .
That is something which I cannot and do not support .
Taxation is a Member State competence , not an EU one , and any reference to a CCCTB inevitably brings concerns about EU corporate tax rates , which is not something I can support .
I therefore rejected the first part of the paragraph , and because the plenary voted overall in favour of that paragraph , I voted against this report in the final vote .
If small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) are , for the first time , to be put at the heart of European legislation , it is no cause for celebration .
It is , rather , a tragedy .
2009 will , no doubt , be a year of destiny in which the survival or otherwise of thousands of SMEs will be decided .
If the big companies fold , the little ones will inevitably follow .
The much talked-about credit crunch looms large , in any case , in the contraction of the volume of credit .
What is needed here is to ensure that Basel II does not lead to the money flow to SMEs drying up definitively .
If we do want to cut red tape , the gain from simplifying a procedure - insofar as this would have any noticeable impact on a business - must not be lost again through new obstacles elsewhere .
If nothing else , tendering and public procurement must also be made more SME-friendly in order to give these companies a chance .
I voted in favour of the Small Business Act in the hope that , this time , it will , at long last , amount to more than a piece of paper specifying objectives and will actually be implemented .
Mr President , I voted in favour of Mrs Herczog 's report on the Small Business Act .
It is clear how important SMEs are within the European Union , and that is why I intend to support Mrs Herczog 's careful piece of work .
Policy , public intervention and the social environment must all meet the real needs of small enterprises , which truly form the backbone of the European Union .
That is why I agree with the report , especially with regard to the legislative proposals for the general block exemption for SMEs in respect of state aid .
in writing . - ( PT ) It is well-known that SMEs are responsible for more than 90 % of jobs in Europe .
However , the crisis that we are experiencing has already seen , or will soon see , many of their workers become unemployed .
The relaxing of Structural Fund procedures , as promoted by the Commission , is a sign that should be welcomed as positive .
The globalisation associated with the current crisis has changed many of the circumstances that served as a basis for decisions taken at European level in the past and which were , at the time , considered correct .
Taking this into account , I am convinced that , for example , some aspects of the regional and cohesion policies must be revisited .
We must also examine the current financial conditions faced by SMEs .
These are decisive , especially when they have to pay back loans at a time of economic stagnation .
I therefore support this report , since it is precisely at these moments that we must think about SMEs and their contribution to innovation , economic growth and employment .
That is why there is a need for anticyclical policies at European level .
This requires steps that are far more decisive to be taken , so as to create a truly macroeconomic policy at European level , which still does not exist .
in writing . - I welcome this report and was pleased to vote for its main text with little exception .
I cannot agree with a common consolidated corporate tax base as there is no agreement for this .
Similarly , on the issue of penalties for exceeding limits on late payments , I prefer the Late Payments Directive so as to avoid confusion .
Given that small to medium-sized businesses are the strongest element of growth in the economy , this proposal helps to strengthen the conditions for such growth .
The south-east of England should benefit from such an approach .
I voted for the European Parliament Resolution for a ' Small Business Act ' for Europe as it is very important to create better framework conditions aimed at providing an environment promoting innovation by SMEs , in particular , by introducing ways to improve the protection of intellectual property rights and to fight against fraud and counterfeiting more effectively throughout the European Union .
A combined effort is required on the part of financial institutions , the Commission and Member States to ensure SMEs ' access to finance and to offer them the possibility of consolidating their capital by reinvesting their profit in the company .
I voted for the amendment asking for immediate action to ensure that charges are not levied prior to SMEs ' commencing activities , in order to ensure that they are able to build up their own resources .
I also called for the EIB to devise new forms of financial instruments and tangible new solutions to tackle the obstacles that collateral presents to accessing credit .
I also called on Member States , in light of the current financial crisis , to encourage banks to guarantee SMEs access to credit on reasonable terms .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Common rules and standards for ship inspection and survey organisations and for the relevant activities of maritime administrations ( recast ) - Common rules and standards for ship inspection and survey organisations ( recast ) - Port State control ( recast ) - Community vessel traffic monitoring and information system - Investigation of accidents in the maritime transport sector - The liability of carriers of passengers by sea in the event of accidents - Civil liability and financial guarantees of shipowners - Compliance with flag State requirements ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report by Luis de Grandes Pascual , on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on common rules and standards for ship inspection and survey organisations and for the relevant activities of maritime administrations ( recast ) ( PE-CONS 3719 / 2008 - - ,
the report by Luis de Grandes Pascual , on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on common rules and standards for ship inspection and survey organisations ( recast ) ( PE-CONS 3720 / 2008 - - ,
the report by Dominique Vlasto , on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on port State control ( recast ) ( PE-CONS 3721 / 2008 - - ,
the report by Dirk Sterckx , on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation committee for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 2002 / 59 / EC establishing a Community vessel traffic monitoring and information system ( PE-CONS 3722 / 2008 - - ,
the report by Jaromír Kohlíček , on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing the fundamental principles governing the investigation of accidents in the maritime transport sector and amending Directives 1999 / 35 / EC and 2002 / 59 / EC ( PE-CONS 3723 / 2008 - - ,
the report by Paolo Costa , on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the liability of carriers of passengers by sea in the event of accidents ( PE-CONS 3724 / 2008 - - ,
the recommendation for second reading on the Council common position for adopting a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the insurance of shipowners for maritime claims ( 14287 / 2 / 2008 - C6-0483 / 2008 - ( rapporteur : Gilles Savary ) and
the recommendation for second reading on the Council common position for adopting a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on compliance with the flag state requirements ( 14288 / 2 / 2008 - C6-0484 / 2008 - ( rapporteur : Emanuel Jardim Fernandes ) .
Mr President , Mr Tajani , ladies and gentlemen , today , with the ratification of the Erika III package , we are bringing to a close an undertaking that began more than three years ago .
The feeling I have at this moment is certainly one of satisfaction , and I am sure that everyone who has trodden this path with me feels the same .
We are now writing a new chapter in the history of Europe , by making it an area of greater safety on our seas .
The aim of the Erika III package is to protect our seas and , as you are all well aware , its roots lie in the terrible oil slicks from the Erika and the Prestige , which caused severe damage to the coasts of southern Europe .
We have learnt the lessons from our past and realise that we have to act immediately to prevent such things from happening in that way again .
Europe must not underrate the strategic value of maritime transport to its economy : 90 % of the European Union 's foreign trade goes by sea , as does 40 % of our intra-Community trade .
That accounts for all the work that the EU has had to put into the legal framework for maritime transport over several decades .
As I say , it has not been a path strewn with roses : far from it , because , although we were all united by a common goal , the Council 's initial miserly attitude made it a difficult journey .
At the same time , to be fair , I would like to praise the firm political will shown by the French Presidency to bring such an important topic to a conclusion .
I also hardly need to stress the decisive role played by Vice-President Tajani , who gave the final push to reach consensus .
Lastly , but no less importantly for all that , I would like to highlight this Chamber 's steadfastness in upholding Europe 's interests and protecting the citizens whom we represent .
Focusing now on the topic itself , I would like to make a number of comments on each of the proposals that make up the package .
I can tell you right now that most of my concerns have been dispelled .
Ladies and gentlemen , there is one issue that gave me great cause for concern throughout the negotiations , since it touches on an essential aspect of the package .
I am talking about the independent nature of the bodies and authorities created for the purpose of adopting the best possible decisions within the shortest possible time .
I am talking specifically about the independent authority that is to be set up to make what is always a very difficult decision : whether to admit a vessel in distress into a place of refuge .
Well , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the final decision that has been adopted .
The way things stand is that each Member State will set up an independent authority with the resources and powers needed to adopt the best possible decisions in the shortest possible time .
Only once a detailed assessment of all the risks has been carried out will the authority finally decide whether to admit the vessel or to send it away .
In this respect , it is proper to acknowledge Mr Sterckx 's tenacity in carrying through this difficult undertaking .
I am also pleased at the progress made on the vessel tracking instruments , which are essential for reducing the number of risk situations .
With regard to the report by Mrs Vlasto , whom I congratulate on her excellent work , I would like to highlight the substantial improvement that will be made to the current inspection regime in Community ports , which will become more effective through being based on a risk profile .
I would also like to thank Mr Kohlíček for his willingness to enter into a dialogue and for the good work he has done .
Another aspect that I would like to highlight is the ambitious proposal in the field of passengers ' rights which , until now , have not been regulated in Community law .
This advance was due to Mr Costa 's efforts until the very last second .

With regard to the Savary and Fernandes reports , I am delighted that the Council has at last decided to abandon its obstructive position , which was not leading anywhere useful .
This change has enabled us to reach a solution , albeit a minimal one .
At any rate , I have to say I am pleased because the package is now complete .
Lastly , I will move on to my own report .
After being examined by the Council , it has been split into two legal instruments .
The key points of my report can be summarised as follows : with this fourth revision of the Community legislation regulating the activities of inspection bodies , we have succeeded in strengthening the surveillance mechanisms by creating an independent assessment committee with permanent powers and the ability to act on its own initiative .
We have also succeeded in laying down a fairer , more flexible system of sanctions that is also more effective than the one we had before , since it penalises those who do not act as they should , but it does so according to the severity of the infringement committed and the organisation 's financial means .
Finally , we have managed to make progress on the very tricky issue of recognition of classification certificates , by setting out the terms on which recognised organisations will have to recognise each other , but without endangering maritime safety , and taking the most stringent rules as our reference in order to safeguard the standards of excellence that characterise our European naval industries .
Mr President , the European Commission published its proposals on the Erika III package on 23 November 2005 , and I hope you will allow me to pay tribute at this point to the Commissioner responsible for transport at the time , Jacques Barrot , because , with this new package , he has worked very ambitiously to improve maritime safety in Europe .
The Erika III package puts the finishing touches to an overall legislative effort that has taken 10 years since the tragic shipwreck of the Erika off the coast of Brittany .
It has allowed the European Union to plug what were initially some serious loopholes , in order to become an international point of reference when it comes to maritime safety .
In the wake of these disasters , European citizens angered by such maritime disasters had the right to expect politicians to respond firmly and vigorously to put a stop to irresponsible behaviour .
Our ambition was to create an area of responsibility within which each party involved in maritime transport must take its fair share of the responsibility for its choices and actions and , where appropriate , for its errors and mistakes .
The Erika III package thus covers several stages in maritime transport , with true complementarity between the various proposals - it is an overall approach that led us to view each of our reports as forming part of an indivisible whole .
Today , when this House is being asked to give its opinion on the outcome of a conciliation procedure that will bring a conclusion to this long process - more than three years ' work - we as rapporteurs are delighted with this joint approach , which has enabled us to achieve what I believe to be a very satisfactory result .
I would like to thank my fellow rapporteurs , who have all considered this general interest before turning to their own individual interests , which has allowed us to achieve , together , a good result that none of us could have achieved individually .
With regard to my own report , Parliament has got what it wanted on almost all the important points in it , firstly because ships will be inspected not only in ports but also at anchorages , as we called for .
This is very important , because it means that ships will not be able to call at locations where they know they will be able to avoid inspections .
Next , we managed to get a very strict regime for conducting inspections : Member States will be able to cooperate to plan the inspections of a following port of call without harming the inspection of high-risk ships , and the interval between inspections of these ships must not be more than six months .
The most pleasing aspect of our negotiations with the Council , however , is that repeated bad behaviour will be punished .
Inspections in our ports may give rise to temporary access refusal measures and to bans on operating in our waters , and possibly even to a permanent ban , in other words , a definitive prohibition on entering European ports and anchorages .
This measure targets hulks .
To achieve this , there will be a tolerance limit - a threshold of unacceptability that cannot be breached , because ships issued with a definitive refusal of access to our ports or anchorages will be designated as hulks , which will have a deterrent effect .
We reached agreement with the Council on this point in conciliation , so the conciliation meeting on 8 December was very positive .
My thanks to the French Presidency of the Council and to Dominique Bussereau , because I am quite sure that it was the personal commitment and all the work done by the Presidency 's teams that have enabled us today to submit a very satisfactory result , which I call on Parliament to approve without reservation .

Mr President , Commissioner , we are finishing off a job we started 10 years ago ; I still remember clearly the indignation aroused by the accident involving the Erika in December 1999 : the speed with which Commissioner de Palacio presented proposals at that time , the cooperation of the Council - which , under pressure from public opinion , was at least partly responsible for ensuring that the first two packages were ready by June 2002 along with , among other things , my report on monitoring and a European policy for the monitoring of ships and for ports of refuge .
I also remember clearly our indignation at the Prestige disaster in November 2002 - incidentally , we were also holding a part-session here in Strasbourg at the time .
Back then , we wondered why we had adopted all those measures if things could go so badly wrong at the application stage .
Parliament played its part back then .
I would remind the House of a report by the Temporary Committee on Improving Safety at Sea , chaired by Mr Jarzembowski , in which we made it clear that , although the regulatory framework was in place at both European and international level , we still had to ensure practical application and follow-up of those rules by people on board ships , in ports and elsewhere in order to ensure that shipping was as safe as possible .
Things still went wrong in places in terms of the practical application of these rules , and the Commission responded to the questions that were asked in the European Parliament at the time with seven proposals by Commissioner Barrot .
I think that these formed a successful whole , and I also wish to thank Commissioner Tajani for following them up .
In my opinion , all this forms a successful whole .
The existing rules are improved and supplemented by two reports , one by Mr Savary and one by Mr Fernandes .
Thus , we have provided a balanced package .
I should like to say a couple of things about my report on vessel traffic monitoring .
An existing network called SafeSeaNet provides a means of exchange , enabling all Member States to talk to one another and exchange information .
All ships must be equipped with AIS , an automatic system that provides information on ships entering European waters , enabling us to locate and contain the risks .
The AIS is also there for the benefit of fishing vessels , improving safety for these vessels , too .
We insist once again - and I think that this is important - that the ship 's crew be treated fairly in case of an accident and not erroneously regarded as criminals .
We have also tightened up the arrangement for the accommodation of ships in distress .
We knew already that we needed plans , but now an authority is needed too , one that is not only involved in drawing up these plans but also takes care of their implementation .
The authority needs to have expertise , be competent to take independent decisions and be permanent in nature .
It should be already available , therefore , rather than needing to be put together in a hurry in case of an accident .
Commissioner , we are still awaiting a scheme to compensate ports of refuge for damage , but I am counting on your presenting a proposal on this at the appropriate time .
We have spent 10 years working on this , then .
This time , we are doing so without the pressure of a disaster .
I should like to thank both the Slovenian and French Presidencies , as Mrs Vlasto has already done .
I believe that no decision would have been possible if it were not for them , but I should also like to stress that Parliament has been very tenacious , and has been united in pushing through its positions on many points .
For this I wish to thank all my fellow Members who played a part , the shadow rapporteurs , the rapporteurs and everyone else .
We remember today someone who is no longer with us , but who played a huge role in bringing about this package , and that is Mr Piecyk .
I should like to express my warm thanks to him posthumously .
Ladies and gentlemen , we cannot issue a directive banning accidents , nor one declaring that there will be no more storms at sea , but I think that everything politicians can do to improve maritime safety is currently being done .
Ladies and gentlemen , maritime disasters can be the single most destructive events that occur in the transport sector .
Maritime transport has been connected ever since mythological times with a range of beliefs and traditions .
Until recently , it was managed through various sets of regulations .
Gradually , the International Maritime Organisation ( IMO ) has established clearer regulations based , among other things , on customary law .
The establishment of these rules was absolutely not an end in itself .
They have to ensure the safe transport , both of goods and passengers , and they specify the technical requirements for ships and infrastructure and the rules of navigation , inter alia .
Other regulations -among the topics recently discussed in the European Parliament - unify the minimum requirements for crew training .
Others attempt to exclude the possibility of maritime disasters occurring .
However , despite all technical measures , large-scale accidents can occur .
Until the Prestige tanker disaster , the countries of the European Union were unaware of the need for a thorough unification of accident technical investigations in the branch of maritime transport .
The inability to investigate the Prestige disaster or to identify clear causes of the accident showed the need for investigation methods to be unified .
This includes the establishment of fixed deadlines for commencing and completing investigations and a structure for the final reports .
The establishment of objective investigatory commissions clearly has a place here .
It was necessary to link the individual sections of the directive with the IMO requirements and other documents from the third maritime package and , at the same time , to use the provisions of other binding documents that are in force in the European Union , e.g. in the area of the confidentiality of personal data .
I think the conciliation procedure will manage to achieve a highly successful resolution to all of the questions that remain open , including a clear formulation of the requirement concerning decent treatment for the crews of ships involved in disasters .
The formula used here conforms to the corresponding parts of the Sterckx directive , i.e. an EU information and control system for operating ships , as my colleague has otherwise briefly mentioned .
In conclusion , I would like to express my thanks for the collegiate approach to the task shown by the amendment proposal authors , for the very amenable attitude of the European Commission staff and of the individual countries holding the presidency , i.e. Germany , Slovenia and France , who participated in the work .
A major contribution to the quality of the text was also made by the specialist assistants .
I received support in the first phase of the work , for example , from Hannes Kugi , among others , and in the conciliation procedure from the remarkably tireless Katrin Huber .
It is thanks also to them that the resulting directive is a practical and usable document which can only be recommended for the attention of the specialist public .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this evening , in this session , we are concluding a lengthy piece of work and I believe that we should all consider ourselves satisfied with the results achieved .
We should be satisfied for a variety of reasons , which are those that concern the Union as a whole , because it is clear that allowing the European Union to create for itself regional regulatory areas where international standards already exist to govern them , and to come between the Member States and international organisations in defining rules , is something that must only be done when necessary .
Yet it is clear that it was necessary .
Unfortunately , the incidents that set the process in motion made it clear .
The result achieved is a result that , I believe , cannot satisfy everyone , in the sense that it is an honourable compromise of a lengthy piece of work , which has seen all the institutions involved - the Commission , Parliament and the Council - play their part , with each representing the interests they are appointed to represent , so to speak .
This ensures that the whole sector and the whole framework of maritime safety have today taken a step forward .
After all , my colleagues and I have had the honour and the opportunity to tackle more specific problems .
I had the responsibility and pleasure of dealing with the liability of carriers , in the event of accidents involving passengers on board .
I must , of course , admit that , as always , the result falls short of our stated ambitions , ambitions that sometimes even seemed like they might be achieved .
The ambition was to immediately extend cover and protection to everyone who gets on board a ship , whether in international waters , national waters or on rivers .
However , the reality of the situation , so to speak , required that the scope be partially reduced .
I am aware , let us say , but I cannot fail to point out that something is missing from this set of rules , owing to the fact that many ships that travel indiscriminately between rivers and the sea are not covered in this way and , certainly , this is a point that should be covered somehow .
I am sure that the Commission will make provisions along these lines as soon as possible .
We set , however , a rather long period to ensure that voyages in domestic waters are also covered .
This problem regarding the length of time is a problem of transition periods , and perhaps it is an issue that we underestimated .
I am afraid that the risk we run is that they are too long and that we will therefore have to wait too long for this .
It is better , however , that they are there , rather than not having changed anything .
The other main discussion point - and , still , the point we have reached - is that this protection begins at a certain time .
Certainly , we can now tell our fellow citizens that when they get on board a ship they are covered , in basic terms , from the end of 2012 , irrespective of how they travel .
To sum up , we have , also from this point of view , enabled all citizens to feel a little more European , since the same cover will apply in any sea , in any location , for any ship .
Mr President , Commissioner , here we are at the end of a legislative marathon that , as has been mentioned , has taken ten years and that , as we were reminded in a debate this morning , has been given the inappropriate name of ' Erika III ' .
It is inappropriate because , after the Erika , there was the Prestige ; after the Prestige , there was the Tricolor ; and , after the Tricolor , there were unfortunately plenty of other maritime disasters both in European waters and beyond .

Above all , though , it is inappropriate because , as Mr Sterckx pointed out , this is cool legislation , for the first time - in other words , it is free of the passions , excesses and polemics that take over in the wake of disasters such as the Erika and the Prestige .

I think it is very much to the credit of Mr Barrot and the Commission that they have proposed it , but it was also a formidably difficult matter .
The Member States are not exactly inclined to legislate in fields like this when nothing serious has happened ; sometimes , on the other hand , they go overboard with the legislation when there are accidents .
In any event , this really is a major piece of legislation , since it contains seven texts .
It aims to make the European maritime space - or rather , that of the Member States - one of the safest in the world .
This is perfectly justified given that it is also one of the busiest in the world and , in geographical terms , one of the most complicated in the world .
We have a number of straits , including the Bosphorus , Gibraltar and Pas-de-Calais - through which 800 commercial ships pass every day - which are among the largest ports on the planet .
We therefore had a lot of work to do , not , unfortunately , to ensure that there are no more accidents - life will always be random - but so that we could be sure that we had done our best to prevent them , and also to punish the causes of any such accidents .
The structure of this package is simple : it is a virtuous circle , in which each link in the transport chain - from the port state to the insurer , via the charterer , the classification society and the flag state - is responsible for its own actions and in some way applies pressure - or at least that is what we are betting on - to clean up transport conditions and to ensure that they are using a responsible transporter that complies with the standards .
Thinking about it , moreover , perhaps it would have been worth basing our model , in terms of its broad principles and structure , on what we are trying to do in the field of finance : The financial ratings agencies have been just as inadequate as the maritime classification societies .
Certain Member States accommodate flags of convenience , or tax havens as they are known in the field of finance .
Certain operators are not wanted , and are subject to blacklisting or bans in the maritime field .
This is , then , a quite exemplary piece of legislation and , moreover , one that fits into the framework of the IMO at international level .
I would also say that , in political terms , this is a truly remarkable success for the Community , because the link between the Commission and Parliament has made it possible to produce a very complicated text and piece of legislation about which the Member States were very reticent .
I would like to thank Mr Tajani and the Commission .
I would also like to thank the French Presidency , because I think that Mr Bussereau realised that this could be something very important during the French Presidency , and I would like to thank all of my fellow Members , because everyone here knows that we made use of subterfuge and magic tricks to get to this point .
We have only managed to bring in this maritime package in as much as we have been united , and have shown solidarity to such an extent that certain fellow Members have , so to speak , inherited some stowaways , such as my text and that of Mr Fernandes , which the Council did not want .
That , ladies and gentlemen , is why we have succeeded .
I would have liked to go into the details of my report , but I think I will have some time to speak at the end , which will give me the opportunity to do so .
( Applause )
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , discussion of the Erika III maritime safety package is drawing to a close .
This process is more than three years old and , during that time , we have argued strongly for more safety for passengers , oceans , seas and maritime routes .
As a Portuguese and a Madeiran , it is thought that I was especially committed to this project and its main goals : ensuring that Member States comply consistently with their obligations as members of the International Maritime Organisation ( IMO ) , adopt that organisation 's conventions and fully apply their mandatory provisions .
The negotiation process was difficult .
For Parliament , the Erika III package was always a package and never a collection of cobbled together measures .
At the time of first reading , Parliament adopted some amendments .
These included the obligation for the flag state to ensure that inspectors and investigators have the correct training and to create capacities for assessment , approval and authorisation of ship and equipment building , the obligation for Member States to obtain documentary evidence of ships ' compliance with international standards - if a ship is not newly built , the Member State is obliged to liaise with the previous flag state and ask it to pass on the necessary documents and data - and the maintenance of a fleet database , which must include the main technical information on each ship , including infringements of IMO conditions .

At that time , we reached political agreements on six of the eight proposals .
My own proposal and that of Mr Savary remained to be agreed .
We have now reached agreement on how these two proposals also can be included in the final text of the Erika III package .
Thanks to Parliament and its perseverance , to the Slovene and , especially , the French Presidencies - whom I thank - and , finally , to the common will of us all , we can now conclude this third maritime safety package .
It is important to highlight the ratification of international conventions using the national method in this process .
That was a position which I supported out of respect for the various ratification systems in existence in the various Member States .
Whilst waiting for the IMO audit scheme to become mandatory , Member States have to subject their maritime authorities to such an audit and publish the results .
Member States will put in place a quality management system for their maritime authorities , which is certified in accordance with international standards .
Before authorising a ship to fly their respective flag , Member States have to check that it complies with international rules .
Member States have to make sure that ships which fly their flag and have been detained in the context of a port state inspection are brought into conformity with the relevant IMO conventions .
When a Member State 's flag appears on the blacklist or the grey list of the Paris Memorandum of Understanding on Port State Control for two consecutive years , it has to submit a report on the reasons for the poor performance to the Commission .
In parallel with the common position , Member States will confirm in a joint declaration their commitment to ratify the main international conventions on maritime safety before 1 January 2012 , apply the IMO Flag State Code and the related audit scheme for maritime authorities , and encourage the IMO to make these two instruments mandatory worldwide .
To conclude , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the adoption of this third maritime safety package is a significant victory in the European legislative process .
The Commission , the Council and the European Parliament have proposed , debated , come to agreement on and accepted a text that improves the lives of citizens and businesses , promotes better security on the seas and oceans and prepares our future .
My participation in this process was a great honour .
When we vote on this package shortly , we will be paying tribute to the victims of all the past or recent maritime tragedies : from the Prestige to the Erika , and from Bolama to Estonia .
We will also be helping to avoid or reduce the consequences of similar events in the future .

Mr President , today we have completed a difficult task , a hard road that the Parliament , Council and Commission have trodden together , beset by difficulties to be overcome , technical problems and some not inconsiderable conflict .
Now I would like to address not only all my fellow members in this Chamber , who are about to put the final seal on our work to introduce a new maritime package , but also all the European Union citizens that you represent .
On the eve of the European elections , concluding this difficult task means sending out a strong message from the institutions to all European citizens .
The job of the European institutions is to impose rules in response to issues raised by the public .
When they have to , they can overcome difficulties and reach an agreement for the greater good of the half a billion Europeans who live within our borders .
They are capable of sending out a message to guarantee safety .
They are capable of sending out a message to protect the environment .
They are capable of sending out a message to defend the rights of passengers .
They are capable of sending out a message to protect companies and ensure the rules are respected .
Because , in Europe , we traditionally base our legal system on cast-iron legal certainties , introducing new rules to the maritime sector means again giving European citizens rules , rules that they can respect , rules that can improve conditions in the transport system ; better conditions for this important sector that affects our seas .
This is the reason I wanted to stress the importance of your vote over this package because , over and above its actual contents , it represents a political message sent out by the European institutions .
The scope of this decision transcends our immediate needs , transcends the issues we are dealing with , that you have decided to turn into rules with the consent of the Commission and the Council .
I would like to reiterate : this is a political choice , a message we are sending out to European citizens to have faith in their institutions , because they are able to tackle problems and resolve them .
So I certainly want to thank the Commission staff that made it possible for first Mr Barrot and then myself to work as effectively as possible .
I want to thank the French Presidency and the Slovenian Presidency .
I want to thank Mrs Bussereau for all the work she put in during the knottiest stage of the negotiations , and I also want to stress the important work done by all the rapporteurs , the Committee on Transport and Tourism and Parliament as a whole .



My thanks also to Mr de Grandes Pascual , to Mrs Vlasto , to Mr Sterckx , to Mr Kohlíček , to the Chairman , Mr Costa , to Mr Savary - whom I thank once again for his work - to Mr Fernandes for his contribution and his ability to ultimately close the negotiations by overcoming even partisan or entrenched attitudes in the attempt to give the public some tangible answers .
Our challenge was to consolidate European legislative instruments to fight illegal shipping and prevent maritime accidents and the pollution of our seas .
We must now use all the maritime transport regulatory instruments at our disposal to prevent the recurrence of the accidents that spurred us to action .
These instruments firstly concern the Flag State , which bears primary responsibility for maritime safety , and a political line has now been drawn .
All European Flag States must , without exception , be on the white list and be in possession of instruments designed for this purpose .
A consolidated framework for European accreditation of classification companies will also allow us more effective control of our shipping .
Other devices will be applied to the Port State .
Certain ships and shipping companies must no longer be welcome in our waters because they do not meet minimum safety regulations .
Coastal states are subject to yet another set of measures : effective monitoring of ships over short and long distances represents an essential preventive tool .
Reinforced rules on the accommodation of ships in distress in a place of refuge will make sure we can prevent shipping accidents from turning into environmental disasters .
We must act to prevent whilst also taking responsibility for the consequences of accidents and learning lessons from them .
Shipping companies must take out adequate third party and passenger liability insurance policies .
A common investigatory framework will also provide us with optimum feedback on accidents so we can learn from them .
It goes without saying that risk cannot be removed altogether from maritime transport , as it is from other sectors , but it is the duty of the law maker , the duty of whoever represents the public , to do their best to limit these risks as far as possible .
So I believe that this is our common goal .
I believe that we have made a step forward that is important by any standards .
The package you are about to adopt certainly represents a great stride in the right direction and - I reiterate - a great political message , a great sign of will by the European institutions to provide answers to the questions asked by 500 million citizens .
Thank you very much , Mr President , thank you very much , Mr Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me , first of all , to thank all the rapporteurs on behalf of my group , not only for their work itself , but also for the fact that we have achieved what we set out to do , namely to treat the proposals as a package .
By treating them as a package , we forced the Council to move towards us as you know that the Council most definitely did not want to adopt two proposals .
Only by standing together did we manage to get the Council to take on these two dossiers , and we succeeded .
I share the view of the Vice-President that this package is a great success for the citizens .
That is something we should say in the election campaign , too .
Looking around , there are not that many Members here for this debate this afternoon , despite the fact that putting this package together was one of the greatest achievements of the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
The citizens perhaps do not understand , sometimes , why we sit for so long and why everything takes so long .
Here , however , they can see , that this package consists of regulations on monitoring , regulations on classification societies , accident investigations , insurance obligations , liability regulations , on port State control and flag State control .
We need to tighten up the requirements for all these different aspects in order , where possible , to prevent accidents and , where accidents do happen , to be able to react quickly .
Mr Sterckx , I would like to offer my particular thanks to you once again , as you were the rapporteur in the special committee that I had the honour of chairing , and we met again after the Prestige sinking to consider what we still needed to improve .
Through Mr Barrot , the Commission essentially adopted our proposals and we actually finalised them through the legislative process .
To that extent , we can be really pleased to be able to agree the third maritime package after all these years .
Let me make two more points , however .
The first is that we should thank Dominique Bussereau who , as a French minister , in the end pushed the package over the final hurdles , enabling it to succeed .
We should give him particular credit for that .
Mr Vice-President , all eyes are on you , now !
You , the Commission , with your fine European Maritime Safety Agency , must now ensure that the Member States also implement and apply this .
It is only when what we have decided is actually applied that we will be able to succeed in preventing the recurrence of accidents like those of the Erika and the Prestige .
We should be fighting together to achieve that . Thank you very much .
Mr President , I have just had a real race to get to the Chamber .
I was in my office listening to Vice-President Tajani and the other speakers , and I feel I have to congratulate all the rapporteurs and the Commission .
Like Mr Tajani , I , too , would like to warmly and gratefully acknowledge the work carried out by Commissioner Barrot , which was very important , and also the goodwill shown by the French Presidency .
I want to say here that this maritime package is going to usher in a decisive change in Europe , one that will foster quality and transparency in the maritime sector .
I believe it will ensure that we will never again witness the spectacle of the lack of transparency that we have seen in the past , after those two terrible accidents of the Erika and the Prestige , particularly the lack of transparency surrounding the Prestige accident .
In this context , Mr Kohlíček 's report , for which I am a shadow rapporteur , is a guarantee - in fact , the guarantee - that investigations in the maritime sector can , in future , be carried out in total transparency .
It will ensure that all of us - the general public and the authorities - will know what was behind or what happened after every accident , so that the same mistakes can never be made again and so that anything that is done badly can be corrected .
Europe has to go further in this field and I am sure that our work is not going to end here , because we have always been leaders and also because maritime traffic is not going to stop growing .
Thank you , Mr President , I , too , would like to congratulate the rapporteur on the result that has been achieved here and to thank the French Presidency for its efforts .
The result that we have achieved is a great success for the environment and for European shipping .
In recent years it has largely been the EU that has set the standard for the impact of shipping on the environment through legislation and through the work of the International Maritime Organisation .
Shipping is a global activity and , for the sake of fair competition and for the sake of the environment , it is important to have common rules at a global level .
However , the EU could take the lead and set the standard by demanding more stringent rules .
We must ensure that the EU Member States actually comply with the IMO agreements and this is what we are doing with the legislative package that we are concluding here .
The seven directives in the third maritime package will prevent pollution , ensure a better coordinated response to accidents and prevent poor ships from entering EU waters .
I have paid particularly close attention to the Directive on port State control and the Directive on the investigation of accidents as the shadow rapporteur for my group , and I would like to thank the two rapporteurs , Mrs Vlasto and Mr Kohlíček , for their proficient and successful work .
We have achieved a better method of inspecting ships , so that it is the poorest ships that are inspected most often and we have a method of investigating accidents that will provide legal protection for those questioned , the witnesses , and that will also mean that what we learn from the accident report can be utilised in future and that the information can be exchanged between Member States .
Thank you , Mr President , we have every reason to express our deepest satisfaction with the maritime package and I would like to say thank you on behalf of our group for the sterling work carried out by the rapporteurs , the Commission and the Council in this area .
Now , ship surveys affect large ships in particular , and I would like to highlight a problem with small ships .
We have special competent bodies to carry out inspections , but we do not have sufficiently clear rules for the seaworthiness of these ships or for when the inspection is to be carried out .
This is particularly the case with regard to fishing vessels , small fishing vessels that have been rebuilt , either to continue fishing or to be used for tourism-related purposes .
This often involves an increase in weight and an increase in engine size , which alters the centre of gravity and reduces seaworthiness , and , in my country , Denmark , we have seen numerous tragic accidents as a result .
We need to introduce a fixed requirement for every vessel , whether new or rebuilt , to undergo a seaworthiness test .
Therefore , like Mr Costa , I would like to ask the Commission to extend the provisions on survey and approval to include these types of ship as soon as possible .
Mr Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen , we , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , support this final compromise .
We are pleased that Parliament has prevailed , with the result that all eight legislative proposals form a single package to be voted on together .
I would like to thank all the rapporteurs from the bottom of my heart for their collaboration .
Marine safety urgently needs stricter European legislation in order to save lives and prevent environmental disasters by preventing accidents .
There must be no repeats of the shipping accidents involving the Erika and the Prestige .
Port State control means that ships that call at EU ports can be better monitored and - this is something we think is important - these ships can face sanctions where they fail to satisfy the safety provisions .
The monitoring of ships in territorial waters is extremely important , especially in environmentally sensitive areas , as pollution of the seas and the oceans recognises no boundaries .
That is why cross-border action is urgently required .
In the liability regulation in favour of passengers on passenger ships there is , unfortunately , only a regulation for the maritime area .
We Greens would have liked to have seen it apply to inland waterways too .
Finally , we are pleased that , after a long delay , the Council has also decided on the obligations of the port States and the insurance and liability of shipowners .
With this port package , we have taken a mighty step forwards , knowing that these rules can and must be improved still further in future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , repeated accidents and an increase in the transport of dangerous goods by sea constantly raise acute issues regarding strengthening the safety rules governing all maritime straits in the European Union and the resources needed in order to enforce these rules .
In particular , it makes sense to classify these straits and approach routes to them in accordance with the procedure relating to ' Seveso zones ' , because transport must come down to a drive to reduce costs whatever the consequences .
The Commission and the Council , under pressure from economic disasters set off by the financial crisis , are finally thinking about calling tax havens into question .
If this can actually be put into action , it could be a real step forward .
Along the same lines , how many more maritime and environmental disasters do we need to have before the Commission , the Council and this Parliament will finally turn their attention to the long-standing scandal of flags of convenience ?
Perhaps , though , it would be wiser for the European electorate to fill Parliament with more MEPs who care more about working for the safety of their fellow citizens than about standing up for free trade , which destroys people and the environment .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , last September , I drew attention to how the electronic data of ships required in these reports could easily find their way to pirates operating off Somalia .
This was not heeded .
These reports have been modified , but not for the better .
In fact , there is now contradiction between them .
I will try again .
Whilst Mr Sterckx obliges ports not to turn ships away , Mr Savary says that they can deny entry if insurance certificates are not being provided .
Add the further contradiction of Mrs Vlasto , which extends port control to ships anchored offshore .
So , if a vessel with no papers lies offshore and then , due to extreme weather , becomes at risk , it must be allowed entry because Mr Sterckx established the right of ships in distress to a place of refuge .
So we come to the situation of a vessel with a dangerous cargo finding its way into a port by manipulating these contradictions .
What happens if it then results in a serious incident , closing a major port ?
Would the compensation mentioned in Mr Sterckx apply to all of that and , in any case , who pays ?
These reports need a real overhaul .
Finally , the Fernandes report endorses various IMO recommendations .
Fine - the UK has already signed these - but the EU wants to add its own fleet database , to which I and others would object .
I say ' would ' because the Fernandes report is to be adopted without a vote .
How democratic is that ?
Whatever happened to the comments made here this very morning that this is an amending House ?
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate all the rapporteurs , who have answered the big questions raised by the challenges of maritime safety and have faced up to our responsibilities .
We all remember the disasters involving the petrol tanker Erika in 1999 and the Prestige in 2002 , and their tragic ecological , human and economic consequences .
A new arsenal of laws to protect Europeans from maritime disasters will now , finally , see the light of day , providing , in particular , for systematic inspections of the most antiquated ships , compulsory insurance to compensate the victims of ecological disasters , and also audits on the flags of European countries , which , as we know , are still far too often flags of convenience .
It was high time to take these measures , which do indeed restrict the vast room for manoeuvre that shipowners have been allowed for centuries .
They bring an end to the impunity of owners of hulks , and inspections will be made even more effective by being targeted at such ships .
The safety of the seas and oceans is not up for negotiation : it is this , and not money , profit and unrestricted trade , that should be the primary reference value .
I do have one regret . It is going to take a long time to implement all these new repressive and preventative laws .
As an MEP for the North-West region , with its numerous shorelines , I am relieved and proud to be voting in favour of this third maritime package .
( EL ) Mr President , the package of seven proposals on shipping is an important development in preventing accidents and in safeguarding an effective response in the event of an accident .
As far as the latter is concerned , I should like , as shadow rapporteur , to refer in particular to what was agreed on refuges for vessels in danger .
I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Sterckx , and the entire negotiating team on achieving a valuable compromise on this important issue .
If one small accident , one small crack , for example , in the tank of an oil tanker , is not contained and confined , it may result , in the event of vibrations from rough seas or difficulties in decanting the cargo to another vessel , in a huge ecological disaster if there is no refuge where appropriate measures can be taken .
At the same time , fear on the part of the crew that they are in danger of suffering criminal or civil consequences or the fact that the vessel has inadequate insurance may prevent refuge from being sought , with unfortunate consequences .
The present compromise safeguards the independence of the experts who decide if a ship in danger is to be given refuge , fair treatment for seamen in the event of an accident in accordance with the ΙΜΟ , the obligation of uninsured ships in refuges , compensation for ports and refuges for damage , on which the Commission will present various policy options , and the obligation of oil tanker owners to notify their cargo if it exceeds 1 000 tonnes .
At the same time , all vessels , including fishing vessels , will need to fit an automatic recognition system .
To close , I welcome the fact that Parliament 's actions have pushed the Council into adopting a final common position on all seven legislative proposals in the package .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the package on which we will be voting tomorrow would have come to nothing without the will of the European Parliament , and I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the work that has been done .
If the European Union creates a legal instrument that , as I hope , will make it possible to prevent disasters such as the shipwrecks of the Erika or the Prestige and finally to make the polluters take responsibility , it will be thanks to the European Parliament 's perseverance in the face of the Council 's timidity .
There is no point in reminding you of the resolve that has been required in order to bring the reports by Mr Savary and Mr Fernandes to the table .
This is a political victory for the European Parliament , and it is also a victory for steadfastness and working together .
Thanks to this ' maritime safety ' package , the Member States will finally have to fulfil their obligations in the International Maritime Organisation and , in particular , carry out technical audits before issuing a flag to a ship .
Another consistent step forward is the requirement for ships to be insured by financial guarantee certificates , which will put real responsibility on their charterers .
If Parliament adopts these texts tomorrow , the European Union will be showing that it has provided itself with an effective tool to fight against waste ships and against criminal charterers and owners , and it is to be hoped that the environment and the health of our fellow citizens will benefit .
Finally , I would like to pay tribute to the work that has been done in this field by Mr Tajani , who is here today , and the rapporteurs on transport law , because we have now embarked on the final stages of the process on maritime law with the aim of covering all transport in Europe .
It is therefore in relation to that work , which has seen a real delay in maritime transport , that , I hope , Parliament will also be able to round off an important strand on maritime transport during this session or , at any rate , as soon as possible .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am delighted that we can end the current Parliamentary term with the final adoption of the last of the maritime packages .
I remember , however , that when I first came to the European Parliament in 1999 , we had a serious maritime accident off the French coast with the Erika , which gave its name to the first set of legislative proposals designed to avert and prevent accidents .
We thought we had warded off the danger , but soon afterwards , the coastline of Galicia was ruined by the tar from an even worse accident than the previous one : the Prestige .
Since then , we in the Committee on Transport and Tourism have worked on a succession of legislative packages in an attempt to overcome the excessive resistance we have encountered among shipowners , oil companies , classification societies and also certain Member States , which rejected the three proposals for being too stringent .
Over the last 10 years , we have adopted a number of directives and regulations , some of which we have had to go back and revise because they proved ineffective in their initial versions , as a result of the cuts made by the Council .
We adopted legislation to introduce double-hulled vessels , a European fund for major oil disasters , and ports of refuge , and now we are revising and adopting legislation on the liability of carriers of passengers by sea , the investigation of maritime accidents , the Community vessel traffic monitoring and information system , port state control and , lastly , the regulation and directives on ship inspection and survey organisations .
All this is good and it is desirable that it should enter into force and be implemented by all the Member States as soon as possible .
I am pleased at that .
However , this Parliament 's term is coming to an end .
I am leaving Parliament , and I am going with the regret that we have not succeeded in making it compulsory to introduce control systems - which already exist and have been patented - to show when and what amounts of bilge and oil tank residues have been illegally dumped into the sea by a particular vessel .
In other words , they are a kind of black box or tachometer that can be inspected by the maritime authorities whenever a vessel enters port .
I believe we owe the marine environment greater attention and stricter procedures to avert all the pollution we cause .
I also think that , if we fail in this , it will affect our food chain and our lives , and we will end up paying a high price for it .
I trust it will not take another 10 years to control illegal discharges at sea more effectively and efficiently .
Thank you , Mr Ortuondo Larrea .
I am sure that your efforts will be remembered in this House , and I am also sure that , wherever you are , you will continue fighting for the objectives that you are leaving here .
They may be unfinished , but they are well on the way to completion thanks to your efforts .
( EL ) Mr President , after five years of debate and consultation with the Council , the much-vaunted shipping package of six directives and one regulation has been stripped of any positive content to do with the safety of life at sea and environmental protection .
In other words , the mountain has brought forth a mouse .
The Council , loyally expressing the anti-grassroots policy of the European Union and the interests of capital , is implementing all the demands of operators and shipowners and of the monopoly business groups which oppose any measure which might even minimally affect their profitability .
Thus , they have managed , through this long , drawn-out procedure , either to remove the teeth of every positive provision designed to control safety rules for ships or to postpone them indefinitely .
No measure has been included to protect and upgrade the human factor , the seamen , the primary factor in the protection of human life at sea and the environment .
The submissions put forward by the European Union since 1986 , within the framework of the common shipping policy , that issues relating to the human factor , to improved working conditions and training of seamen , will allegedly be examined in the future , are misleading and false , given that they have been deteriorating all these years .
That is why the Greek Communist Party will vote against the so-called shipping package in its entirety .
( IT ) Mr President , Mr Tajani , ladies and gentlemen , Parliament 's Committee on Transport and Tourism could not , and cannot , avoid the task of providing a holistic response to the need to improve shipping safety and also to lay down the measures to be taken in the event of accidents .
The third maritime package also deals effectively with issues of the liability of carriers in relation to their passengers and the goods they carry .
It was about time , always assuming that the matter is not disregarded , as I have the impression is happening in the case of airline passengers ' rights .
I actually believe that the goals for category A ships to come into line by 2016 and the even later deadline set for category B , C and D ships are too lenient and give the carriers too much leeway .
I hope that this largesse by the European Union is repaid by the carriers ' prompt compliance with the new regulations .
We needed , and still need , common standards for classification companies which are responsible for monitoring ships and granting shipping permits , and also very clear rules governing inspections and the addition of ships to the blacklist .
I therefore welcome the proposals and also the measures for managing accidents and shipping and environmental disaster risks and the relevant responsibilities , which I call on the Commission to make a greater commitment to uphold .
The far-ranging package also considers measures on investigations , on competences and on just sovereignty in the event of maritime accidents , a compendium which , I hope , will help clarify issues of liability and compensation .
I therefore voted for the set of reports .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner Tajani , the course of the maritime safety package has been turbulent , but the outcome is pretty good .
This is largely thanks to the fact that Commissioner Tajani and his officials stood side by side with the European Parliament in encouraging the Council to seriously set to work on a number of crucial points that were so important to Parliament .
After all , there must be compulsory cooperation at European level if maritime safety is to be improved at the end of the day .
Fortunately , we have now sorted out a number of missing links , although Parliament would have liked to go further on a number of points .
The fact that independent accident investigation has now been made compulsory in case of major maritime accidents is progress , as this will make it possible to really get to the bottom of the cause .
There is already a great deal of experience with this in aviation .
Just last week , a Turkish Airlines aircraft crashed near Amsterdam in the Netherlands and , thanks to independent accident investigation , the cause had been determined within a week , putting an end to speculation .
It is real progress that we now have independent accident investigation , irrespective of culpability , in shipping too .
The rapporteur has done an excellent job in this regard .
Mr President , I should like to highlight another point in this package , namely the improved regulation of maritime passenger liability .
This is a good thing , but it is also good that inland waterways are excluded , as small inland waterway vessels cannot be treated in the same way as seagoing ships navigating on the high seas .
The two things are different and , ultimately , it is good that this has been confirmed in the proposal .
( BG ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the maritime community has long discussed the need to improve the regulation , control and monitoring of vessel traffic due to risks of incidents , environmental pollution , danger to human life and illegal trafficking which , unfortunately , is far from negligible .
The integration of new technology into maritime traffic and the intensification of piracy , combined with the lack of any strict , general control , are premises underlying the problem .
Amending the directive establishes and develops conditions for a maritime safety network , as well as conditions for developing an effective , automated IT system .
These are achievements which must be assessed on behalf of the European Parliament , Commission and Council .
The framework for dealing with problems involving hazardous waste is important .
The application of the directive will not allow vessels carrying hazardous , unidentified cargo to pass through European waters looking for somewhere to dump its cargo .
Exercising control over maritime traffic is an absolute necessity .
A maritime safety culture must be created , the logistics for this process must be set up , a technical and technological basis must be provided for the system , a system must be created for distributing information efficiently while protecting part of this information which ensures the safety of traffic .
I welcome the efforts which the European Maritime Safety Agency is making , including with regard to developing a Vessel Traffic Management and Information System , while providing an integrated database , which includes displaying vessels in real time , along with other data linked to their cargo and its properties .
Even though the ' Erika ' incident is already a textbook case in terms of learning to manage and analyse risk , I do not want a case like this to happen again or any more similar incidents to occur .
( RO ) The compromise reached for the third maritime package will improve passenger safety , as well as help protect the environment and reinforce control systems .
The blacklist drawn up for ships which repeatedly breach the regulations will , just like in the aviation sector , mark an important step in improving safety .
Erika III is of particular importance to Romania as , in the wake of the documents recently adopted , An Integrated Maritime Policy for the European Union and Black Sea Synergy , it may have an important say in the success of the process for extending European principles and good practice to the other littoral states which are not part of the European Union , using the new instrument proposed by the European Commission via the Eastern Partnership .
The measures relating to maritime transport must be supplemented by increasing cooperation between littoral states in order to make the most efficient use of resources and reduce the pollution resulting from activities carried out in ports and on shore , as well as along the whole course of the Danube .
The Black Sea can only be protected effectively through concerted action in every area .
Mr President , the package has been a very difficult one for Parliament and the Council .
There has been much negotiation and debate , and I am glad to see the issues have been finally resolved .
The adoption of this package is a victory for the European Parliament and certainly for the rapporteurs who have fought to ensure that we delivered on behalf of our citizens , even against very strong opposition from Member State governments .
This law will impact on a variety of areas , including the standards of European flags , ensuring improved inspection procedures for ships .
What we have now is more transparency and stricter inspections .
Essentially , this package will deliver safer vessels , meaning a lower risk of environmental disasters and loss of sea life .
From the point of view of Ireland , the timing is extremely important by virtue of the fact that we have a Latvian ship tied up in an Irish port where the crew have not been paid , they have not been given enough food and they have no way of getting back to their Member State , Latvia .
These are the kinds of issues that have to be tackled , and I look forward to the implementation of the package .
( RO ) The third maritime package is extremely important .
The EU would like to develop the maritime corridors as part of extending TEN-T .
This maritime package helps increase maritime transport safety and puts into practice the lessons learnt from the sea accidents which have taken place in recent years involving the ships Erika and Prestige , along with accidents in the Black Sea .
In the case of the Black Sea in particular , this package will be particularly important as many of the Black Sea littoral states are on the Paris Memorandum blacklist or grey list .
Shipowners ' liability should be applied in the event of an accident , including accidents which occur on inland waterways .
I believe that ships in distress must be received in specially equipped areas where they can be given the assistance they need .
However , the way in which these services are paid for must be clearly regulated .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when the Erika was shipwrecked , I was one of those Members in France who called on the French authorities to close the sluices so that the salt pans would not be polluted .
When the Prestige disaster occurred , I was co-rapporteur , along with Mr Sterckx , as we were jointly responsible for the topic of transport - I myself was responsible for the environment - and we quite justifiably called for greater safety in maritime transport .
I well remember how hard we fought in this very Parliament for an inquiry committee on the Prestige to be set up : it certainly made an impression .
Today , therefore , I think we can all be pleased with the fact that many international and European rules have moved forward as part of the maritime package , and I hope this will soon be nothing more than a bad memory .
However , I would like , if I may , to draw attention to ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , I would like to reiterate , on the record , in relation to this most important maritime package , recital 3 of the review of the EU-ETS Directive , which was passed by an overwhelming majority .
This directive deals with our carbon dioxide emission reduction targets and the timetable for the same .
Recital 3 states that ' [ a ] ll sectors of the economy should contribute to achieving these emission reductions , including international maritime shipping and aviation .
In the event that no international agreement including international maritime emissions in its reduction targets through the IMO has been approved by Member States and / or no such agreement through the UNFCCC has been approved by 31 December 2011 , the Commission should make a proposal to include international maritime emissions according to harmonised modalities in the Community reduction commitment with the aim of its entry into force by 2013 .
Such a proposal should minimise any negative impact on EU competitiveness , taking into account the potential environmental benefits . '
Comments please , Commissioner .
Mr President , we have come a long way as a Parliament since the Prestige , a tragedy to the coastline of Galicia and to its ecosystems .
We have come a long way since the Erika polluted and destroyed the wonderful coast of Brittany .
We have come a long way since Sea Empress , Exxon Valdez and other shipping disasters .
This package is a testament to the work of Parliament , the Commission and also , if belatedly , the Council .
For me , the significance of this package will be felt for many years to come .
It is a testament also to the work of all our rapporteurs and MEPs who , over the years , have pushed for such legislation .
This package is a victory for this Parliament , for Members from all the political groups , particularly on the Committee on Transport , although I hope Members would allow me to make special mention at this time of Mrs Miguélez Ramos and the late Mr Willi Piecyk .
Mr President , during the discussions that have taken place in this Chamber , amidst all the general satisfaction of seeing the Council , Parliament and Commission adopt rules that provide the public with tangible answers , I believe one overriding question has emerged : will all these good rules - that have been arrived at through compromise and a lot of hard work - be properly applied ?
Will the Commission be able to ensure they are complied with ?
Will the Agency be able to cooperate effectively with the Commission in ensuring the enforcement of these rules ?
I refer to the comments that were made during the course of the debate - I am thinking in particular of remarks by Mr Jarzembowski and Mr Romagnoli - but also the letters that were sent to the Commission during recent months , by Mr Sterckx and Mr Simpson , who also raised the same problem .

I believe I can confirm the commitment of the Commission , which strongly urged the approval of this package , to ensuring its observation by the Member States .
I intend to call on the cooperation of the Agency - which is an institution in which I believe and one that has always worked effectively and fulfils its role of supporting the Commission and also of supporting the Member States in the best possible way - to implement this regulation as it has done with other regulations .
I visited Lisbon , where the Agency is based , and I found a great spirit of cooperation , great willingness and also great commitment and enthusiasm for applying all the rules in the package .
These will be guaranteed though the safety system , Safe Sea Net , and also all the other state-of-the-art technological tools used to help the public ensure that European Union rules are actually applied .
As you are well aware , when the law gives the Commission a specific responsibility , the Commission is able to call on the Agency to help it perform tasks of a technical nature .
I intend to continue moving in the direction taken by my predecessor , Jacques Barrot , and call on the cooperation of an agency that I consider to be efficient , well-run and full of people with the right attitude who believe in the work they are doing .
And that applies , for example , to the inspections that aim to check the correct application of regulations or the implementation of traffic monitoring information systems .
On the last point , I wish to stress the essential part played by the Agency - and I address my remarks to Mr Sterckx in particular - in the implementation of Safe Sea Net , the European platform for the exchange of data on maritime traffic , and in the setting up of a European long-range ship identification and tracking centre .
These tasks comply with the Agency 's regulation , even though they are not specifically mentioned , because the latest amendment dates back to 2004 , but they will certainly be included in the next revision of the regulation , which is currently being prepared .
The fact that these specific tasks are not mentioned in the directives or in the specific regulations has no bearing on the division of roles between the Commission and the Agency .
My intention , by replying , is to reassure Parliament of the Commission 's will and determination to apply the rules that we are approving with the support of the Agency .
It would be pointless to tell the public : ' We 've done something positive for you ' , if we were then unable to apply this positive thing and ensure it was respected .
We should bear in mind that the Member States , represented by the Council , are part and parcel of this agreement .
Because they are joint legislators with us , I believe the Member States will apply the rules we are approving .
There is no doubt that the Commission will ensure this commitment is respected and upheld and we will do so with the technical support of the Agency .
Mr President , I think we have reached the end , and we should all be very pleased that we have arrived at this moment after such a long journey .
If the codecision procedure is ever justified , I think it is in the case of this package and the way it has been handled .
The key to this package lay in the need to bring the Commission , the Council and Parliament to an agreement .
Parliament did very well to take the lead - it can be seen to be justified now more than ever - and in pressing to have this package considered absolutely essential .
Right from the start , we would not accept any kind of split or separation , so as to achieve a whole that could guarantee safety at sea .
I think we can be confident that there are guarantees for the future that ad hoc political measures will be superfluous .
We will thus save ourselves from disgraceful situations in which certain people in power criticise the positions of some governments and have to praise the positions of others .
In future , therefore , the major decisions will be in the hands of independent committees , who will make rigorous , authoritative , immediate and capable use of decision-making tools .
That will ensure that the decisions made are rigorous , right and fair .
That is because we have had to balance many different things here in this package : classification societies have had to be brought together with marine equipment ; all interests have had to be put clearly on the table ; and , above all , Parliament has had to show leadership .
We should be pleased at the fact that Parliament has shown this leadership .
It can now proudly say loud and clear that the European Union has not waited for the IMO - the International Maritime Organisation - but that we have taken the lead .
It was our duty , and we did not need to wait for anyone .
I think we can feel pleased and have hope for the future , trusting that mistakes will not be repeated and that we have learnt the lessons of the past .
Mr President , to finish , I would like to say that the work everyone has achieved will allow us - if Parliament adopts the package , of course - to worry much less about the protection of our seas , our coasts and our fellow citizens .
The important thing now is to implement the recommended prevention and enforcement provisions , which need to be properly effective in all our countries .
If we can do that , we will have helped to safeguard our maritime heritage .
I am grateful to the Commissioner , who has shown himself to be determined to ensure that the European directive is implemented , rather than just being discussed .
Mr President , once again , I note that there is a consensus in Parliament .
The vast majority supports the contents of this package , the compromise we have reached .
I think that that is a sign to everyone involved that this is not an ideological conflict but rather is a matter of making practical arrangements to improve maritime safety .
I should also like to thank the Commissioner for his answer to my question on the uncertainty over the agency and its role .
In case we have forgotten , the agency was one of the components of the first Erika package .
The agency was one of the first proposals : an agency bringing together the necessary know-how and specialists to ensure that we - the Commission in particular , but also Parliament - have support in what we do , in drafting legislation .
Now then , I welcome the consensus , and am also proud of what we have achieved , but I do think , Commissioner - as both you and Mrs Vlasto have already said - that everything now depends on the quality of the implementation .
The aim is to have high-quality authorities - for the accommodation of ships in distress , for example - in all Member States .
If their quality is below par , you must take action .
Thus it is now up to you - the Commission , the Commission services , the agency - to ensure that the Member States do indeed do what they have incorporated in the legislation in the fields of port state control , classification societies , SafeSeaNet and all the matters we are now finalising or improving .
Commissioner , we shall be monitoring you , and if you should retain responsibility for transport in the next Commission , we shall continue to monitor you , to ensure that the quality is indeed as we had intended .
All the best , then .
We shall keep an eye on you , and shall support you again if further proposals are needed .
I would like to take the unusual liberty for this place of correcting my fellow Member , because it not just a question of whether the Commissioner will remain in office so that we can keep an eye him but also of whether we will remain in office .
So much for the correction .
I would like to thank everyone who has collaborated on this package .
This document is paradoxically becoming the first major success of the Czech Presidency in the European Commission , whether we want it to or not .
Concerning the comments of Mr Toussas , who spoke with some bitterness about how the package generally ignores work conditions at sea , it is true that the package actually does not directly address the work conditions of ship crews , except for decent treatment for the crews of ships experiencing difficulties and the crews of ships involved in maritime disasters , .
However , I believe that the European Parliament , together with the Commission , will return to this topic in the near future .
After all , we are similarly involved in other fields of transport so it would only be logical .
Until now , the important matter of the maritime transport safety has not been sufficiently addressed in the same way as inland transport .
And I believe , to return once more to my starting point , that as long as we can join forces with Commissioner Tajani in our common task , we will be able to cooperate .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would also add my own thanks to everyone who has been engaged in this long and important task .
I would like to express my heartfelt thanks and say a true thank you because now , European legislation , the European rules on maritime safety , are certainly better than they used to be .
Now it is , of course , the Commission 's job to ensure they are applied and I am sure that the Commissioner will do his bit to ensure that the rules do not remain empty words .
Fortunately , some of the rules will immediately come into force .
In some other cases , the Commission will have to ensure that the directives are transposed into national law .
Of course as soon as one chapter closes , another one immediately opens .
We left many issues to one side but now we should perhaps revisit them .
I will only mention two : we have not yet properly finalised the details of ports of refuge and I hope that this does not lead to any dangers if we have any difficulties on our seas ; the other problem is the extension of passenger cover to inland navigation as well as the extension of domestic navigation .
We could say much more , but there would not be much point .
The thing that it is worth doing at the moment is perhaps to thank yet again the Commission for its initiative and the Commissioner for the conscientious way he has followed through the actions of Parliament - and also to vindicate the part played by Parliament without allowing ourselves to become overly self-righteous .
I believe that when we take a look at the proposal that embarked on the legislative process and think back to the way it was stripped down from the Council 's initial stance to achieve the final result , I think we can state with pride that Parliament has done its job , which is much more than being - I cannot say ' custodian ' because the Commission is the custodian - let us say a determined proponent of European legislation and the role Europe must perform for the common good .
Mr President , everyone in Parliament , with just a few exceptions , knows what it means to legislate and to bring added value to a text from the Commission .
From that point of view , I would like to echo what Mr Costa said : for Parliament , this is not just a textbook exercise to be proud of , but an exciting reality at a time when Europe needs a lift .
I would like to say , because I am not sure whether this has been emphasised sufficiently , that this legislative package of seven plus one texts will , in fact , be going at two speeds : there are five plus one on which we will be asked , tomorrow , to ratify the conciliation procedure and agreement , and two others - the reports by Mr Fernandes and myself - that will go to second reading , because they were initially rejected by the Council .

As we have , almost miraculously , reached agreement with the Council , due to the fact that our fellow rapporteurs were kind enough to give us a vehicle within their own reports so that the Council would agree and be required to state its position , we are only at second reading on the reports by Mr Fernandes and myself .
Of course , we do not want them to be amended , and I do not think they will be , as no amendments have been tabled .
We hope that they will be adopted in their current form tomorrow .
This will allow us to re-integrate the package , having achieved a very pleasing success with respect to the Council .

I would say to you , Commissioner , that the ball is now in the Commission 's court : we are all aware that , in order to monitor the implementation of this legislation , in many fields , legislating here is not enough - the texts need to be transposed in the Member States .
Personally , with regard to the requirement for insurance against damages to third parties , in other words , serious pollution and damages subsequent to a maritime accident , I think we need to ensure that , in particular , the major international conventions are ratified , because that is a commitment made by the Member States .
I also think it would be good for the Commission to report to Parliament on this subject in 2012 .
Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking the French Presidency for the opportunity that it gave us to see this package through to the end .
Special thanks go to Vice-President Tajani and to the Commission for its significant contribution in the final phase of the negotiations .
I also thank everyone for your comments and contributions .
I wish to give a special mention to all the rapporteurs , especially Mr Kohlíček , and , if you will permit me , also to the shadow rapporteur , Mrs Miguélez Ramos .
They ensured that disputes between Member States , such as occurred with the wreck of the Prestige , will not happen again and that everyone really recognises their responsibility when the worst happens .
I thank Mr Costa , with whom I worked throughout the process , especially on the report relating to the responsibilities of passenger carriers while I was rapporteur for the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , for ensuring that all modes of maritime transport guarantee the protection of their passengers ; that means of financially compensating passengers exist for when the worst happens ; and that those who are potentially the worst affected are also the best protected , quickly and even in advance , regardless of where the blame lies .
Means of legal recourse exist that are sufficiently clear , accessible and based on information that is clear and available in advance .
As I have already said , the adoption of this third maritime safety package is a significant victory for the European legislative process .
The Commission , the Council and Parliament have accepted a text that improves everyone 's lives , promotes better security on the seas , oceans and inland waters , and prepares our future .
By voting for this package tomorrow , we are paying tribute to the victims of all the past or recent maritime tragedies and we are honouring citizens and businesses .
I hope , Mr Vice-President , that the provisions to be adopted tomorrow in this package will be observed so that the citizens ' expectations that have now been created can be transformed into a real strengthening of their safety and their rights .

( DE ) Mr President , as we close this debate having thanked Vice-Presidents Barrot and Tajani and the French Presidency , and specifically Mr Bussereau , we should also thank those who work on the Conciliation Committee and the Committee on Transport and Tourism who have been working with us on this for a number of years .
They have played their part in making possible the success that we have achieved and for that I ask that we thank them .
( ES ) Mr President , I would just like to add something to what Mr Jarzembowski has just said .
We would also like to thank him as the Chairman of the Temporary Committee on the Improvement of Safety at Sea , which was set up to clarify the Prestige case , which , in some way , lay at the root of everything we have been dealing with here today .
In case we lose touch with Mr Jarzembowski , I would like to tell him that we will always remember the ability he demonstrated on that committee .
Mrs Ayala Sender , from the chair I naturally add my congratulations to someone who has certainly been a very effective chairman , and wish him every happiness and success .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
Ladies and gentlemen , the compromise which has been reached will consolidate the EU 's legislation on safety and the transposition of important international instruments into Community legislation .
By adopting this , the European Parliament will set a new benchmark in terms of standards for investigating accidents involving vessels .
These measures have been adopted as a consequence of the accident involving the tanker ' Erika ' , but I want to remind you of another , more recent case .
On 13 February 2004 , 7.5 nautical miles from the Bosporus , the ship ' Hera ' sank with its entire crew of 19 on board , in circumstances which are still unexplained .
Five years after this tragedy , which took place in one of the busiest and most monitored spots in the world , no one can say how and why this ship sank .
Furthermore , no one can say what rescue operations were carried out after the emergency signal was received .
The investigation into the reasons and consequences of this accident has reached a dead end at the moment .
The only thing which can be confirmed with any certainty is that 17 European Union citizens and two from Ukraine perished .
No one has yet been made to answer for this .
It is obvious that the new rules we are adopting will not prevent such tragedies , but I hope that they will ensure that a transparent , complete and objective investigation is carried out so that we can bring the guilty parties to book for this .
The charging of heavy goods vehicles for the use of certain infrastructures - Greening of transport and internalisation of external costs ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
by Mr El Khadraoui , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 1999 / 62 / EC on the charging of heavy goods vehicles for the use of certain infrastructures - C6-0276 / 2008 - , and
by Mr Jarzembowski , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the greening of transport and the internalisation of external costs .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to come straight to the point and clear up a few misunderstandings .
I have read from various sources that , by bringing in this Eurovignette Directive , we are trying to give the road transport sector the kiss of death in these economically difficult times .
I have also read that we mean to make road pricing compulsory for all passenger cars in Europe .
The truth is , of course , that we do not mean to impose anything at all ; on the contrary , we wish to offer a wide range of possibilities to help Member States who so desire to introduce , in their own time , the ' polluter pays ' principle into the road transport sector .
That is , we want to establish a framework , to lay down ground rules that Member States must observe if they wish to internalise external costs .
This should bring us one step closer to a more sustainable transport system .
I wish to add straight away that this is no miracle cure .
Very many more measures will have to be taken if we are to work wonders .
If we do nothing , however - as the Commission is well aware - road transport will increase by 55 % by 2020 .
We therefore have to do something .
What we are proposing here is a minor revolution in itself , if I may say so , but it is just a start , and will require an ambitious follow-up within a few years .
With the help of the majority in the Committee on Transport and Tourism , we managed to draft a balanced , reasonable , coherent proposal .
I should also like to thank everyone involved .
It was not easy ; points of view differed very widely .
However , I hope that we retain this balance after tomorrow and thus send out a strong signal to the Council , which needs to draw up another common position .
What are the essential points ?
Firstly , which externalities are to be introduced into the system ?
We opted for the areas of air pollution , noise and congestion .
Regarding the last of these , we have actually made a concession to the road transport sector by saying that countries wanting their systems to cover congestion should make a link with passenger cars .
This is optional , not obligatory .
Secondly , on the subject of earmarking , we do not regard the revenue from these charges as an additional tax that is allowed to simply flow into State treasuries .
Such revenue must be reinvested in the transport system with the aim of keeping external costs down .
This must be the ultimate objective .
Thirdly , there is interoperability , which is vital , and I think the Commission still has some way to go in this regard .
We want to prevent lorries having to take along 27 different tins in future in order to pay all the various tolls around Europe , and so I think that clear initiatives are needed to this end .
Fourthly , there must be the possibility of further action in future .
Within a few years , an overview must be drawn up of the internalisation of external costs in all modes of transport .
We must consider the possibility of adding other external costs , too , but we must also favour charging schemes based on kilometerage over time-based schemes .
Overall , the impact of all of this is actually limited .
We estimate that the operational costs could rise by 3 % if this Directive were to be applied in the field throughout Europe .
Consequently , I wish to propose to my fellow Members that we stick with the package supported by the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
In other words , I do not support the amendments by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats that seek to remove congestion from the system , nor can I support the amendments tabled by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , no matter how appealing I find them .
Let us preserve a coherent whole and take a step forward in this way .
Mr President , Mr Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin by saying that the mobility of people and goods is quite simply of key importance to citizens ' quality of life , growth and employment , the social and territorial cohesion of the European Union and for trade with third countries .
That is why the European Community quite simply needs an infrastructure that meets its needs and equitable transport rules for all modes of transport .
Given that transport also has negative consequences for people and the environment , it must , of course , be further greened , in order , also , to play its role in fighting climate change .
However , I have to tell you , Mr Vice-President , that what you put forward to us as a basis document on the greening of transport was a little too sparse .
I am sorry to say that there is no consistent overall plan and you leave everything open - everything is palmed off on subsidiarity .
If you say that we have to green transport , that must apply throughout the European Union and cannot be made subject to the wishes of the Member States .
It must then apply to everything from the railways to marine transport .
You cannot just pick out road transport - and , in fact , specifically only goods vehicle traffic - and then say ' we will leave it up to the Member States to decide whether or not they want to have road tolls . '
If you want a fundamental change , you need to put forward an integrated plan for all means of transport - and that is something we made very clear in the committee .
Then , however , you also have to do that with scientifically-based impact assessments that take account of the consequences for competition amongst means of transport , mobility costs and the competitiveness of Europe .
The second communication , on the internalisation of external costs , is another example of the compartmentalisation under your system , proposing something and yet not proposing it .
As regards the internalisation of external costs , you again set out a great big handbook that provides a multiplicity of ways to perform calculations , but then , in the end , you say ' we will calculate according to a flat-rate value . '
No one on earth could understand that .
You also fail to take account of the contributions already made by the various means of transport , be it in the form of general taxation , petroleum tax or vehicle tax .
You know , it is the same story with the Eurovignette .
My group agrees with the other groups that exhaust emissions and noise should be taken account of in the external costs and in the charging thereof .
Congestion , though ?
Mr Vice-President , congestion is caused by an insufficient provision of infrastructure by the Member States .
To give the Member States money for managing their own shortcomings would be downright madness .
What is more , you are very much aware of the fact that companies have long borne the costs of congestion , as it leads to higher wage costs and higher fuel costs .
With that in mind , it must be said , Mr El Khadraoui , that it makes no sense to internalise the costs of congestion - quite the opposite , in fact .
We must attempt to get rid of this congestion through the prudent upgrading of infrastructure and the deployment of intelligent transport information systems , yet we must not burden businesses , already struggling with rising costs , with additional costs in the form of road tolls .
There is no point in that .
Mr Vice-President , your communication on noise protection measures on the railways is positive , in principle .
As the man on the English-speaking street says , though , ' Where 's the beef ? '
What are you actually proposing ?
You say there are many options .
No , you are the Commission !
You have the right and the duty to put forward proposals that we can then implement .
That is why the Committee on Transport and Tourism is calling on you to actually table a proposal for a directive on the introduction of noise-related track access charges so that , by re-investing the money collected by means of such track access charges in the railway companies - including private companies - we will be able to help see new noise-reducing brakes actually installed .
All of us in this House have a clear goal and that is that noise pollution by the railways must be eradicated .
We want to promote the railways , but then their journey through the serene Rhine valley must also be effected in an environmentally sound manner .
So help us do this - propose something really tangible !
Mr President , we have reached the end of yet another debate on a subject that I resolved to bring to the attention of this House as soon as I had obtained the support of Parliament , in other words , our aim of not imposing a new tax on European citizens .
As far as the Commission is concerned , the fact that the new Eurovignette is optional is evidence that we are not imposing a new tax .
Above all , the sums collected will not be generally earmarked for the budgets of the various Member States but will be allocated to make a difference in a particular sector , namely pollution , the internalisation of external costs and the construction of safer roads and infrastructure .
I wish to thank Parliament for the commitment it showed to the greening package , particularly with regard to the review of the Eurovignette directive .
The draft adopted by the Committee on Transport and Tourism based on Mr El Khadraoui 's report sends out a strong message to Member States because it proposes a more flexible framework that legally authorises the adoption of new instruments to combat negative effects within the transport sector and also within the parties involved in the sector .
It does this by showing a political intent to gradually encourage the introduction of fair and effective tariff scales for the use of infrastructures whereby the polluter pays , instead of the taxpayer having to foot the bill .
I feel that the opinion approved by the Commission , which is under discussion today , reinforces the Commission 's proposal in some key respects .
As far as the allocation of resources is concerned , I believe the proposed amendments are consistent with our suggested approach , which aims to defend the allocation of revenue from tolls and reduce the external effects of road transport , and I believe I can support them .
As far as the type of external effects that should be taken into account , I say no to CO2 but yes to taking congestion into account .
A modulated congestion charge would allow us to fight climate change more effectively than if we applied a one-off tax on CO2 .
It is essential for the economic effectiveness of road transport and useful for ensuring sufficient income to fund new transport capacities and I believe that the compromise we achieved constitutes a sound basis for discussions with the Council .
We must nonetheless take great care to ensure that the final result represents an encouragement to States rather than a deterrent and does not impose conditions that are too complicated to manage .
I harbour certain reservations , however , about the specific amendment concerning sensitive mountain areas .
The Commission proposal already authorises a pollution cost multiplication factor known as the mountain correction factor .
The fact that we simply authorised the addition of this tariff charge to the existing surcharge , decided in 2006 to fund the great tunnels through the Alps , amounts to a double tariff charge and this is an obstacle to achieving a single market in my opinion .
Hence my puzzlement .
Now I would like to move on to Mr Jarzembowski 's report on the communication accompanying the directive .
As he clearly showed during his speech , Mr Jarzembowski is highly critical of the Commission 's position : for once. we are not in agreement after all these years of working together .
The report is clearly critical .
I will attempt to concentrate on two points in particular , two points that I feel are crucial .
I wish to stress , on the one hand , that the Commission has carried out an impact assessment that covers all transport methods and analyses the effects of the various internalisation options .
I feel that this analysis lays the foundation for the internalisation strategy proposed by the Commission .
On the other hand , the Commission has proposed a common internalisation framework based on a principle that concerns all transport methods and takes into account past initiatives .
It is a pragmatic approach that respects the acquis communautaire and takes into account the recently adopted proposals - I am thinking of the extension of the ETS to aviation and the international agreements on aviation , the maritime sector and inland waterways .
Of course we can debate whether or not the Commission 's proposals go far enough , but I must stress the fact that the Commission has dealt with the topics it was asked to cover , in other words , an integrated plan to make transport greener , supported by specific legislative proposals .
I wish to end by bringing up one aspect on which the Commission and Parliament are in agreement : the need to find a legislative approach to the problem of noise pollution in the railway sector .
The Commission will submit its proposals within the framework of the first railway package revision , due to be adopted in the autumn .
We will , of course , be pleased to hear your suggestions on this matter .
Thank you , Mr Tajani .
In your relations with Mr Jarzembowski , you will have seen how right Karl Marx was when he showed how people 's institutional position also determines their political position on various subjects .
Mr President , the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy mainly looked into two aspects of this directive , the first of which was oil .
Of all the major world economies , Europe is the most dependent on the transport of goods using oil .
Let us not deceive ourselves .
Although the price of oil is going down at the moment , it is only because the global economy is shrinking .
Once the economy starts to recover , we are once again going to see the same problems of oil shortages , and the European economy 's main Achilles heel in the future will be our dependence on oil for the transport of goods .
The second aspect relates to technology and exports .
If Europe introduces a relevant Eurovignette system , it will also promote the rise of European economic players .
The United States , China , India and Indonesia are economies that will have the same problem as us .
This is therefore an appeal for the implementation of an ambitious policy , both with regard to the internalisation of external costs to anticipate the necessary changes from oil and to promote European industry in all the technological apparatus surrounding the Eurovignette .
Mr President , Commissioner , our rapporteur , my esteemed fellow member , Mr El Khadraoui , began with some reassuring words .
No European charges are to be imposed .
Instead , the rapporteur is concerned with ground rules for the internal market , aiming to facilitate sustainable transport in Europe .
However , the position he adopts as rapporteur gives Member States a licence to impose very high charges , up to a few euros per kilometre , with the congestion charge and the mark-up on top .
Mr President , in the Commissioner 's words , what we have here are not ground rules for the internal market but barriers to the internal market .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats wishes to make its position here today clear .
We are staunch supporters of investment in sustainable transport .
Therefore , the internalisation of external costs for air and noise pollution can count on our approval , provided the revenues are invested in making road transport cleaner - something that enjoys broad support .
However , the proposed congestion charging and mark-up are a bridge too far for the PPE-DE Group .
Congestion charging has a very limited impact on the environment and does not solve the problem of congestion , and would also constitute an extra heavy burden in these times of economic crisis , an extra burden on SMEs , which is also bad for employment .
The rapporteur has reached a compromise with the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe by making a link with passenger transport , which was crucial to obtaining their support .
The Council will not accept that - so much is already clear .
This puts the rapporteur in a position he himself wants but the ALDE Group does not .
Therefore , I should like to end my speech on behalf of the PPE-DE Group with an old saying : we may lose the battle , but that does not mean we have lost the war .
Amendment of the agenda
Ladies and gentlemen , as I am in the chair , I have to read you a communication which states that , at its meeting on Monday , 9 March , the Committee on Foreign Affairs approved a motion for a resolution on the deterioration of the humanitarian situation in Sri Lanka and , in view of the alarming situation there , it requested that the motion for a resolution be included on the agenda for the current part-session in accordance with Rule 91 of the Rules of Procedure .
The motion for a resolution will be deemed adopted unless at least 40 Members submit a written objection by noon tomorrow , Wednesday , in which case it will be included in the current part-session for debate and voting .
The charging of heavy goods vehicles for the use of certain infrastructures - Greening of transport and internalisation of external costs ( continuation of debate )
We shall continue with the debate on the reports by Mr El Khadraoui and Mr Jarzembowski on the transport sector .


I would first of all like to congratulate my colleague , Mr El Khadraoui , and Mr Jarzembowski .

The transport sector is one of the key sectors contributing to the European Union 's economic and social development .
At the request of the European Parliament , the European Commission proposed internalising external costs and amending the Eurovignette Directive .
However , the moment that has been chosen to do this comes at a very difficult time .
As a result of the economic crisis , the volume of orders is dropping , carriers are facing increased costs , companies are going bust and jobs are being lost .
Although the texts being proposed by the Commission mark a step forward in the development of transport which respects and protects the environment , they can and must be improved .
I do not think that Mr Jarzembowski 's approach , where we only criticise without making any improvements , is the right one .
In my personal opinion , a directive which cannot be applied to all Member States on a mandatory basis will not achieve its aim and may significantly distort the internal market through the barriers which some Member States , if they so wish , may introduce to block the free movement of persons and goods .
This is why I consider that the process of internalising external costs must be applied to every kind of transport and double taxation must be avoided .
In this way , if some Member States have decided to introduce road tolls they should not then introduce an additional pollution tax later on .
This is also actually the stance adopted by Mr El Khadraoui , which I support .
The costs incurred by traffic congestion are rising to 1 % of GDP .
We must therefore act to reduce this , but the cost of these measures must not only be paid by goods and passenger transport operators .
Congestion is caused by all vehicles and , especially , by a defective infrastructure .
Member States must invest in the construction of motorways , high-speed railway lines and in those alternatives which can cut traffic congestion .
Intermodal transport will facilitate the transfer of goods from the road network to a rail , ship or air freight system , making the transportation of goods and passengers more efficient .
In conclusion , we need an integrated strategy for developing European transport which protects the environment , but without internalisation of external costs affecting the competitiveness of road transport .

Mr President , I agree with Mr Jarzembowski when he says that mobility is essential to society .
I also agree with Mrs Wortmann-Kool when she says that here , too , we must pay particular attention to the internal market .
However , to my mind , this compromise does take us a step in that direction .
The internal market is important , and so it is also important that agreements be made between Member States .
In addition , this is just a first step towards a system we are going to have to think over in its entirety anyway at a given point in time and to adjust at certain points .
A large majority of our group supports the compromise reached with the rapporteur , for which I thank him .
The internalisation of external costs - and I have listened closely to the rapporteur 's words - is not a regular tax .
The revenues thus generated must be used to reduce the external costs .
This is an essential component of Parliament 's position .
If this does not happen , we no longer have a compromise .
Therefore , we agree to the inclusion of air pollution , noise and congestion in the internalisation of external costs .
In the case of congestion , however , if the aim is to fight and reduce this phenomenon , all road users causing it must be treated in the same way without any discrimination between the various elements responsible .
I also think it a good thing , therefore , that a Member State must present an action plan and state how it plans to reduce congestion .
All in all , earmarking is important - the rapporteur too has pointed out that this is an essential component .
It is not disputed in Parliament that earmarking , the use of the revenues , is very important .
I should like to say to Mrs Wortmann-Kool that , if these two conditions - equal treatment of all the road users responsible for congestion and clear earmarking of revenue from the charge - are not met , and if the Council is not in agreement , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe will also withdraw its support for the compromise .

Thank you , Mr President , firstly , I would like to thank both rapporteurs , especially Mr El Khadraoui , for this difficult work on trying to reach a compromise .
I think that part of the compromise is being voted on by the Committee on Transport and Tourism - the part relating to the use of earmarked taxes - but the plenary sitting will clearly be voting on a certain part , such as congestion .
I would also like to thank my fellow Members for their understanding in relation to not removing time-based charges in countries at the European Union 's borders , where heavy goods vehicles generate considerable pollution , queuing at the borders for long periods , day and night .
Finally , once we have adopted this directive in one form or another , I very much hope that , regardless of the crisis , the Member States will nonetheless not subordinate the short-term situation to long-term goals .
In my view , this would be very important in resolving the problem . Thank you .
Thank you , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , tomorrow 's decision on external costs in the road haulage sector is a decision about whether haulage , ultimately , is sustainable ; whether , in future , there is to be fair competition between road and rail ; and whether the polluter pays principle is finally to be made to apply to road traffic - at least to some extent .
The costs are not new - they have been around for some time .
It is just that , at present , they are paid for from national budgets .
We surely must put the environment and the health of those living close to transport links above having uncongested roads .
The burdens are well enough known to all of us .
Health impacts along transit routes have been documented and that is our call to action .
The stricter exhaust emission standards for goods vehicles , for which we had had such high hopes , were inadequate .
Any improvement in each individual goods vehicle meant nothing , as simultaneous growth cancelled everything out .
That means that we need new , targeted measures in order to provide a better framework for a market that has come off the rails .
It also means , however , that the likes of relief for heavy road-users , which are still in existence , need to be abolished , as what this does is give extra reward to polluters for polluting .
We demand the most comprehensive possible inclusion of all the external costs that arise that currently have to be borne by the budgets , and I will finish with my old ceterum censeo : the sensitive area of the Alps needs special protection .
Mr President , the abolition of customs borders and exchange rates within Europe has increased the scale of the economy .
The government has created a dense network of ever wider motorways .
Many goods are now transported over long distances , sometimes even at various stages of the production process .
These developments have a negative impact on the environment , and their costs are not borne by hauliers .
Partly as a result of this , freight transport has become increasingly cheap over the years .
This encourages even more transport and increases the environmental impact still further .
In nearly 10 years as a Member of this House , I have often heard talk of charging this environmental damage to hauliers , but unfortunately the results are still unsatisfactory .
Sometimes it seems as though politicians are more interested in the calculation models themselves than the results that can be obtained using them .
Decisions taken on this in 2006 have yielded insufficient results .
As far as my group is concerned , the objective must be to give the most environmentally-friendly modes of transport - transport by rail and water - more of a chance , and to curb the most environmentally damaging - road and air transport .
In the absence of a clear objective such as this , calculation models and more European rules only produce bureaucracy , at no benefit to humans and the environment .
My country , the Netherlands , is an example of how not to do things .
A discussion on road pricing - taxing road traffic according to the distance travelled - has been under way there for nearly 20 years , and has now become completely deadlocked .
The only impression voters are left with is that congestion is being taxed without there being any prospect of a solution to the problems in the form of improvements to the railways and public passenger transport services .
Europe must not repeat such errors by Member States . It must , however , remove all the barriers to regional and national measures , enable effective coordination of these measures , improve cross-border payment of charges and provide professional drivers with better information on what measures to expect outside the area where they live .
The proposals by rapporteur Mr El Khadraoui provide scope for this , and therefore have the support of my group .
In addition , rapporteur Mr Jarzembowski mainly calls attention to the noise nuisance from rail freight traffic , and we agree with him .
At the same time , however , I should like to point out that the construction of more and more high noise barriers along railway lines cannot be the solution .
Mr President , following a long , tiring debate , we are on the verge of adopting Parliament 's position at first reading .
I am fairly pleased with the result , and very pleased with the cooperation with the rapporteur .
It is good that Member States are to be given the opportunity to pass on external costs to the polluter .
Let us not hesitate to pass on the costs of congestion , air and noise pollution to what will ultimately be the consumer .
I do take the view , though , that Member States must retain the scope to vary the costs .
In addition , it must be possible to trace back the burdens imposed clearly and transparently to the actual costs incurred .
We cannot allow Member States to introduce a kind of punitive tax .
Amendment 40 will therefore have to be removed from the report .
I should also like the Council to tell me whether it shares Parliament 's view that the revenues from the Eurovignette must be used to reduce the external costs .
This is essential to my support for the Eurovignette Directive .
In addition , this proposal must not remain isolated .
Lorries are not the only road users responsible for congestion costs ; other modes of transport generate them too .
With the exception of maritime and air transport , which will be covered by the Emissions Trading Scheme , these hauliers too must pay their external costs .
This is a fair way of encouraging hauliers to clean up their act .
I should also like to take this opportunity to request support for my Amendment 76 .
I do not understand why the Commission decided to change the old text on regulatory charges to ' any urban road ' .
The imposition of such regulatory charges is a national competence .
It is the Member States who must decide on the way they wish to impose such a regulatory charge , provided it is non-discriminatory , of course .
I propose that we return to the old text from 2006 , therefore , and I ask for your support for this .
On a final note , it is of the utmost importance that the Commission ensures that the Member States do not use this directive to impose unduly high charges on freight transport .
The Commission must take very seriously its tasks under Article 11 ( 1 ) .
If a Member State makes a mockery of the external cost charge calculation or of the maximum value , the Commission must come down hard on that Member State .
( DE ) Mr President , the economy , the environment and people - these are the three cornerstones within which we must fit European law relating to road charging and the Eurovignette .
When it comes to freight transport in Europe it is probably right to say that we must rank these three priorities differently , according to reverse alphabetical order , no less .
We must now prioritise as follows : people first , then the environment , then the economy .
We , the Commission and Parliament , want to do that .
The Commission has produced a very sound proposal on the subject of internalising external costs , proposing a truer reflection of costs in transport - in freight transport , but not just there - and we have former Vice-President Barrot and current Vice-President Tajani to thank for that .
We improved the proposal in the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
In particular , we put an even greater emphasis on the concerns of those affected most - people , the environment and the economy .
In this context I would like to offer my sincere thanks to the rapporteur , Mr El Khadraoui , and to all those who played their very constructive and active parts in this work .
We have also kept a sense of proportion .
Europe cannot and should not regulate everything and in every detail .
The Member States , as the shapers of their own specific conditions , must also have their place .
This also applies , and especially applies , to this much debated topic today , of congestion .
In this case , it should not be about punishing those who find themselves stuck in congestion but about coming up with constructive solutions to help prevent it .
Design should take precedence here , not bans .
As is also frequently the case with our text , the devil is in the detail .
In its original proposal , the Commission proposed , after careful cost calculations , to forget everything and have a final upper limit on costs after all .
In the committee , we rejected that as nonsensical in the then Amendment 20 .
Tomorrow , this item will be voted on again as Amendment 40 .
The rapporteur is in favour .
I ask all of you to support this item - we need to win this vote .
In closing , I would like to say that I find it very regrettable that the Czech Presidency has not deemed it worth the effort to send a representative to Parliament for this important legislative proposal .
Mr President , I will speak on the El Khadraoui report .
I would like to thank the rapporteur and his staff for all their hard work and for finding a compromise when , at times , it looked impossible .
There are a number of points that need to be made in this debate .
Firstly , this is the start of a process , not the end , and contained within the compromise is the right of Member States to introduce congestion charging or not .
I also want to remind honourable Members , particularly from the PPE-DE Group , that this Chamber has consistently demanded from the Commission a proposal and strategy to internalise external costs in all modes of transport - but in particular road transport - and this has indeed been highlighted as our roads become more congested and global warming more severe .
There is also a need to see a more balanced road sector that is not only economically sustainable , but also environmentally sustainable , and one that recognises that it has to pay a fair price for the costs it creates - be these environmental or infrastructure costs .
We cannot have a ' do-nothing ' attitude , although I note that this phrase has become synonymous with the Conservatives over recent months .
I know the formulation of this report has been difficult - some Members believe it goes too far , whilst others not far enough .
However , as a first stage , I think that this compromise deserves support .
I look forward in the future to other externalities being included and would stress my group 's support that all revenue from Eurovignettes should be earmarked for use in the transport sector so that transparency and public opinion can be brought closer together .
This report is a serious attempt to deliver what Parliament has called for over many years .
It will be an important tool in combating congestion , in improving the environment and in facilitating modal shift , which is why it deserves our full support .
And Commissioner , I would not worry too much about disagreeing with Georg Jarzembowski - we in the Socialist Group have been doing that successfully for years .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this is the third time I have had occasion to deal with this subject .
During the previous term , I had the pleasure of acting as rapporteur for an own-initiative report on the topic and then , not long ago , we approved the previous version of the Eurovignette .
We should not forget the reason why this process has dragged on for so long .
At least three factors are simultaneously at play .
Until recently , road and other infrastructures were paid for only by taxpayers .
The Eurovignette is paving the way to allow us to begin shifting at least part of the responsibility for paying the financial burden of infrastructures onto the user , in a manner that is clearly fairer .
In other words the Eurovignette is an instrument designed to ensure fair taxation , despite all indications to the contrary at the moment .
Ensuring this takes place in a different way will depend on financial engineering within the various states , who are not allowing Europe to deal with the matter - because otherwise we would be only too willing to do so .
The present Eurovignette applies the ' user pays ' principle .
Now we have the problem of switching to a ' polluter pays ' system , which is another great principle that we must seek to tackle .
As far as I am concerned , the compromise we have reached is a good compromise and we must seek to hold onto it as far as possible .
This is evidence that , if the Council agrees , we will effectively be able to pass ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( GA ) Mr President , I would like to say that I understand the reasons behind this report .
However , in so far as it relates to me it is unfair , as this duty , the Eurovignette , is adding to the costs of countries that are a long distance from the centre of the market .
The Commissioner said that mountain regions are opposing the Single Market .
What about areas like my own constituency in the West of Ireland , from where 1 000 lorries depart every week ?
They are hit while going to the market .
And what is this about it being a single market ?
It is not !
Costs are being raised for peripheral countries because you want the greening of the market .
You can 't have it both ways , however .
You must think about the countries on the periphery and give them a fair deal , Mr President , something which is not done in this report .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , no serious scientist doubts that there must be a drastic application of the brakes to the consumption of fossil fuels , as the raw materials are limited and as the combustion of fossil fuels is the main cause of the climate chaos .
We all know that around a third of fossil fuels are squandered on travel and transport and that goods vehicles , in particular , cause enormous damage to people and the environment that the taxpayer then has to pay for .
Everyone essentially agrees to the principle of paying the true costs .
Yet , when it comes to the specific measures to implement true costs , we hear a thousand excuses .
It is thoroughly incomprehensible why the actions being taken in response to the crises are not much more consistent .
It is wrong to continue to promote the unhealthy and bloated transport economy .
The 20-20-20 target will otherwise grow ever more distant .
We must be clear that this dishonesty jeopardises the future of our grandchildren .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , first of all , I would like to thank Mr El Khadraoui .
He has achieved a workable compromise under really difficult conditions .
For us transport policy makers , it is a quantum leap forward that air pollution , noise and congestion can now also be included in the tolls .
This reinforces the polluter pays principle .
The polluter pays principle prevents profits going into private hands while the damage is paid for by society .
That is a social democratic concept .
Parliament has resolved to introduce this principle to all modes of transport step by step .
There will then , at long last , be fair competition between the railways , lorries and inland waterways .
It must also be made clear at this point that it will be entirely up to the Member States whether or not these additional tolls are implemented .
Nobody will be forced to do so .
All we are doing here is setting up the basic framework for it so that there is no patchwork of different toll models across Europe , thereby avoiding discrimination , as road haulage should be treated in a comparable way throughout the internal market .
For us , this is not about additional income streams but is , instead , about directing transport more strongly by means of price signals .
The Committee on Transport and Tourism is right to want to see the mandatory ring-fencing of this additional income for use in reducing external damage .
However , there is still one fly in the ointment , as I see it .
Unfortunately , the committee decision , as it currently stands , links the introduction of congestion costs for goods vehicles to the inclusion of other modes of transport , such as passenger cars .
That will prevent the introduction of congestion costs in those Member States , such as Germany , that do not want a toll for passenger cars .
That therefore denies us an important instrument of taxation in the field of transport policy .
My conclusion is as follows : tomorrow 's vote offers a breakthrough in transport policy after decades of discussion about external costs .
I hope that we will receive the necessary majority to achieve that breakthrough .
( NL ) Mr President , the only reason - at least the way I see it - to look seriously at this proposal at all is that it creates a European framework for Member States to work within , which ultimately benefits the internal market .
Indeed , the ' green ' concept is being misused with increasing frequency for the purposes of a kind of protectionism .
The sectoral driving bans in Austria are a good example of this .
We have come a long way . A few tricky points remain under discussion , however .
Let me be clear that , as far as I am concerned , the possibility of a congestion charge for road freight transport is inadmissible , and I also consider the abandonment of earmarking unacceptable .
As my colleague Mr Sterckx said earlier , if , at second reading , it emerges that there is no majority in this House and in the Council in favour of these positions , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe will withdraw its support for the proposal .
Road freight transport is an important driving force for our economy .
It is particularly important that we do not lose sight of that fact - certainly not at this time .
Allow me , too - I say this particularly with the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats in mind - to conclude with an old Dutch saying : the bull-in-a-china-shop approach rarely works .
( PL ) Mr. President , the crisis which is increasingly taking its toll on road hauliers should caution us against introducing new charging regulations , unless what we want to do is to exacerbate the crisis .
Transport has always been the lifeblood of the whole economy .
We have had negative experience reforming the common agricultural policy , and this is likely to repeat itself now .
We must remember that road hauliers are not , in the main , vast enterprises , but small businesses with a handful of vehicles .
Let us not make them pay for the upkeep of the country .
This is already being done through tax on fuel , insurance , road checks and through many other charges .
Introducing payments for external costs would significantly increase the cost of transport and mean paying twice for the same thing .
It is clear that goods need to be transported , as there will always be producers and customers for goods which will need transporting , but do we have to make them responsible for the costs of infrastructure ?
I move for the suspension of all further action until better times , or for the complete rejection of the Commission 's proposal .
( DE ) Mr President , transport , and above all road transport , is responsible for 30 % of CO2 emissions , and even with this directive we are still miles away from achieving fair competition between the different modes of transport .
The EU has had a mandatory rail toll since the mid-1990s .
It applies to every locomotive on every kilometre of track , and it is practically unlimited in size .
On the roads , it is left up to the Member States to decide whether they charge any toll at all .
It applies only to goods vehicles , only on motorways and only to goods vehicles weighing 12 tonnes or more .
That is unfair competition .
It leads to the traffic moving from the railways to the roads rather than , as your fine grandiose speeches often indicate , from the roads to the railways .
The rail toll in Slovakia is twice as high as in Germany , and the Slovaks have no road tolls at all .
That is just madness .
That is why we need this directive .
We need the true reflection of costs .
If Members from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats believe that the costs of congestion should not be included , they should at least vote for the inclusion of the climate costs , the accident costs and the noise costs .
Then they will be credible .
Those who vote ' no ' on this issue are giving up on climate change and setting our children and our children 's children on the road to ruin , as they will have no future on this planet .
We need regulation that is much tougher than what the Commission and the majority of this House have proposed .
( PT ) Mr President , the revision of the Eurovignette Directive should have been used to encourage more sustainable and environmentally-friendly road transport .
Simply put : in my view , with the result obtained in committee , we have taken the wrong road .
We have not chosen measures that encourage more sustainable carriage of goods .
Instead , we have sent out the wrong message at this time of global crisis , with a revision for which all the indications are that it will only exacerbate the already precarious situation of many transport companies .
Many of these are small and medium-sized enterprises , which make up the majority of Europe 's businesses .
We know that measures aiming to combat pollution or stimulate technological innovation , such as cleaner engines and intelligent vehicles , are essential .
The problem , which is starting to cause serious difficulties , lies in the imposition of a congestion charge .
As far as the so-called ' peak hours ' are concerned , the cause of these is , above all , local motorists who are travelling to their job or business , or for leisure .
By coming up with the imposition of a charge that affects the carriage of goods , we will simply be punishing those who supply the workings of our daily lives , and who do so in the fastest , most flexible way , door-to-door .
We will also be acting unilaterally if we fail , for example , to take action in terms of changing working hours , accident prevention or road planning and maintenance , and will therefore call into question the very mobility that defines our societies and the market economy .
We are also impugning other measures taken to promote the economic , social and territorial cohesion of the Union .
For my country , Portugal , as well as for all the peripheral countries , this measure is nothing more than a throttling of economic activity , as we will merely be net contributors of any transit charges .
Mr President , in summary : with this charge we will be misconstruing the environmental objectives , which are important , causing more difficulties and even bankruptcy for small and medium-sized enterprises , and therefore directly contributing to increasing unemployment and social instability in European societies .
The choice is ours , and let there be no doubt that we will be called to account for the consequences of our decisions .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to express our profound disappointment , not least from the viewpoint of the Socialist benches - despite being geographically peripheral - at the dreadful timing of this report .
Firstly , it has come too soon .
We have not even evaluated Eurovignette II yet , which only began to be implemented about six months ago , but here we are opening another new dossier .
In addition , we are in the grips of a cruel financial , economic and social crisis , which has had devastating effects on goods transport .
It therefore sounds like a bad joke to propose a measure now that necessarily means raising the cost of goods , especially those transported in the countries on the fringes of Europe , which are precisely the ones that are worst affected by unemployment and lack the alternatives of railways or motorways of the sea .
They simply do not exist and , moreover , there is no willingness at the border .
Furthermore , the European Parliament has historically called for internalisation for all modes of transport and not just for the one that is already subject to cross-border charging .
We asked the Commission to make a really creative effort to achieve an intermodal system based on solidarity and thus maintain consistency in our European commitment to a co-modal logistics chain .
This text contradicts that in its partiality .
Lastly , I am disappointed because I feel it is dishonest to tell people that this instrument will solve their daily congestion problem for ever .
If that were the case , the road haulage sector would be the first to call for this instrument , because that is the group that already pays for the delays caused by urban traffic jams .
The rapporteur is proposing a compromise that deserves praise for its sharpness , but it contains an obvious legal weakness which the Commission denies , even though it can see it , not to mention the confused message that we send out to citizens when we establish European rules that the Member States are free to implement or not as they see fit .
As I have said , this has come at the wrong time , and it is an incomplete instrument that shows little solidarity , at least with the fringes of Europe .
Mr President , I want to say a word on the need to include CO2 emissions in the Eurovignette .
CO2 emissions from heavy goods vehicles amount to almost a quarter of emissions from road transport and , while cars are gradually getting more efficient , HGV fuel efficiency has not improved in the last 15 years .
If we do not include CO2 in the Eurovignette , what other options do we have ?
Precious few , because pigs will fly , as we say , before Ecofin ministers agree on EU-level fuel taxation .
Worse still , if a Member State wants to bring in a toll system that reflects the external costs of CO2 , they will not be allowed to do so unless we now include CO2 within the Eurovignette .
Excluding CO2 from the Eurovignette would be particularly unfair given that all Member States now have binding CO2 reduction targets to meet under the effort-sharing decision .
They need to have a range of tools at their disposal .

Mr President , I rise to speak specifically on Mr El Khadraoui 's report on the Eurovignette , the subject of which has been before this House in numerous forms on many previous occasions .
My position remains the same in that I do not see the need to pile extra taxation onto an industry which is already badly hit by the economic downturn .
In the United Kingdom , over GBP 50 billion is already taken from road transport each year and only GBP 10 billion reinvested in transport as a whole .
So much for hypothecation .
At a time when we are facing the biggest economic crisis in living memory , and businesses , large and small , are going bankrupt each week , why are we at a European level discussing measures which would exacerbate the problem ?
In this context , may I also say to Brian Simpson that it is better to do nothing than to do it wrong , as I am sure his party will find to its cost in the next few weeks .
On a more general note , I should make Members aware that , in the UK , these matters are decisions for local authorities in the context of implementing road pricing .
In my own region , the West Midlands , all seven of the local city councils of differing political complexions rejected the idea of implementing such a scheme .
In Brian Simpson 's own region , citizens overwhelmingly rejected road-pricing in a local referendum in the Greater Manchester area .
So I would ask this Parliament , and the European Commission , what part of ' no ' do you not understand ?
It should not be for the EU to dictate a ' one-size-fits-all ' approach in this area .
It should remain a matter solely for national and local determination .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to take this opportunity - as soon as we have quiet again in the Chamber - to offer my sincere congratulations to the rapporteur .
It was a tough job , and yet noteworthy progress was made , and progress that represents a small step on the road to the complete greening of heavy goods transport , especially in allowing no compensation for the additional charges and in including noise , air pollution and , to some extent , congestion , with some room for discussion about whether - in particular in the case of congestion - this is not somewhat too little .
I am , however , dissatisfied with certain elements and I would like to say a few words in that regard .
The problem of climate change must , by now , be something that everyone knows about or is at least aware of .
We have therefore also decided on special requirements , especially for heavy industry , that are not particularly easy to comply with and that are very much open to further discussion .
However , what no one in Austria and in the rest of Europe understands , under these circumstances , is that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats has prevented one of the largest causes of CO2 emissions , namely heavy goods transit traffic , from having to pay even a single euro cent for the costs it has given rise to .
That is something you will not be able to explain to your constituents , ladies and gentlemen .
They have to pay these costs through their taxes , and you really cannot explain that .
If the rapporteur for the PPE-DE Group believes that they have lost a battle here , I would say to her that I hope they lose many such battles , as that would be good for the vast majority of people in Europe .
( BG ) The report on road tolls contains suggestions which will make transport in the European Union significantly more expensive , especially over long distances and when using carriers from periphery countries of the EU , like Bulgaria .
It will not only be the carriers which will suffer as a result of this , but also their direct customers , retailers and end customers in the European Union .
Road transport operators are being hit hard by the financial and economic crisis .
We are seeing a 50 % reduction in the demand for transport services compared to 2007 , as well as 110 % more bankruptcies in this sector compared to 2007 .
Due to the lack of similar regulatory requirements , European carriers are not as competitive as firms from third countries which carry out a large number of shipments in the European Union .
Companies which have invested in green vehicles in recent years are in a particularly difficult position .
At the moment , they cannot service their leases and are consequently faced with bankruptcy .
Taking into account these conditions , I firmly support proposals 71 and 72 which recommend a ' congestion ' factor should not be included in the directive .
I also think that it is extremely important not to allow resources collected from road tolls to be transferred to other means of transport .
This will have an adverse impact , especially in countries with an underdeveloped road infrastructure , as is the case in my country , Bulgaria .
( RO ) We need a coherent , sustainable European policy in the transport sector which respects the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality .
Internalising external costs for pollution and noise is a positive measure .
The tolls paid by heavy vehicles to use road infrastructures will support , in the long term , the huge investments in the infrastructures included in the European and national economic recovery plans , at the level of both Trans-European transport networks and of other categories of road infrastructures , including mountainous regions where , in many cases , it is particularly difficult to construct roads .
However , in the short term , it is still the Member States ' responsibility to find specific quick ways of financing these investments through the sensible use of the funds which the EU provides to them , both as part of the TEN-T financing and through the Structural Funds and Cohesion Fund , as well as through franchises and public-private partnerships .
The European Commission must support , using the instruments which it has available , the integrated initiatives for extending Member States ' infrastructure networks , especially in the new Member States .
As regards introducing a charge on those using the infrastructure to help solve the problem of congestion , I believe that this proposal should be examined in more depth , bearing in mind that congestion does not depend exclusively on cars , but more significantly on Member States ' ability to plan and implement efficiently national infrastructures at regional and local level .
For this reason , I believe that there needs to be a better correlation between spatial development plans , town plans and traffic management , especially in urban and peri-urban areas where congestion causes the most problems .

Mr President , I would like to start by congratulating my friend and colleague , Mr El Khadraoui , who , it is fair to say , despite appearances suggesting the contrary , has actually proved himself capable of producing a very sound and workable report .
I am happy to add my support to it , and indeed to the underlying principle that the polluter should pay .
On this side of the House , we attach great importance to air quality , about which we are all very concerned , and we all know that lorries pollute .
As Mrs Lichtenberger put it , ' there is documented evidence ' .
Now Mrs Wortmann-Kool , who has left , spoke about the obstacles to the internal market and Mr Jarzembowski , despite his report on the greening of transport , also expressed reservations about the Eurovignette .
I would say to both of them that the biggest threat to all markets will be if we get overtaken by pollution .
I do not believe that an extra 2-3 % will be a huge burden , but it will show that we are taking serious steps to counter pollution .
Mr O 'Neachtain expressed reservations and concerns about Ireland and other peripheral countries .
He seems not to understand that this is optional on Member States .
It will only apply in Ireland if his government actually decides it .
I think he , and probably Mr Bradbourn , will have learnt one lesson this afternoon , which is that it is dangerous - and makes you look rather foolish - to speak on a report that you either have not read or that you clearly do not understand .
On another point , as an aside , I believe that we should , and could , do much more to encourage freight off the roads onto the waterways , where one barge can carry as much as 15 lorries .
I therefore think that we should support the initiative of our erstwhile Belgian colleague .


( FR ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , I would like to start by congratulating my fellow Members , Mr El Khadraoui and Mr Jarzembowski , on the high quality of their work and the excellent reports they have produced .
We are currently at a turning point , where we are trying to safeguard our industry whilst making it more sustainable , and to reach the ' three times 20 ' objective that was reaffirmed by the President of the European Union at the time , Nicolas Sarkozy , in this House last December .
In this context , the European Union has expressed a desire to legislate to take account , in transport costs , of other costs that have , to date , been borne by European society as a whole : this is the polluter pays principle that Parliament has always supported .
We voted for this for air transport last June , when aviation was integrated into the ETS system .
In the maritime sector , the European Commission is currently looking into the best way of taking account of discharges from ships , and it is what we are proposing today with this text for the transport of freight by road .
I agree with those of you who have said that we certainly must not restrict mobility .
We need to carry on as we have been for a number of years in encouraging this mobility in the European Union , and we need to ensure that there is fair competition between the various modes of transport .
We must not compel businesses at all costs to transport their goods by train or boat instead of by road freight - that would be absurd and anti-economic .
What we need to do is make sure that businesses can choose the quickest , most economic and most beneficial mode of transport for their purposes , and for that to be possible , the price has to reflect the real cost of the selected mode of transport .
By giving the States the option of internalising certain external costs if they wish , this directive takes a first step in that direction - a first step towards true integration of the external costs in all modes of transport , which sends a powerful political message .
It is important for us to support this when we vote tomorrow .
( PL ) Mr. President , I would like to thank our rapporteur , Mr El Khadraoui .
He has done a fine job .
He has dealt with hundreds of comments .
More to the point , I would like to stress that it is road transport that is currently keeping Europe up and running .
It is true that we are deciding on introducing additional charges , and it seems right that we should pay for what we use .
But when planning our work on the directive , we did not plan on the crisis .
I therefore feel I must speak on behalf of the road hauliers and say that their actual situation is much worse , particularly with the fall in demand for international road transport .
The hauliers have cited huge financial burdens , particularly those of tax on fuels .
There has been a temporary respite in terms of fuel costs , but we , as the European Union , cannot guarantee fuel prices over the longer term .
I believe that both the European Commission and governments should enter into dialogue with professional road hauliers .
We must explain to them how this initiative came about .
And we must also convince them that our intention is equal treatment for all forms of transport , and finally , that we are responsible for a sensible , balanced European transport policy .
( ES ) Mr President , the revision of the Eurovignette Directive is a very important issue that occupies us all and is also a cause for concern , particularly to those of us in peripheral countries who feel victimised by this proposal .
The European Commission has decided to approach the internalisation of the external costs of road transport by charging for three new costs : air pollution , noise pollution and congestion .
Although the principles behind the proposal - ' the user pays ' and ' the polluter pays ' - are reasonable , the solution proposed is definitely not , as it will discriminate against a sector which , for months , has been suffering from the disastrous effects of the economic crisis .
Although it was not the intention to demonise goods transport by road , it has ended up being the target .
This proposal , ladies and gentlemen , is inappropriate and , far from achieving the expected objectives of sustainable transport , it will be a death sentence for a large number of small and medium-sized European enterprises that employ thousands of people in the European Union and contribute every day to the distribution of goods , ensuring that products reach the end consumer .
Consumers will see how product prices will rise when these charges are implemented .
Ladies and gentlemen , we need a transport system that is competitive , sustainable and environmentally friendly and does not rule out road transport , because at the moment , it is the only way to get everywhere .
Modal change remains a dream and is far from becoming reality .
Trans-European networks , motorways of the sea and cross-border connections are still plans and not realities in some cases .
When the world economy Titanic goes down , ladies and gentlemen , we cannot ask the orchestra to carry on playing , and certainly not in celebration .

( PT ) Thank you to all those who were involved , particularly and especially my colleague Mr El Khadraoui , who gave his all in a manner very open to and ready for consensual solutions .
The proposal under discussion will allow Member States to levy charges with the objective of covering certain external environmental costs , as well as generating a significant income to be used for improving the European road network and minimising the environmental impact of some road transport .
On the other hand , it could also mean significant costs , especially for the more peripheral countries such as my country , Portugal .
That is why I insisted on Copel and vehemently opposed the mandatory extension of the geographic scope to cover all major roads .
I also opposed the application of charges generated just by the congestion of a few , which is a measure that will lead to unfair advantage and which fails to penalise those who pollute most .
I do , however , recognise the need to keep accounts of these charges .
Application just to trans-European road networks or to routes usually and significantly used by international road haulage , thereby allowing the Member State to choose the routes for which to introduce charges , is a lesser evil which could be minimised even further if application of this proposal were postponed until after the difficult global economic crisis we are currently experiencing .
( DE ) Thank you , Mr President , I very much welcome this proposal .
We are on the right road here , in particular , when it comes to incorporating the costs of congestion into overall road costs .
We need to achieve cost reality here to really bring about a situation where market economic instruments regulate traffic .
Otherwise , we will always have imbalances in this regard .
This debate has also shown up the tensions between the peripheral regions and those areas in the centre of our continent .
Quite simply , it must also be the case that when people from the peripheral regions drive though our central areas , they must take account of the concerns of the population .
That is very important and I do ask for understanding on this point , because on this issue some of the population has found itself pushed to the limit .
The subsidiarity principle , as expressed in the proposal , allows the Member States to decide for themselves whether they want to internalise these external costs .
For the central areas - and for the Alpine regions in particular - it is clear that they will choose to do so .
If peripheral regions decide not to take that route , that is something I can understand .
Overall , however , we must strive to make the individual sectors in the transport industry bear the costs that they actually give rise to .
That is the only way in which , in the long term , we can create a system that is truly sustainable and that satisfies the concerns of the population . Thank you .

( FR ) Mr President , I would like to start by congratulating Mr El Khadraoui on having reached a compromise , but we must not pretend that this text is not a very fragile one .
It is suffering from the external costs of the crisis , by which I mean that there is considerable pressure and considerable concern on the part of the road hauliers .
Moreover , when it landed in the office of our co-legislator , it had quite a different nature , because oil was at USD 57 a barrel .
It is therefore a text that was born under difficult circumstances , but I would like to say at this point , because I have been surprised by some of the things I have heard , that it is not a text that introduces a tax or a toll : it is the individual Member States that will decide whether to introduce a tax or a toll .
It is a text that , like the two previous ones , aims to define the conditions for road tolls in the various countries in order to avoid excessive distortions and so as not to create distortions of competition or discrimination .
We do , in my view , need to be quite clear on this .
The text complies completely with the principle of subsidiarity , and it is also fair .
I would say that I am very pleased with it on behalf of my own country because it will make it possible to obtain a contribution to the infrastructure of a transit country such as France from heavy goods transporters that currently go through the country without buying a drop of petrol and without spending a cent .
I therefore think that this will be a beneficial text .
( RO ) The Commission 's desire to charge transport operators not only for the right to use the infrastructure , but also for the impact on the environment , known as internalisation of external costs , will impose a tax burden with severe repercussions for these companies , especially in the current economic crisis .
Specific impact studies based on relevant statistics need to be carried out before putting forward a directive like this .
A realistic assessment is required of the consequences which will result from the implementation of such a directive and specific proposals on methods for calculating and posting external costs to account .
The internalisation of external transport costs is , in the long run , a measure which may help to make transport greener .
I should mention that specific legislative instruments such as these are actually necessary in Member States such as Romania .
However , I do not envisage yet that these external costs will be applied in the future , at any rate , not in Bucharest where I come from .
I am referring here to traffic congestion , air pollution , sound pollution , water pollution , soil pollution or the impact on natural landscapes .
I find it difficult to believe that the authorities in Romania will implement this directive , which is more of a burden than a help .
However , as Mr Jarzembowski also indicates , measures of this kind must be implemented after objective studies have been carried out , based on statistical data .
We cannot ask transport companies to pay sums of money that have been arbitrarily set for external costs , all the more so as we are talking about significant sums .
( DE ) Mr President , I wanted to speak again because a number of my fellow Members have spoken about the jobs issue in perhaps somewhat sanctimonious terms .
I think we would all agree that it is incredibly important , especially in times like these , to safeguard jobs .
The freight transport industry is , of course , suffering in this situation , but it is not only the hauliers that are suffering - the railways , inland waterways and maritime transport are suffering just as much .
All this directive does is to reduce the unfair advantage that road haulage currently enjoys over other forms of transport .
The question of jobs is a completely different issue .
In that regard , we need to implement a prudent economic and reconstruction policy , and we must consistently push on with what we have decided in this House .
This directive , however , has absolutely nothing to do with that .
Mr President , during the course of the debate , very many different positions emerged , sometimes conflicting , because they were linked with political stances as well as national positions .
All this discussion therefore highlights the difficulty of the issue , but also its importance .
I believe that we must find a compromise and the one we are arriving at in Parliament through Mr El Khadraoui 's report is a good compromise on the whole .
I do not believe that the Commission set out to inflict an additional tax or wanted to penalise countries situated to the west and east , in other words , more outlying countries .
In any case , the Eurovignette is not compulsory .
We also tried to harmonise the system to establish a framework that prevents tariff fraud , so maximum values are also established .
However , different stances , different ideas naturally emerged in our discussion .
I believe that the text that will be sent to the Council will certainly undergo amendments because people do not see eye to eye within the Council either .
We all agree with the ' polluter pays ' principle , but then when we go into the practical applications , differences emerge between Member States , between political forces , between MEPs , between the Commission , Parliament and Council .
The argument is therefore certainly thorny and complicated .
I do not , however , think we need to give credence to the critical viewpoint that takes a gloomy outlook because we are in the midst of a crisis .
It is true to say that we are in the midst of a crisis but it is also true that the proposal is for the measure to be applied from 2012 .
I certainly hope - and I am absolutely sure I am right to say - that the crisis will be well and truly over by 2012 .
A little optimism is a good thing , but even the most pessimistic amongst us cannot believe that we will still be in the midst of a crisis in the year 2012 .
Having said this , I believe that the Council will make amendments .
This means that the first reading will not be enough and we will then have time over the coming months to assess the changes that must be made so that we can attempt to come to a successful agreement through the conciliation procedure .
This will allow us to come up with specific answers for the public and allow us to apply the ' polluter pays ' principle as an option from 2012 in the best way possible .
Mr President , I wish to make a couple of comments .
I should like to start by asking my fellow Members not to be fooled by the off-putting statistics some have put forward .
One example is Mrs Wortmann-Kool , who talks of additional costs of several euro .
With all due respect , that is completely wrong .
I can tell you to the nearest cent what the impact would be in the most extreme case : congestion would be 65 euro cents per kilometre at the absolute maximum : 65 euro cents in very heavily congested areas , and only for the few kilometres where there was congestion , not the rest of the journey .
Noise would add 1.1 euro cents to this .
Air pollution would be a further 16 euro cents in the case of the most polluting lorries .
If you add all this up , you arrive at an absolute maximum of 82 euro cents for the few kilometres where there is congestion .
For the rest of the route , the 65 euro cents can be deducted .
That was the first thing I wanted to say , and I addressed it also to those from the peripheral Member States .
Secondly , it is true that we are in the midst of a crisis , but the crisis will not last forever .
What we are doing now is creating a framework to permit willing Member States to actually introduce a system of internalisation of external costs - following a national debate , in their own time and usually after years of preparation .
Thirdly , I note that quite a few of my fellow Members are seeking to anticipate all the Council 's decisions , as the Council has yet to take a position .
We should not be deterred by this one bit .
Let us simply go for a position we support 100 % .
Afterwards , we shall enter the debate , the fray , with the Council .
I can assure you that I shall do my best as rapporteur to secure most , if not all , of Parliament 's position , which we shall then discuss at a later date .
Mr President , Mr Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me , as we close this debate , to add two comments .
The first I address to Mr Evans .
My group is in favour of the internalisation of external costs , and specifically exhaust emissions and noise .
We believe this is reasonable .
Yet , if you always put the polluter pays principle first - I am prepared to discuss this with you - then it is the Member States that cause the congestion by not providing sufficient infrastructure .
The goods vehicles drive into congestion , 80 % of which is made up of cars .
To make businesses pay for congestion caused by the Member States is nonsensical .
If you applied the polluter pays principle , Member States would have to give extra money to the goods vehicle owners as it is the States that cause the congestion by failing to provide adequate infrastructure in time .
We are in agreement that there does not always have to be additional infrastructure .
Another way to prevent congestion is through intelligent traffic systems .
There are lots of modern technologies capable of preventing congestion .
To say , however , we have congestion , so the goods vehicles must pay for it , gives the Member States no incentive to remove the congestion , as to do so would cost them revenue .
That , surely , cannot be right !
Mr Vice-President , you were right to say that you did not want to introduce new taxes by means of this proposal and you insisted on ring-fencing .
Can we agree , then , Commissioner , Mr Vice-President , that , when the Council of Ministers fails to come out in favour of a clear ring-fencing of the revenue from the Eurovignettes , you will withdraw the proposal ?
You see , you said you do not want any new taxes .
I completely agree with you that if the Eurovignette is to be made more expensive as a result of exhaust emissions and noise , this extra money must also be used to reduce the environmental impact of road transport and not to fill holes in the finance ministers ' budgets .
That is not on .
With that in mind , I hope that you will stick to your position , in other words , no taxation without ring-fencing and withdrawal of the proposal where that is the case . Thank you very much .
There are three aspects of the present debate that need to be stressed : vehicle charging , environmentally-friendly vehicles and the internalisation of external costs .
The overriding priority of EU initiatives should be to guarantee the rights of EU citizens to unhampered mobility and its promotion through the consistent implementation of the EU infrastructure development plans .
This is enshrined in principle 4 of the Treaty on the freedom of the internal market .
Investments in infrastructure development should be based on the designated environmental protection priorities which take into account the EU climate change targets .
A modern integrated infrastructure should therefore be developed , while retaining the principles of intermodality and interoperability .
The costs of protecting the environment , noise , traffic congestion and protecting human health are integrally tied in with the modification of Europe 's rapidly developing infrastructure network .
It would seem appropriate to make the ' polluter pays ' principle , proposed in this document , binding .
We should remember that the principle has been operational in the field of business in the EC for several years now .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time ( B6-0009 / 2009 ) which , exceptionally , will last until 8 p.m.
I begin by informing you that Mr Kovács will not be present , so Questions Nos 1 and 3 from the first part of this period , addressed to the Commissioner , will be taken up by Mrs Reding .
The following questions have been submitted to the Commission .
Part One
Subject : Measures for the promotion of products and services that help increase energy efficiency and promote renewable energies
At the Spring European Council in 2008 , the Heads of State and Government agreed on a future review of the Energy Taxation Directive aimed at promoting an increase in the percentage of renewable energy as a proportion of the total energy used .
Increasing energy efficiency is one of the quickest , safest and cheapest ways of reducing EU dependence on third country energy resources , lowering energy consumption and cutting CO2 emissions and the European public 's expenditure on energy bills .
In the light of the need to increase energy efficiency , could the Commission indicate what measures and financial and fiscal instruments it has in mind to promote products and services that help increase energy efficiency and promote renewable energies ?
Member of the Commission . - It is in its European Economic Recovery Plan - which has , by the way , been endorsed by Parliament and the Council - that the Commission supports the promotion of the rapid take-up of green products .
It has , among other things , proposed reduced VAT rates for green products and services aimed at improving the energy efficiency of buildings in particular .
Furthermore , the Commission encourages Member States to provide further incentives to consumers to stimulate demand for environmentally-friendly products .
The Commission is currently carrying out a review of the existing Community tax legislation .
The objective is to eliminate as much as possible existing incentives that run counter to the objectives of energy efficiency and the reduction of carbon emissions , as well as to create incentives where appropriate to serve these objectives .
In addition to the above fiscal initiatives , the Commission seeks to enhance the use of other financial instruments to promote energy efficiency , in particular , in buildings .
A sustainable energy financing initiative is being developed jointly by the Commission and the European Investment Bank .
The initiative aims at mobilising funding from capital markets to be used via the participation of the Covenant of Mayors .
For 2009 , a budget of EUR 15 million can be expected to be made available .
The Commission has also proposed the modification of Regulation ( EC ) No 1080 / 2006 on the European Regional Development Fund , which would allow use of this fund by all Member States for increased expenditure on energy efficiency improvements and the use of renewable energy in existing housing .
( RO ) I would like to start by saying that the current directive was implemented badly or inadequately , which is why I would like to ask the Commission whether it is considering cutting VAT on products too in the future .
In addition , I think that it would be important to increase the European Regional Development Fund allocation supporting energy efficiency for buildings and social housing from 3 % to 15 % .
I also think that a fund for energy efficiency and renewable energy would be important .
Member of the Commission . - We know that it is very important to have measures to help citizens and governments go for energy efficiency .
We now have some studies on the potential of tax incentives for energy and environmental purposes , and the Commission is preparing a proposal to amend the VAT directive to allow reduced rates of VAT to apply to certain environmentally-friendly goods and services .
As set out in the Economic Recovery Plan , the Commission may propose reduced VAT rates for green products and services aimed at improving the energy efficiency of buildings in particular .
It should be pointed out , however , that the Commission proposal of July 2008 already provides an option for Member States to apply these reduced VAT rates on services involving the renovation , repair , alteration and maintenance of housing , places of worship and of cultural heritage , and historical monuments .
This includes work aimed at increasing the energy savings and efficiency of the buildings concerned .
The Ecofin today came to a compromise .
It is too early to say exactly what we are going to do in detail with the Ecofin proposals , but the Commission is going to study the proposals that were made today .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to put on record my thanks to the Commissioner and the Commission for ensuring , in particular , that the subject of the thermal insulation of buildings was discussed here .
It is one of the most efficient ways of saving energy and , from that point of view , it seems to me to be an important and a correct route to go down .
In this context , my question is this : does the Commission see an opportunity here to make the corresponding VAT cuts available for low-energy houses and energy-neutral houses in the prefabricated construction sector ?
Is this something that can be considered , and where are we heading ?

Mr President , what Mr Rack has just proposed is an interesting idea .
His idea will , of course , be analysed by the Commission along with the other ideas on the table in relation to energy efficiency in house building or housing renovation .
I can also say that the Commission is going to restructure the structural funds with the effect that it will also be possible to invest in such energy-efficient houses through the structural funds .
Subject : More flexible interpretation of the Stability and Growth Pact
Will the Commission say whether , during this period of very great economic crisis , it is insisting on its view that all countries with deficits must reduce them within a period of two rather than three years , although the latter period would appear more reasonable according to the available data ?
If so , why ? How is this insistence compatible with the views of the Eurogroup chairman regarding a more flexible interpretation of the Stability and Growth Pact ( see statements of 21 January 2009 , Agence Europe ) ?
Member of the Commission . - Under normal circumstances , the Stability and Growth Pact presumes there will be rapid correction of the excessive deficit and this correction should be carried out the year after such an excessive deficit has been identified .
However , the reformed Stability and Growth Pact also allows for longer deadlines in the case of special circumstances - in accordance with Article 34 of Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1467 / 97 .

The Pact does not provide an explicit definition of these special circumstances .
However , when preparing a report under Article 143 of the Treaty triggered by the existence or the planned excessive deficit , the Commission is required by the Treaty to take into account what are known as ' relevant factors ' .
In this report , the Commission shall reflect developments in the medium-term economic position , in particular , potential growth , prevailing cyclical conditions , the implementation of policies in the context of the Lisbon Agenda and policies to foster research and development and innovation .
It shall also reflect developments in the medium-term budgetary position , in particular , fiscal consolidation efforts in good times , the level of public debt and sustainability issues , external financing needs , public investment , and the overall quality of public finances .
It shall also take into consideration any other factors which , in the opinion of the Member State concerned , are relevant in order to comprehensively assess in qualitative terms the excess over the reference value and which the Member State has , of course , put forward to the Commission and to the Council .
The provisions of the relevant factors to be considered indicate that determining the incidence of special circumstances should be based on an overall assessment of such factors .
On 18 February , the Commission adopted its recommendations for Council opinions on the latest updates of the stability and convergence programmes for 17 Member States .
At the same time , and taking into account its assessment of these programmes , the Commission adopted reports for Ireland , Greece , Spain , France , Latvia and Malta .
The Ecofin adopted its opinion on these reports this morning .
The Commission will propose recommendations to the Council to put an end to situations where an excessive deficit exists .
These recommendations will include deadlines which will have been decided according to the Stability and Growth Pact , i.e. taking into consideration the existence of special circumstances , where appropriate .

( EL ) Mr President , I should like to thank the Commissioner for her very detailed reply , although I must say that I was somewhat surprised that , with all the important things you said , you did not mention the concept of timetables , in other words if the Commission will recommend specific timetables for each case and , secondly , if , in its recommendation , the Commission will link the timetable phases with the reduction in the percentage above 3 % .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I have two brief questions .
My first question is this : what happens in respect of those Member States that have really provocatively low business tax rates or indeed none at all ?
Is it fair for the relaxation of the Pact by these countries to be overlooked when they get into difficulties due to the low tax takes resulting from their policies ?
My second question is as follows . Should this question not be linked to a certain level of success ?
In other words , where a Member State suffers a greater deficit in order to combat unemployment and unemployment then falls dramatically , would it not make sense to promote such an approach ?
Has there been a change in the Rules of Procedure ?
I thought it was the questioner who had a supplementary , plus two other Members .
Secondly , what time does Question Time continue until tonight as we started late ?
Mrs Doyle , we will actually finish at 8 p.m. as intended .
We began late and we will finish late .
Does the honourable Member not have a supplementary question ?
Do you wish to pose your supplementary question Mrs Doyle ?
Mr President , I do .
My apologies .
I understood you were only giving it to the Questioner and one other .
I misunderstood the point you made .
I would like to follow through by asking the Commissioner to name any Member State that will not have an excessive deficit , as understood to date .
Secondly , could she develop exactly what the Commission is going to propose to the Council as decided this morning in relation to Ireland ?

Member of the Commission . - In answer to the question by Mr Dimitrakopoulos , the Commission , when proposing the deadlines for a Member State to return to a sustainable position of public finances , will take into account the room for manoeuvre available to the Member State concerned .
A call for rapid fiscal consolidation can be expected only in cases of danger of a public finance crisis , taking into account the financing needs of the whole economy .
As for the second question , which was a double question , the answer to the first part is ' no ' .
The answer to the second part - on countries with low corporate tax - the Stability and Growth Pact assesses the global fiscal position of a Member State , not the specific tax structure of each Member State .
In reply to the third question , on whether there are any Member States without excessive deficits , there are , of course , certain Member States without excessive deficits , as can be seen in the charts which the Commission regularly publishes .
Subject : Abolition of tax havens
Has the Commission proposed or does it intend to propose the abolition of tax havens , especially within the EU ?
Has the EU adopted any decision proposing that Member States abolish the tax havens existing within their territory ?
What measures will the Commission take to put an end to tax havens , combat financial speculation and curb the free movement of capital , especially within the Union ?
Mr President , since the end of the 1990s , the Commission has been pursuing a determined policy against fraud , tax evasion and detrimental fiscal competition .
A key element in this policy has been to promote transparency in tax systems and the exchange of information between tax administrations .
Finally , this policy has been confirmed by the clear declarations by the G20 attacking non-transparent practices in certain jurisdictions , often referred to as tax havens .
The Commission strengthened its policy in this field at the end of 2008 and the start of 2009 , by presenting two proposals .
The first aims to boost the exchange of information as laid down in the savings directive .
The second effectively proposes that all the Member States should align their information exchange standards to the most open level , particularly by ensuring that Member States cannot use financial confidentiality as an excuse to refuse to provide information that other Member States need in order to calculate their residents ' taxes .
In May 2008 , the Council decided to promote this policy of good fiscal governance to third countries , including the principles of transparency , exchange of information and fair fiscal competition , and it asked the Commission to negotiate clauses to this effect in agreements with third countries .
The Commission intends to present a political initiative soon with the aim of highlighting the consistency of this policy and the key factors in ensuring that it is successful .
It feels , in particular , that the implementation of measures coordinated at European level would respond to the concerns expressed by Mr Guerreiro .
( PT ) On the strength of what was said , there seems to be less action than words .
In other words , tax havens and their abolition are not on the menu , but I would pose the following question : how does the Commission intend to dissuade banks from operating from ' offshore ' centres , as it has stated that intention ?
Also , what actual measures does it intend to propose to combat the financial speculation that is central to the causes of the current financial and economic crisis ?
The Commissioner must know a little bit about tax havens , because Luxembourg rather falls into that category .
Does she not feel that this undermines the whole principle of a common market , with lorries driving out of their way to get the cheap fuel there ?
Then there is Jersey , Guernsey , the Isle of Man - which are in the UK but outside the EU - Liechtenstein , Monaco , San Marino , etc .
They are all little tax havens , with offshore banking , which we have just heard about , pandering to the rich .
They only exist because the EU allows them to do so .
These are her words : ' a resolute policy against tax evasion ' .
If that were true , would not the Commission include some suggestions for abolishing these tax havens ?
Member of the Commission . - In answer to the first question , the Commission has proposed two new directives in order to solve these problems because the financial crisis has highlighted the problems more clearly than before .
We made a proposal at the end of 2008 and another one at the beginning of 2009 , the former reinforcing the information exchange and the latter enshrining the right of a Member State to obtain information without the other Member State invoking banking secrecy .
As for the second question I just want to underline that lorries have nothing to do with tax havens .
Subject : The Internet and hate crimes
Incitement to racial hatred is a crime in all EU Member States .
However , according to the 2008 Hate Crime Survey published by the NGO Human Rights First , hate crimes are on the rise in Europe , and it is important to see the central role that the Internet plays in this .
As part of its aim to fight cybercrime and create a safer Internet for all , is the Commission taking any specific action to help combat websites which incite racial hatred and violence ?
Member of the Commission . - The question which was asked is very important , and I would like to underline that the Commission strongly rejects the racism , xenophobia and any type of hate speech the honourable Member refers to .
The Commission also shares the concerns raised , and is aware that certain content available on the Internet can have a very negative impact .
The Commission fights racism , xenophobia and anti-Semitism in all media platforms , and not just the Internet , as far as possible , under the powers conferred by the Treaties .
On this basis , the Commission has taken a number of initiatives - legislative and non-legislative - which seek to prevent discrimination as well as racist , xenophobic and anti-Semitic speeches .
Firstly , there is the Audiovisual Media Services Directive , which extends minimum standards for content to all audiovisual and media services , and that includes on-demand offers on the Internet .
This includes : ' prohibition of incitement to hatred based on race , sex , religion or nationality ' .
Furthermore , the Commission had adopted policies that aim at reducing racist content online .
I would just underline here the recommendation on the protection of minors and human dignity and on the right of reply , which calls for action against discrimination in all media .
The recently adopted Council framework decision on combating certain forms and expressions of racism and xenophobia by means of criminal law sets out a common EU approach to racism and xenophobia .
The framework decision aims at criminalising international conduct , such as incitement to violence or hate towards a group of people or against a person belonging to a group defined on the basis of race , colour , descent , religion , belief , or national or ethnic origin .
Incitement to violence or hatred would also be punishable if committed by public dissemination and distribution of tracts , pictures and other materials .
The Member States have an obligation to comply with those provisions by 28 November 2010 .
Apart from this legal approach , the Commission is promoting a set of measures for the safer use of the Internet .
I think Parliament well knows the Safer Internet Plus Programme , with a budget of EUR 55 million for the period 2009-2013 , which co-funds projects with the following objectives : increased public awareness , provision of a network of contact points for reporting illegal and harmful content and conduct , in particular , on child sexual abuse material , grooming and cyber-bullying , fostering of self-regulatory initiatives in this field and involving children in creating a safer online environment , establishing a knowledge base of the new trends in the use of online technologies and their consequences for children 's lives .
The Commission furthermore strives to promote a responsible use of media and the Internet .
In its communication on media literacy of December 2007 , the Commission calls on Member States to commit to more effectively promoting media literacy and research in this field .
This year , it will present a recommendation on media literacy .
It is also worth noting that our neighbour , the Council of Europe , has developed a series of international legally binding and non-binding instruments on these issues , which all show that cyberspace is not a lawless area and that Member States are bound to protect individual rights and freedoms through their national laws , inter alia , the Cybercrime Convention and its additional Protocol 3 .
Commissioner , I do not doubt for one minute your commitment to this area .
I know you have looked into it in great detail .
However , concerning this issue which you mentioned of the ' lawless area ' of cybercrime , are you convinced , specifically in connection with inciting hatred - which is a criminal offence in all Member States , I think - that the implementation of the Framework Decision , the Audiovisual Directive and many of the other instruments that you have mentioned is actually stopping the proliferation of these sites ?
The evidence so far is that they are increasing as we speak .
Do you feel that we should take further action ?
Commissioner , there is no greater hate crime than murder , and this week in my constituency of Northern Ireland , we had three hate murders of members of the security forces by Irish Republican terrorists .
And yet , within hours , there were a number of sites , across the Internet , glorifying those hideous murders and praising those who had carried them out .
So , as well as looking at racism and xenophobia , is the Commission focused on how it deals with the abuse of the Internet by terrorist parasites ?
Member of the Commission . - There is no excuse for crime , wherever that crime has taken place - be it in the real world or in the digital world - but of course , it is much easier to fight crime in the real world because you have the instruments which allow you directly to intervene .
It is much more complicated on the worldwide web , and that is why we have developed a whole series of instruments in order to fight such crime .
I know from discussions with my colleague , Jacques Barrot , that police forces are building up a network of analyses in order to fight crime on line , and that they are having more and more success in catching the criminals .
However , there are also more and more sites being constructed .
I myself have tried , with the Safer Internet Programme , to do something else in this respect .
This is to empower people - and most of all young people - who utilise the Internet to know what to do when they come across negative content .
For instance - and we are not necessarily speaking about crime , but about cyber-bullying , which can become terrible for young people - that there is a special report button for them to ask for help .
So we are trying by different means to fight criminals by means of the police forces , by empowering educators , parents and children so that they can take a decision by themselves or report , and , of course , by media literacy programmes , which I personally would wish to be much more numerous in the Member States .
You have to give tools to the next generation to find a solution and to fight , because , if not , then we might have a problem with the Internet , and that parents will not allow , for instance , their kids to be on the Internet , and that would not be the right way to proceed .
We want the positive site of the Internet to flourish and the negative side of the Internet to be blocked .
Now to the murder question which the honourable Member underlined .
This is a terrible thing to happen , and I believe that it is within the field of activity of the police and security forces to block all this .
Those tools should , of course , not be regarded as something which can be utilised for solving all society 's problems , but when it comes to crime there can be no discussion .
Crime has to be fought and it has to be fought very strongly .
Subject : Information and Communication Technologies ( ICT ) and Information Society
The Commission has put the development of ICT and of the Information Society , which has huge potential benefits for European economy and society , at the heart of its programmes .
However , what is the Commission doing to ensure that certain sectors of European society - such as older people and people on low incomes - are not left behind or forgotten in this process ?
Member of the Commission . - Information and communication technologies have a huge potential for helping older people .
Well , that is easily said and not so easily done because we do have a real digital divide here .
It is those people who badly need ICT tools who , because they have never used those tools in their lives before , are not used to utilising them .
For instance , only 15 % of older people use the Internet .
That is why we have to develop a whole policy in order to bring this barrier down , because we will need ICT to enable older people to stay active and productive for longer , to continue to engage in society with more accessible online services , and to enjoy a healthier and higher quality of life for longer .
That was exactly why the Commission presented in 2007 an action plan for ageing well in the information society with very concrete measures .
The first measure is on research and innovation in order to develop and test technologies for social care and independent living for older persons .
I must pay tribute to our industries because , through these research programmes , the industries have developed a whole series of mechanisms , services and products which help older people to stay longer in their own homes .
The second measure is to raise awareness of the benefits among users and public authorities through the establishment of a best practice Internet portal and European award schemes for smart homes - independent living applications for instance .
The third is to reduce the fragmentation of approaches in deploying these technologies in Europe .
In 2008 , the Commission adopted two other initiatives .
The first was a new joint programme to support joint research with Member States in the area of ambient-assisted living : those are the technologies for home applications and for mobility , assisting older users in their daily lives and providing social care applications .
The second was the new communication on e-accessibility , fostering the use of ICT goods and services by older people and by people with disabilities , and inviting Member States to take all necessary steps to improve the accessibility of public websites .
In line with those measures , between now and 2013 , the EU , together with Member States and the private sector , will invest more than EUR 1 billion in research and innovation for the ageing society .
So you see we really take that very seriously and we believe that we have possibilities here to improve life in an ageing society .
On the problem of low income users , I would refer first of all to the second package of the roaming regulation which Parliament adopted in the ITRA committee yesterday night .
One element of this package is to bring down the prices of using mobile phones , landlines , the Internet , etc .
The Commission has also set up a consumer market scoreboard that permits monitoring of market outcomes for consumers .
The evidence on the scoreboard helps us to better take account of consumer interests .
The new proposals which are before Parliament in the review of the telecom market also aim to strengthen consumers ' and users ' rights with a view to improving accessibility and promoting an inclusive society .
It has been proposed , for instance , to amend some provisions in order to take better account of the needs of the elderly and those with special needs , and those should be general objectives guiding the activity of the national regulatory authorities .
I would like to thank the Commissioner .
I do not for one minute doubt that the Commission is doing an awful lot on IT information .
You can see a lot of the work they do .
I am a recent participant in the ' Twitter ' site and I have to say that I am more than surprised and impressed at how much information is on that site from the European Union .
It gives a huge amount of information and I would like to congratulate them on that .
However , we still have a problem with people from disadvantaged backgrounds and elderly people using and accessing the Internet and new technologies .
This is changing all the time , but we have an opportunity , or a challenge , between now and the June elections , and I would just like to ask you whether you have any plans to try to get more people to participate on the Internet to promote the June elections in the European Union .
( RO ) I would like to congratulate you on what you are doing for children and the Internet , as well as for the decision to have 100 % broadband coverage by 2010 .
I want to say that in Romania , elderly people and parents communicate cheaply and efficiently via the Internet with children who have gone abroad ; they can see and hear them .
However , I want to ask you what you are doing to develop online services .
I am referring in this case to the public key infrastructure .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , industry does actually produce equipment that is very suitable for the varied purposes of the information society for elderly and disabled users , too .
That said , nearly all the mobile phones , emergency call buttons and similar gadgets are offered at fundamentally very expensive prices .
Is the Commission able to do anything about this ?
You see , selling particularly simple technology at especially expensive prices is not very user-friendly .
Member of the Commission . - First of all , the Internet and the elections .
This is a question which those who are standing for election , the MEPs and the candidates , should take on board and on which they should develop better communication with their citizens .
In recent years , so many positive actions have been taken with the help of the European Parliament that it should not be very difficult to present all these positive actions to citizens .
Looking only at the examples of e-inclusion in Ireland , for instance , I can give the list of those which have been put into practice on the territory of Ireland with Irish companies , research centres and NGOs .
It will be very interesting , even for the MEPs themselves , to explain what is being done via the European budget to improve the life of citizens .
The second question was about the young and the old , and how they can communicate better .
Well , I can tell you that my mother , who had never used a mobile phone , bought one in order to communicate with her grandchildren because she understood that this was the only way they could call her .
Now she is very much upset if they do not call her often enough .
However , I have also met a lot older persons who have come to use the Internet because of Skype , because their children or grandchildren are abroad and they would like to speak with them .
That is why we are trying to develop measures towards a real internal market for communications in Europe , so that this communication will be swift and not very expensive .
That brings me to the third question : what about the price of the communications ?
There are a lot of services in operation which bring down the price of communications .
Now it is true that those services or those items specially adapted to the older generation are being kept on the home market , because the market is not yet developed very strongly and they are still too expensive .
There is only one solution to this , namely to develop the market , because if thousands and thousands of older people take up those services , take up those instruments , the price will become affordable .
So we have to raise awareness to promote the take-up of these ICT goods and services which I believe will be one of the solutions to the problems of the ageing society .
Subject : Internet monitoring
It has come to my attention that the Internet has become a safe haven for racists and other bigots to air their views .
Has the Commission raised this and , if so , what action is it taking ?
Questions Nos 37 and 40 will receive answers in writing .

Member of the Commission . - The question the honourable Member has asked is not new , which shows that it is something that is very dear to the heart of MEPs .
I would recall the answer I gave to the questions by Mr Moraes on the Internet and hate crimes , by Luca Romagnoli on content and the use of blogs , and by Robert Kilroy-Silk on racism and violence on social websites .

I can tell you not only that those questions have been asked but also that the Commission has taken action in this area .
Speaking only about the social websites , some weeks ago , all the social networking site providers sat around a table and signed a code of conduct to help young children and adolescents to fight against negative content on these websites .
As you know , the Commission strongly rejects all racist and xenophobic views conveyed on the Internet , together with the types of hate speech cited by the honourable Member in his question .
As is often the case with the web , the picture is one of stark contrasts .
On the web , the best rubs shoulders with the worst : on the one hand , there are tremendous opportunities to diffuse and receive valuable , targeted information , for better social cohesion ; on the other , it is an ideal forum for stereotypes , prejudices , derogatory views and even dangerous content , as was mentioned in the question .
Here lies the danger : should the State go and block access to websites or filter search-engine results ?
This is already being done by authoritarian states .
In democratic countries , such as the EU Member States , restrictions on the freedom of speech are exceptional and governed by the rule of law .
It is worth noting that the Council of Europe has developed a series of international , legally binding instruments , directly and indirectly concerning the Internet .
These uphold the belief that cyberspace is not a lawless area , but is subject to the rule of law .
I would recall the Convention on Cybercrime and its additional protocol .
The Commission has also adopted policies aimed at reducing racist content online , notably the recommendation on the protection of minors and human dignity and the right of reply , which calls for action against discrimination in all media .
I would also like to draw attention to the Framework Decision on combating certain forms of expression of racism and xenophobia , which aims at criminalising intentional conduct , such as incitement to violence or hatred towards a group of people or against a person belonging to that group .
This is a criminal offence if committed by public dissemination or distribution of tracts , pictures or other material , and here , Member States have the obligation to comply with the provisions of the Framework Decision by 28 November 2010 .
I could also underline that the European law already prohibits incitement to hatred on grounds of sex , race , religion or nationality in TV broadcasts and in TV online .
So we already have a whole series of mechanisms , a whole series of laws and a whole series of measures implementing these laws .
But as always with negative content - be it in the traditional media or on the Internet - it pops up more quickly than you can fight it .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for her reply .
In recent days , we have seen in Northern Ireland two soldiers and a policeman killed , as has been referred to by another Member , by people who secretly arrogate to themselves the right to do things like this based on bigotry and evil and - yes - racism and xenophobia .
They , and their like , use such things as the Internet to recruit and to spread their evil words and deeds .
It seems to me very clear , for example , that if the rules for entering chat rooms were to be tightened up , by not allowing the use of , for example , Hotmail - I confess I do not know very much about it but it is very easily used - and insisting instead on some sort of traceable e-mail , then the people who do these sorts of things , which they could not do in the open , would be more easily traced .
I ask the Commissioner to use all her powers to continue to pursue this issue , because it is not acceptable that the Internet should be used for racism and xenophobia .
Member of the Commission . - Crime is crime wherever it happens , and that is why we also have instruments to go after crime when it is committed on the Internet .
Together with my colleague , Jacques Barrot , we will develop those instruments so that they become stronger and are used more efficiently .
The problem of the Internet , of course , is that it goes beyond national territory , which is why collaboration between police forces and those forces which combat terrorism and international crime has to be reinforced .
In recent years , we have seen those forces working together with very good results .
I hope and I think these efforts will continue .
Subject : Serbia 's candidate status
The debate about granting Serbia the status of an EU candidate country continues .
Is there not a risk involved in making Serbia a candidate country or even a Member State before the Republic of Kosovo , given that Belgrade might use this advantage to block future accession negotiations or , indeed , the establishment of any kind of relations between the Republic of Kosovo and the EU ?
Member of the Commission . - ( RO ) The prospects of Serbia joining the European Union depend on this country meeting the Copenhagen accession criteria , as well as the conditions set out as part of the Stabilisation and Association Process , including the condition to cooperate fully with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia .
However , Serbia is not a candidate country and has not , as yet , requested to join the European Union .
As a result , I am not in a position to pass an opinion on what might happen in the future and on the actions which Serbia might or might not take in relation to Kosovo .
If Serbia were to apply for accession , the European Commission would draw up , following a request made by the Council , a draft opinion based on the established objective criteria applied to all states which request to join the EU .
Subsequently , it will be the European Council which will decide whether to grant candidate country status or not .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I have a high personal regard for you , and that is why I regret the fact that Commissioner Rehn is not here , as I am far from satisfied with that answer .
I could have printed that off from the Internet myself .
I will state very plainly what I was getting at with my question .
Negotiations are taking place with Serbia about a stabilisation agreement currently being drawn up .
I want to draw the Commission 's attention to the danger that Serbia could block Kosovo here , as in the UN and the Council of Europe .
My question was , what do we do to prevent the occurrence of something like the current block on Croatia by Slovenia .
Member of the Commission . - ( RO ) As I said in my reply , we do not wish in any way to pre-empt possible actions in the future .
At the present time , Serbia is at a certain point where no application has been submitted yet to join the European Union .
Let us see what happens in the future .
Therefore , as I have said , let us not speculate on hypothetical situations in the future .
Subject : Serbian accession
Will the European Commission explicitly and firmly recommend that no further progress be made regarding Serbia 's accession to the EU unless Ratko Mladić and Goran Hadžić , the two remaining fugitives from the ICTY , are delivered to The Hague ?
Member of the Commission . - ( RO ) Serbia 's accession to the European Union depends on Serbia meeting the political condition to cooperate fully with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia , along with complying with all the other obligations which are a condition of integration into the EU .
In this respect , the Commission shares the conclusions of the Council reached in April 2008 that full cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia , including making every possible effort to arrest and hand over people who have been indicted , is an essential element of the Stabilisation and Association Process .
In this regard , the assessment carried out by the ICT 's chief prosecutor , Serge Brammertz , is particularly important .
We have established permanent , close contact with him .
Furthermore , Commissioner Rehn has taken every opportunity to call on the Serbian authorities to implement fully the recommendations made by the chief prosecutor in his report published in December 2008 and sent to the UN Security Council .
This is the surest way of allowing Serbia to cooperate fully with the International Criminal Tribunal and make progress in terms of fulfilling its aspirations to become a Member State of the European Union .
I am very supportive of Serbia making progress towards EU accession , as I am all of the Western Balkans , as a former member of the relevant European Parliament delegation .
The problem is that when we say Serbia 's accession will depend on full cooperation with the ICTY , this begs the question of when exactly we will make this criterion bite .
I really want to try and get from the Commissioner the fact that no further progress will be made now , in the next few weeks , unless these fugitives are delivered .
Can he also tell me that no further progress can be made regarding Croatia 's accession unless the ICTY is satisfied that there is full cooperation over evidence and witnesses regarding the Croatian invitees ?
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to support Mrs Ludford 's question .
The Commissioner has rightly said that this is a criterion for Serbia .
What he has not said , is whether or not Serbia fulfils this criterion .
I would be interested to hear the answer .
Does Serbia fulfil the criterion of full cooperation ?
We know that that is the case for Croatia .
Member of the Commission . - You are aware that in the Council , there are different opinions concerning this issue and you know that there is no unanimity concerning the position of the Council on this issue .
So , as I said in my answer we , the Commission , fully share the opinions of the Council - and I refer to the conclusions of the Council from April 2008 - that full cooperation with the Tribunal is essential for following the process .
Questions Nos 43 and 44 will receive answers in writing .
Subject : Turkish-funded usurpation of Greek Cypriot properties in the occupied territory of Cyprus
According to public allegations by the former Cypriot Foreign Minister , Erato Markoulli , large-scale usurpation of Greek Cypriot properties situated on the Karpas peninsula in the occupied territory of Cyprus is taking place with funding from Turkey .
This matter clearly came to the attention of Mrs Markoulli in the course of negotiations to resolve the Cyprus question , in which she is involved , and on the basis of other information .
Turkey , which has applied for accession to the EU while , at the same time , occupying territory in the Republic of Cyprus , an EU Member State , is organising the usurpation of properties belonging to European citizens , thereby infringing international law and human rights , together with EU principles and values .
What view does the Commission take of this policy being followed by Turkey ?
Is it acceptable on the part of a country seeking EU membership ?
Does the Commission intend to take measures against Turkey and , if so , what measures , in response to the usurpation of Greek Cypriot properties in occupied Cyprus ?
Member of the Commission . - ( RO ) The Commission has noted the use of properties belonging to Greek Cypriots in the northern part of Cyprus .
The Commission is aware of this problem , which intensified when Cyprus joined the European Union on 1 May 2004 , and shares the concern of the European Parliament 's honourable Member .
With regard to the specific cases which the Parliament 's honourable Member is referring to , the Commission does not have any information on this and is therefore unable to comment .
The European Commission reaffirms its full commitment to support the efforts of the leaders of the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot communities in identifying a comprehensive solution to the Cypriot problem under the auspices of the United Nations .
Such a settlement would help resolve the problems over property on the island , which the European Parliament 's honourable Member is referring to .
( EL ) Mr President , I am a Cypriot member of parliament , I have supported the integration of Turkey into Europe since the days of President Ozal and I still support it today .
In the fourth interstate application , the Court of Human Rights ruled that Turkey is responsible for usurping Greek-Cypriot property .
What , at long last , is to be done ?
How are we supposed to put up with this situation year after year ?
Are there first- and second-class human rights or does their application depend on the size of the country ?
Member of the Commission . - The Commission has always encouraged Turkey to implement all the decisions of the European Court of Human Rights .
A debate will be held tomorrow in plenary , and this subject will also be discussed .
Subject : Opening of the ' energy ' chapter in the accession negotiations with Turkey
The recent gas crisis between Russia and Ukraine demonstrated once again the importance of diversifying the EU 's energy sources and energy supply routes .
Turkey is a strategic transit country and , in this respect as well , of vital importance to the EU 's energy security .
It is all the more vital , therefore , that the EU 's negotiations with Turkey on the ' energy ' chapter should continue unhampered and not be blocked by certain Member States on political grounds .
Will the Commission take steps to ensure that this negotiating chapter is opened ?
Can it indicate a timeframe ?
What is the most serious obstacle to the full opening of the ' energy ' negotiating chapter ?
Questions Nos 47 and 48 will receive answers in writing .
Member of the Commission . - ( RO ) The European Commission considers that Turkey is sufficiently prepared to initiate negotiations on the Energy chapter and therefore recommended for this chapter to be opened in spring 2007 .
Our point of view has not changed on this matter .
However , the unanimous approval of all Member States is required to open a chapter , which has not happened so far .
In the context of the recent energy crisis , we completely concur with you that both the interests of the EU and Turkey would be better served through close cooperation and aligning Turkey 's legislation with Community legislation in the energy sector .
Initiating negotiations in the energy sector would make a decisive contribution to attaining this objective .
( DE ) So , will the Commission take steps to ensure that the chapter is opened , or will we simply have to wait until all the Member States agree ?
Does the Commission not influence the Member States ?
Member of the Commission . - These are the rules .
The Commission made a proposal , and now it is up to the Council to decide unanimously whether the chapter is open or not .
So these are the procedures . We have to follow the procedures .
Subject : Market support
In early January , the Commission pledged to introduce new measures to support the dairy sector and producers ' incomes across Europe in an effort to combat some of the negative effects the current economic crisis is having on the dairy sector .
Has the Commission any plans to make similar pledges to support other agricultural sectors and producers who have also been negatively affected by the current economic crisis ?
Subject : Dairy sector in the EU
The Commission has introduced measures to assist the dairy sector . The Commission will reintroduce export refunds for butter , skimmed milk powder ( SMP ) , whole milk powder and cheese .
In addition , the Commission will purchase more than the fixed quantities of butter and SMP should the market situation warrant it .
Does the Commission think that these measures will be sufficient to end the spiral of downward prices in the EU and particularly the Irish dairy sector ?
Member of the Commission . - The two questions by Mrs Harkin and Mr Ó Neachtain mainly concern the same subject .
Thank you for giving me the opportunity to answer them together .
I am happy to say that the Commission has recently taken a number of measures within the dairy sector in an attempt to try to end the downward spiral of prices .
We have already introduced private storage earlier than we normally do .
We have also started the intervention system whereby we hope to be able to stabilise the prices for butter and for skimmed milk powder , as this intervention system will certainly remove a lot of quantities from the market .
Originally , we entered a level of 30 000 t of butter and 109 000 t of powder , but I have indicated recently that we will be able or willing to go higher than these figures by opening a tender .
Export refunds for the dairy sector were further alleviated recently .
We can see that we are faced with a significant drop in the world market prices although Europe has not increased its production , despite the 2 % increase in the milk quota which was agreed for last April .
So I think I can say to those people who argue that the drop in prices is due to the increase in the quota that this is not the case , because we can see that in spite of the 2 % increase in the quota , production is staying at a lower level than we used to see before .
With the introduction of the export refunds , however , we should see a situation where we can increase the chances for the European Union 's dairy producers to be present in the world market .
At the same time , this may also alleviate the imbalance within the dairy market .
In response to the specific question that Mr Ó Neachtain put forward , the Irish dairy sector with a relatively high share of milk processed into butter and into skimmed milk powder , and a relatively high share of export outside the European Union , will , in particular , benefit from the measures taken by the Commission .
I can promise you that we are closely following the situation in the dairy market .
This can be seen from the fact that two weeks ago , we actually increased the export refunds in the dairy sector , and we will be willing to take all the necessary steps .
Of course , the sector itself also has a responsibility to adapt production to demand , in order to try to restore profitability , and Mrs Harkin wants to know if the Commission has similar plans for other sectors .
I gather that the question might be aimed at refunds for the pig meat sector .
But I must say that at present , I do not see any justification for introducing export refunds in the pig meat sector because we see that the number of pregnant sows and the number of piglets are decreasing .
Consequently , the input on the European market will decrease , and therefore we hope that the result will be increasing prices .
We also have to take into account that for pork production , the situation is totally different to the end of 2007 because today , the feed input prices , and the energy prices , are considerably lower than when we introduced the export refunds for the pig meat sector .
So please trust me that we will continue to keep an eye on the situation .
I do not underestimate the difficulties in the dairy sector .
I think it is decades since we experienced a situation like the one we are seeing today .
Thank you for your very detailed reply , Commissioner .
You talked about the measures you have taken to stop the downward spiral of prices .
As you are well aware , milk prices at the moment are below production prices .
Many dairy farmers are hanging on by their fingernails .
I am very pleased to hear you say that you will be willing to take all the necessary steps .
By that , are you saying that you would be prepared to make greater use of some of the dairy management tools that are at your disposal , such as export refunds , aid to private storage and intervention ?
I would like you to clarify that for me , please .
( GA ) Mr President , I would also like to thank the Commissioner for her comprehensive answer .
However , as she understands , milk producers are having major difficulties .
The cost of producing the milk is higher than the price for which it is sold .
I accept your point about Ireland , but can any further policy - an intervention policy - be provided to raise the price at this point ?
Farmers cannot continue to produce milk under the current conditions .
Commissioner , what urgency and commitment does the Commission have towards ensuring that the dairy market bottoms out ?
Is there not a danger that , by piecemeal incremental measures , it will take even more time to turn the market ?
And yet time is the one thing we do not have .
Is it not time to be bold with the export refunds ?
Because , Commissioner , our industry is dying on its feet .
I should like to thank you , Commissioner , and I particularly welcome your decision in relation to reintroducing intervention as a short-term measure only because we have a crisis situation .
Would the Commissioner not agree that we have four problems : firstly , the rate of exchange between the euro and the pound sterling ; secondly , the reduction in production as a result of the melamine scandal in Asia and in China ; thirdly , the 3 % increase in production in the United States and , last but by no means least , our old enemy , Brazil ?
Would we not need to be constantly monitoring world trends in order to have our answer ready for these kinds of situations ?
Member of the Commission . - First of all , I have clearly signalled that I am ready to use the management tools that we have available .
However , we have certain limits and it is very important that the decisions we might take do not mean that , at the end of the day , we shoot ourselves in the foot .
We have to take into account the fact that intervention is a fine and - I was happy to hear - short-term measure .
This is because we have to , I would not say get rid of it , but it has to apply to the market at a later stage , which rather prolongs the pain , but we cannot just dump it .
As I said previously , we did show our commitment by increasing export refunds , both on butter and on powdered milk , ten days ago , and we are monitoring the market .
Concerning compensation , it seems that quite a lot of dairy farmers have forgotten that , under the 2003 reform , they were actually compensated via the direct payment , and so an amount not linked to the dairy cow per se , but calculated on the basis of historic production between 2000 and 2002 , is now incorporated into the direct payment .
I also sometimes have to remind some farmers that this compensation has already taken place .
I know this is not a fully satisfactory answer in this difficult situation , but it has been taken into account .
I sent a very clear signal during the Green Week in Berlin at the beginning of January , saying that I was ready to spend some of the unspent money under the 2009 budget , and the Commission has made a proposal to spend EUR 1.5 billion in 2009 to cover the gap arising from the consequences of the health check not entering into force until 1 January 2010 , when the package for trying to meet the new challenges comes into effect .
The question of whether Member States want to spend EUR 1.5 billion is not in my hands , but in those of the Heads of State and Finance Ministers , and I hope it will also be possible , via a sort of lobbying by Members of the European Parliament on their national governments , to push for a solution .
I completely agree on the three reasons for the situation .
For Ireland , exporting into the UK with an exchange rate that makes life even more difficult is , of course , a huge disadvantage , specifically for Irish farmers .
I do not under estimate the spin-off consequences of the scandal in China , where some people might be much more cautious over the dairy products they eat and drink .
The increase on the world market does not come exclusively from the United States .
We have seen a significant increase taking place in New Zealand , and this has been dropped on the world market with the consequences we have mentioned .
I hope that in general , on the world market , production will go down , because this is a general problem and not one only affecting European dairy producers .
It is very difficult to make money in the dairy sector at the moment .
We will therefore not hesitate to use the tools available in an appropriate and balanced manner .
Subject : Labelling for sheep meat products
There is currently no specific EU legislation dealing with the issue of origin labelling for the sheep meat sector .
As a result , there are many different labelling techniques in operation within the EU for sheep products .
Would the Commission consider introducing an EU regulation for the labelling of sheep meat products which would allow consumers to distinguish between EU products and those from third countries ?
Member of the Commission . - I definitely think that European farmers can be proud of their standards and the Commission favours any initiative that helps farmers , not least in the livestock sector , to communicate with consumers about the origin of products .
As the honourable Member states , there is currently no specific EU legislation dealing with the issue of origin labelling for the sheep meat sector .
Of course , the general internal market rules about labelling and advertising of foodstuffs also apply to sheep meat .
These rules require mandatory origin labelling in cases where consumers might be misled regarding the true origin or provenance of the foodstuffs .
It is not the Commission 's view that there is a general problem of consumers being misled about the origin of sheep meat .
Therefore , the recent Commission proposal for a regulation on food information to consumers does not extend the list to which compulsory origin labelling applies .
I would like to underline that the origin labelling for beef and beef products is a special case , and I think we all keep in mind from where it came , because it was a spin-off of the BSE crisis .
Therefore , in order to rebuild consumer confidence in beef , it was necessary to make more information available to consumers by clear labelling of the product , including its origin .
It is also important to recall that already , the existing legislation makes it possible to put in place voluntary labelling of sheep meat .
If the whole supply chain could agree on such a labelling system , it could add value to their products to provide consumers with extra information .
For the internal market to function smoothly , the Commission 's proposal for a regulation on food information to consumers introduced a framework for voluntary origin indications .
In particular , as regards sheep meat , when origin is mentioned , information on the different locations of birth , rearing and slaughter of the animal shall be provided .
If these production steps took place in different Member States , all origins should be indicated .
Looking further ahead , the Commission is considering whether all different agricultural products should be labelled to show the place of farming and specifically whether EU farming requirements have been followed .
I am aware that , during the public consultation on the Green Paper on the quality of agricultural products , stakeholders in the sheep meat sector have advocated compulsory origin labelling .
In May 2009 , the Commission will issue a communication where we will seek to strike the right balance between simplification , transparency and product specification .
A conference organised by the Czech Presidency will take place on this issue on Thursday and Friday this week , and I am sure we will have a lively and interesting discussion on labelling .
It is important .
It is not always easy , because nobody wants to read a novel on the back of food in supermarkets , so I think we should try to find a balance and the right solution .
I am happy with all the comments that we have already had on the Green Paper .
Thank you Commissioner .
I particularly welcome the Conference that is going to take place and indeed we can be very proud of the standard of our food products in Europe - I certainly agree with you on that .
I want to refer , however , to the proposed compulsory electronic identification of sheep , which commences in January 2010 , and which the Commission is determined to press ahead with despite the opposition of the Agricultural Committee members and the farming organisations .
We have , as Members , challenged the operational and cost implications of the compulsory electronic identification , and the disastrous consequences for an industry already in serious decline .
Would the Commission consider granting a further deferral or removing the compulsory nature of this proposal ?
Failing that , would the Commission consider meeting the additional costs of compulsory electronic identification ?
Member of the Commission . - First of all , I should say that if you want an in-depth discussion on electronic earmarking on sheep then , as you probably know , you have to invite another Commissioner - the Commissioner responsible for consumer protection - but I will be happy to give my remarks on this issue .
There seems to be unanimity now in the Council on this issue .
I have the opportunity to travel quite a lot and I meet many people who consider that the electronic identification system will kill many smaller producers because of the cost .
I think you have to look into the possibility of using rural development funding to try and alleviate the cost of electronic earmarking .
There is a line called ' approximation of standards ' that can be used to call on rural development funding for these extra costs that will certainly be felt by many of the smaller sheep producers .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 8.05 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Childcare facilities - Barcelona objectives ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on childcare facilities - Barcelona objectives .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission welcomes the opportunity , a few days after International Women 's Day on 8 March , to make a declaration before the European Parliament on childcare facilities for pre-school age children .
These facilities are essential for promoting gender equality and for helping to achieve a work-life balance , but also for ensuring quality of life for children .
At a meeting of the European Council in Barcelona in 2002 , the Member States adopted ambitious aims which were to be fulfilled by 2010 .
In line with the undertaking which the Commission accepted before the European Parliament in 2007 , a report on the implementation of the Barcelona objectives was presented in October 2008 .
In the report , the Commission spoke about why it is important to invest more in childcare facilities .
The Commission noted mainly that the Barcelona objectives are aimed at eliminating obstacles to accessing the labour market , especially for women .
More than 6 million women in the EU ( aged from 25 to 49 ) say that they are unable to work or can work only part-time because of family obligations .
The European economy is thereby deprived of significant productive potential , and this at a time when it must confront serious economic and demographic challenges , and when the social position of families is thereby weakened .
The development of childcare facilities for pre-school age children will enable families to decide freely how to organise their time and how to achieve a better work-life balance .
The aim is not to ' force ' parents to send their children to these facilities .
The aim is to offer this option to parents who want it .
The development of childcare services will also contribute to the prevention of poverty , especially for single-parent families , more than a third of whom face the threat of poverty .
In connection with the demographic slowdown which Europe is going through , access to childcare facilities will also assist in the implementation of family planning .
It turns out that the Member States with the highest birth rates are precisely those which have introduced the most highly-developed policies on the work-life balance and which record the highest levels of employment of women .
Childcare facilities also contribute to children 's development , of course .
Numerous studies , especially those carried out by the OECD and UNICEF , have shown that these services play a significant role in the personal development of children , provided that they are of a high quality and children are entrusted to them for adequate periods of time .
Childcare services can also have a positive influence on educational results and future professional life .
The Commission states in its report that despite all of the aforementioned good reasons , most Member States are far from achieving the objectives set out in 2002 .
A lot of work remains to be done , especially concerning children under three years old .
Furthermore , there are some facilities operating only for part of the working day , which restricts parents ' access to the labour market .
The Commission recognises , however , that significant progress has been achieved in many Member States .
The undertakings adopted by Member States at a European level and the appeals expressed by the European Parliament in a series of resolutions have played an important role in this regard .
It is therefore necessary for all of the participants , especially the national and regional bodies , to come together and create progressive , financially accessible and high-quality childcare facilities for pre-school age children .
In the Plan for Achieving Gender Equality , the European Commission undertook to support the efforts being made by Member States in this area .
It encourages the Member States to make full use of the possibilities offered by the structural funds .
With the aim of assisting local organisations to introduce measures in this area , the Commission has adopted an information brochure in addition to last year 's one on the possibilities for financing family support measures .
The Commission will continue to support the exchange of proven approaches and will regularly monitor the Barcelona objectives within the framework of the strategy for growth and employment .
It will also evaluate family policies , especially policies on the work-life balance , in which it will rely mainly on cooperation with the OECD .
Last but not least , the Commission will support adherence to European childcare objectives within the framework of the strategy for growth and employment after 2010 .
Some people may be questioning the wisdom of investing in childcare facilities at a time of crisis .
Nevertheless , numerous studies have shown that where such services are not available , everyone pays the price .
It is therefore important to act today in order to ensure access to childcare facilities and in order to support employment and to promote equality , social inclusion and the interests of children .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Commissioner , thank you for your statement .
I was very encouraged by your words , but was very discouraged to notice that only 12 colleagues were here to hear it .
That has now risen to the dizzy heights of 18 MEPs , to hear what is an important statement on an important subject .
I was curious though that there was no reference - unless I missed it - to the Council Presidency comments of a month or so ago , because I thought those remarks were also very helpful to the debate and they made the point very clearly that , whilst the Barcelona objectives had not yet been reached - in some cases , by a very long way - it was very clear that a number of countries did not have any immediate plans to reach them and did not see that as a particular problem .
The reason for that is , and I quote from what the Czech Council Presidency said : ' No one should criticise the decision of those countries that fail to fulfil the Barcelona objectives and do not intend to increase efforts for their fulfilment . There are countries whose citizens , based on their historical experience , are not interested in placing their children in day care ' .
I think that is true .
That does not mean , of course , that we should not try as hard as we can to encourage the provision of day care and make quality day care available for those who want to use it .
I hope that you will agree , Commissioner , that in the context of helping more women into the labour market , and in the context of helping people with the important role of childcare , that there are indeed many roads to Paradise - and there is not just the one road that we should exclusively concentrate upon .
Let us please explore all routes , but let us keep Paradise in mind so that the objectives we all share can indeed be fulfilled .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , the financial crisis has become an economic crisis and we are now facing a recession in Europe , which is also affecting ordinary citizens : prices have been going up , unemployment is growing , investment is slowing down , credit is less available and thus , the economy is slowing down .
It is a trompe l 'oeil figure , which shows that , actually , men are hit first - and most - by unemployment due to the male domination in industry , such as the car industry .
However , women will be hit in the second wave of the redundancies and we will suffer in the long term .
Women with temporary and outsourcing contracts often fill posts in sectors where the need is great during good economic times but where the position is often very fragile during an economic downturn .
This flexibility works in favour of the labour market but not for women who want and need social security , employment guarantees and reconciliation of private and professional life .
It is even more worrying when conservative governments , such as the current Czech Presidency , talk about revising the Barcelona targets and going back to home childcare .
The Barcelona targets , as PSE women demonstrated by our campaign in 2007 , are beneficial for the whole of society and all children .
It helps to give them an equal start in life and to eradicate poverty .
As Jacques Delors says : ' in every child there is a treasure , and we have to give them the chance to explore and develop this treasure ' .
If I might add : every child needs an equal chance to develop their treasures .
In this way , we can also ensure well-prepared and competent labour forces .
The Barcelona objectives also help towards achieving the Lisbon objectives of having 60 % of women in the labour market by making the reconciliation of public and professional life possible for women workers .
It is clear that governments may not cut back on public services , not even during the current crisis .
( The President asked the speaker to speak more slowly )
Home childcare is important .
Every woman should have the choice between home and public childcare , but it is the responsibility of every government to ensure this freedom of choice by providing good quality , accessible and affordable childcare for everyone .
I am glad that we have such a dedicated ally in keeping the Barcelona objectives .
Madam President , children and politics - rarely are the interests of the citizens and of the politicians so far apart .
For citizens throughout Europe , the subject of children is right at the top of their priorities .
For politicians , children 's issues are also-ran issues , as we can see again here , too .
I do not know of a single country with a dedicated ministry for children , nor is there a dedicated representative for the interests of our youngest citizens in the Commission .
In Parliament , the subject of children is spread across all the committees .
That is why I would like to give special mention to the Commission today , as it is dealing here with childcare facilities and the Barcelona objective .
Thank you ever so much .
In the parliamentary working group on Quality of childhood , we observed that our children live in a very complicated world .
The future for those who are children right here , right now - today - is completely uncertain .
A child of today can climb right to the top of the social ladder or fall right down to the bottom .
Such children can remain in their own cultural circle or they can search out another one .
They can follow a similar life path to their parents or do the exact opposite .
They can marry someone from the opposite sex or someone of their own sex .
More than 50 years ago , when we launched the project of uniting Europe , all that was completely different .
The diversity that characterises us as Europeans has become a decisive factor in the lives of children .
The concept of diversity must , therefore , find its way into what teachers and others engaged in educating our children teach .
Far too little attention is paid to this at present .
Europe 's childcare facilities and schools are , after all , cracking under the strain of the challenge of integration .
We need to press the reset button when it comes to matters of integration and start again from scratch .
Let us approach this subject completely free of prejudice again , according to the slogan ' stop it through diversity ' .
In addition , I would ask all the MEPs after me not only to come out and advocate gender mainstreaming , but to fight for child mainstreaming , too - especially in this time of global financial crisis - because , otherwise , we will saddle our children with immeasurable debts .

Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we should remember that we cannot uphold women 's rights in any document that deals with employment or equal opportunities unless we can count on satisfactory childcare facilities , without which mediation is impossible and rights count for nothing .
These matters are more pertinent than ever now that we are faced with problems raised by the economic crisis .
In the European Union , more than six million women aged 25 to 49 state that they are forced to be unemployed or work part time due to their family responsibilities .
The situation of more than one quarter of these women stems from the lack of childcare facilities or their excessive cost .
Six years after the adoption of the Barcelona objectives , as the 2010 deadline approaches , we find that most Member States will not achieve these objectives , which were not even particularly ambitious : guaranteeing access to childcare facilities for 30 % of children under the age of three .
We must therefore work hard to achieve satisfactory levels of availability of children 's services , beginning with services for children aged under three .
For this reason , I am very happy that today 's ECOFIN Council has approved the possibility for all Member States to cut VAT on children 's services .
I believe that this is a considerable incentive and a common sense gesture that could help to relaunch the childcare plan and a plan for services for children and families throughout the European Union .
Madam President , we find the Czech Presidency 's attempts to water down the EU 's childcare objectives to be truly shameful and we naturally , therefore , roundly reject them .
It is also a great success that the Union 's Ministers for the Family , as a result of the pressure that has been exerted by this House , did not endorse this watering down of the childcare objectives .
I also find it very regrettable that the Czech Presidency is conspicuous by its absence today and is unable to discuss its attempt to water down the Barcelona objectives with us here in Parliament , as this Czech move is a very clear roll-back in EU equality policy and we very clearly reject the antiquated picture of women and the family expressed by the Czech Presidency 's proposal .
Yet , Commissioner Špidla , you have said that there are funding opportunities .
You have observed that most Member States of the EU do not meet the objectives , particularly when it comes to childcare for the under-threes .
What initiative will the Commission take in order to make the Member States more active , however ?
I have , I am afraid to say , heard no answer from you today on that question .
What else will the Commission do to encourage the Member States ?
You have also hinted that there are possibilities of co-financing .
Are these possibilities being used by the Member States ?
I would ask that you answer this question .
If not , why are they not used and will the Commission also increase the funding for the expansion of childcare ?
Madam President , I very much appreciated the Member States adopting targets within the Barcelona objectives relating to children 's access to childcare .
I felt - and still do today - that the objectives were set rather low , but we have at least made a start .
Access to good childcare is a basic prerequisite if women are to have the opportunity to work and it is also a basic prerequisite for equality .
However , I am now concerned that these targets will not be achieved and , of course , I am concerned about the indications from the Czech Presidency about replacing the childcare objective with care in the home as a fully viable alternative , and that it therefore wishes to remove this objective .
However , I would also like to thank Commissioner Špidla , who has , in fact , made it clear that the Commission still regards it as important for us to achieve the Barcelona objectives with regard to childcare .
I would also like to thank Mrs Resetarits for her proposal on child mainstreaming .
I think that , together , we should bear this in mind .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Commissioner , many of my constituents are babies and very young children , and tonight I would like to speak on their behalf , especially as there are many very good speakers tonight who can speak effectively for women in the workplace .
The care a child receives in the earliest years will have an impact on him or her throughout life .
Many students of child development , like Maria Montessori , have noted the need a young child has for the presence of his or her mother , or mother substitute .
Many of them have also noted a watershed in a child 's development at two years and nine months , after which it becomes safe for a child to spend periods of time away from his or her primary care-giver .
In the last decade , brain-imaging technology has backed up those observations , demonstrating that there is a definite shift in the child 's brain that allows him or her to internalise the primary care-giver , usually the mother , so that she is available to the child in active memory even when she is not present .
At that time , the child can understand that the mother , or the substitute primary care-giver , will come back and is not gone forever .
Of course , life is not like that and mothers often work outside the home .
They may want to work , or choose to , and even if they do not , they may need to earn because mortgages must be paid and food must be put on the table .
Women have been a wonderful addition to the workforce .
Their inclusion and equal treatment is a matter of fundamental rights .
However , babies do not know , nor are they able to consider what their mothers must , or want to , do .
They are hardwired to need what they need .
Nature is a very powerful force .
There are always consequences when we go against nature .
Having a loving invested mother is the ideal for a child , which we should make every effort to accommodate where a woman wants to be available to her child in those early years . This is because , if that young child needs the constant reassuring presence of its mother , not having her will have an impact , despite all the very worthy reasons for her absence .
However , as I said , women work , and we must do our best to at least ensure that if someone other than the primary care-giver is taking care of the child below the age of two years nine months , that it is someone who can give the child as nurturing a care as possible .
Some children are fortunate enough to receive this care from secondary care-givers like fathers , grandparents , other relatives , close neighbours - people who are committed to them and part of their life on an ongoing basis .
However , this is simply not the lot of most babies and toddlers who would be cared for in childcare facilities .
It behoves us to ensure that those facilities are clean , safe , stimulating and , above all , nurturing , and are not just holding centres .
Children are our future .
The foundation they receive is of utmost importance , but the time , space and nurturing children need to grow and develop fully is becoming a luxury afforded to fewer and fewer .
For better or for worse , we are shaping Europe 's future by how we raise our children .
I would ask the Commission to view this issue for a moment from a child 's point of view .
If you could ask a baby whether it wanted its mum or a day-care centre , it would always choose mum .
We need to listen to that child as mothers do , and to help them find a way to reconcile home and work to the benefit of both .
( SK ) We probably all know how important it is to implement all of the Barcelona objectives into everyday life .
Achieving a balance between family life and work life is essential to applying the principle of equality in employment .
It also brings advantages for children in terms of their healthy development .
Support for the expansion of services in the area of pre-school and out-of-school facilities , for parents ' centres and also for the operation of broad-spectrum , multi-functional , daily community centres increases accessibility , flexibility and equality in the system of public social services for families by making them competitive and improving their quality .
The situation with childcare in Slovakia is rather complicated .
Public childcare facilities for the youngest children up to the age of two or three have virtually disappeared , operating only on an exceptional basis , while private facilities are not affordable for most families .
Competence in this area has been transferred to local authorities who can choose whether or not to participate in running such facilities .
The situation with the hidden population of older children from three to six years old , in other words the so-called little schools , is not much better .
According to EU statistical estimates , only Greece , Lithuania , Poland and Slovenia record lower attendance levels of children aged from three upwards .
The countries with social and family policies based on the spirit and letter of gender equality , such as Finland , Sweden and France , have , in recent years , recorded high levels of fertility , while the countries supporting the traditional separation of parental roles are facing low fertility and increasing levels of childlessness , for example Germany , Spain and Italy .
Many of the countries with a high proportion of women on the labour market , such as the northern countries , have , at the same time , higher birth rates and fertility levels .
It is necessary for the state to provide support so that women can work and , at the same time , fulfil their longing to be mothers .
The demographic situation is simply an outcome of the interest or lack of interest shown by the state in the next generation .
By supporting family policies , the state will provide the essential preconditions for families .
The blindness to these values which we have seen to date , together with support for the consumer lifestyle , is probably the cause of the current demographic gloom .
It is also true that pre-school facilities are extremely important for problem groups as well , such as children from socially disadvantaged groups and Roma children .
It is precisely these children who pick up basic habits of hygiene in pre-school facilities and also gradually learn rules of behaviour .
Let us agree that the Barcelona objectives should form part of the national policy of the state on citizens ' welfare .
( PT ) Almost seven years after the Barcelona European Council , the majority of Member States are a long way off achieving the objectives that were set out .
Yet childcare facilities are an essential requirement for reconciling professional , family and private life , as much for men as for women .
They are also a requirement for the promotion of equality .
I would remind you that family responsibilities prevent more than six million European women from taking part in the labour market .
Yet there are 15 Member States that have a coverage ratio lower than the European average , which falls far short of the Barcelona objectives .
For example , the Czech Republic , which currently holds the presidency of the European Council , has a coverage ratio lower than 10 % for the under three age group .
It is not surprising , then , that there should be a debate on the revision of the Barcelona objectives included in the programme of the Czech Presidency .
More seriously , the Czech Presidency will , and I quote : ' focus on the issue of parental childcare and its relation to employment policy and stress the importance of home childcare as a fully fledged alternative to a professional career ' .
End quote .
It is hard to believe when reading it .
Nonetheless , it is true : the Czech Presidency wants to send women back into the home .
It wants Europe to regress years and years and European women to give up the results of years of fighting for equality .
This is definitely the case , because the authors of this proposal are not intending to send men into the home so that it can be they who look after the children .
Yet women have the same right as men to professional fulfilment .
I would like to give the example of Portugal , which has launched an ambitious programme of construction of childcare facilities .
These will help to stimulate the economy and create employment , and also achieve the Barcelona objectives .
( PL ) Madam President , I sometimes get the impression that the wealthier a country , the less money it spends on caring for , bringing up and educating its children .
However , we must remember that Europe is being threatened by a demographic crisis .
We must do everything to encourage women and men to have families and as many children as possible .
In many countries of the EU , guaranteeing a place in a nursery means applying even before the child is born .
How , then , can we talk about making it easy for women to return to work ?
Furthermore , many women look for their first job only after they have had their children .
Let the attitude of European citizens to the family and to children define our level of culture and civilisation .
( EL ) Madam President , the European Commission 's effort to help mothers actively participate in the labour market by promoting the application of everything decided in Barcelona in 2002 is noteworthy .
However , I should like to remind the Commissioner that freedom of choice , especially where there is economic pressure , is not a question of historic tradition , it is a question of democracy .
Forcing mothers down this road will not bring about good results ; on the contrary , the result must come about once parents have been convinced that this is the ideal solution for their child and , as the previous speaker said , this is achieved with support and advisory services from the beginning , when life is created .
Thus , parents will also find the best solution and will adapt care facilities over time , immediately after the birth and three years later .
However , we must look at the services being supplied , because quality costs money .
Today , in most countries , quality costs a great deal of money and implies private facilities .
By contrast , public facilities , which are cheaper or - on rare occasions - free , have lower costs but are of a poor standard .
We therefore have to look at the education of the staff working in such facilities and we need to increase parents ' confidence so that they can participate .
When I had the first of my nine children in Paris , I was confident of the standard of services offered by these facilities , which I as a mother could not give .
We must therefore respect the experience of mothers and consider it as prior service , if it is provided solely to children .
While mothers are offering their services , they can be supported by lifelong learning and training measures so that they can practice their profession afterwards .
We must also remember Parliament 's report on childcare facilities for students , because we are talking about work , but work starts with professional qualifications .
If , therefore , we have no childcare facilities during study for professional qualifications , how will women subsequently participate in the labour market ?
( RO ) The Czech Presidency was right : the Barcelona objectives were established before the EU 's last expansion .
However , it was fundamentally wrong when it stated that the specific situation in the new Member States and their previous experience would be arguments against these objectives .
If anything , the benefits are important : for parents and gender equality , for the economy and level of employment , and for children and the future .
The relatively low salaries in our countries mean that both parents are obliged to work ; it is not an option but a necessity .
In addition , the number of single-parent families is on the rise .
In some countries , almost a third of children are not born in the traditional family set-up .
The policies which encourage labour mobility , considered to be an efficiency factor , cannot continue to ignore the fact that people have children .
Many of them live in poor families without any proper provision for food , healthcare and education .
Sometimes , the family environment is violent .
When parents emigrate for work , these children are also left alone .
These services can break the poverty chain and offer a positive alternative way of socialisation under the guidance of specialist staff .
However , to be able to fulfil this role , crèches and nurseries need to be :
1. available , but above all , accessible , whether free or at an affordable cost , and
2. of good quality .
This is where it is vital for staff to have professional training .
In order to combat the current crisis , we give up nearly new cars to buy other brand new ones , wasting considerable material resources in the process .
We would be better instead investing in building crèches and nurseries and creating stable jobs for those working in this sector .
The quality of the human resources deployed has been , for a long time , one factor which differentiates countries .
We suggest that the Commission should seriously factor in the public cost of a child when evaluating employment programmes in each country .
It is true that Jacques Delors once said that there is a treasure in every child and it is society 's task to discover it .
However , I would add to this : otherwise , society is undermining its entire future .
( SK ) Achieving a balance between the family responsibilities of mothers and fathers , on the one hand , and their professional ambitions , on the other , can have a very positive and direct impact on the whole of society .
I would like to propose that the definition of work be revised in order to highlight the advantages of achieving a balance between family responsibilities and professional ambitions .
Family responsibilities must not be automatically regarded as harmful to the future prospects of mothers merely because they involve a temporary withdrawal from the labour market .
Up until now , European policies and politics have viewed citizens only on the basis of the requirements of the labour market .
Responding to the demographic crisis , however , also involves viewing citizens on the basis of their role as parents , in other words , as mothers and fathers who have a responsibility to their families .
At this point , a fundamental question arises which will determine the direction of further deliberations .
It is the question of which social model we wish to promote .
Do we want to have families that are adapted to the market and the needs of companies or a market and companies that are adapted to families ?
This is absolutely not a meaningless question .
European and national policies in this area are both determined by the tension between market logic and the logic of human nature .
The task of society is therefore to act in such a way that women and men can decide freely between the two logical options , each of which has a reason for existing when viewed from a broader perspective than that of work .
The logic of EU policies relating to the cycle of life assumes a special significance insofar as it takes specific account of the active categories of men and women aged between 15 and 49 in order for them to be able to fulfil their particular role in resolving the demographic crisis .
In contrast to the proposals of the European Commission , the decision to give life to a child cannot be considered simply as an individual goal involving fulfilment of the longing to have children .
( BG ) Ladies and gentlemen , childcare should be the focus of EU policy .
Not because we sometimes say for the sake of it that children are the future of the nation , but because current reality demands us to think about and work at building the future of Europe .
We are witnessing a serious demographic crisis , a low birth rate , an ageing population , as well as economic and social problems in society .
Our efforts must be aimed at creating suitable conditions for giving birth to , bringing up , educating , providing materially for and fostering the social development of children .
We need to appropriately allocate the rights , obligations and responsibilities involving childcare between the state , local authorities and the family .
We also need to support childcare institutions in both the public and private sector , look to establish public-private partnerships in the area of childcare and obtain the funds for their development .
To enable us to attain the Barcelona objectives , we must adopt concrete measures , increase the provision for children in crèches and nurseries , which must be built as a priority .
We must also set up networks offering comprehensive services , consultancy and social support for children and parents .
My country , Bulgaria , offers a high level of childcare .
The National Strategy for Children and National Child Protection Programme which have been adopted not only specified the objectives , but also concrete measures to be implemented by the executive with regard to childcare .
Children 's institutions changed their image , for instance , solutions have been sought aimed at returning children to their family environment , the principles of foster families were accepted , safe houses were created and nurseries and crèches were built .
However , we are talking about all this in the context of a financial and economic crisis , when it is possible that we will lose what we have achieved and fail to achieve what we have planned .
Will we then invest in the children of Europe ?
( CS ) Commissioner , ladies , you will perhaps not like what I have to say .
The Barcelona objectives have the aim of increasing employment among mothers but they say nothing at all about improving the lives of their children nor do they have the aim of helping these children to manage and overcome life 's problems in the future .
Someone raised the point that , for example , infants and toddlers up to two years old need the presence of their mother , father or grandmother or simply a nanny every day , but the one thing these children definitely do not need for their healthy development is a childcare facility .
The situation is quite different for children of pre-school age , of course , and here the Barcelona objectives are quite appropriate .
Even the Czech Republic manages to provide childcare facilities for 90 % of pre-school age children because these children are learning to play together and need to be in a group .
However , ladies and gentlemen , the Barcelona objectives are a policy of the last century .
A modern family policy for the 21st century should also promote the healthy development of children .
Those of us from the communist countries have a wealth of experience with childcare facilities because mothers had to go back to work four or five months after their child was born .
I would like to ask you to read a bit of European history as well .
( ET ) My political party has the custom of visiting kindergartens at roughly the time of International Women 's Day and acknowledging the people who work there .
This year , I have visited ten kindergartens , and at every one of them I heard about long waiting lists .
It is clear that Estonia cannot achieve the Barcelona objectives , at least not as regards children up to the age of three , but the Commission 's appeal is very welcome , and will help towards solving the problem .
I would also , however , like to emphasise one more thing : child day care is generally spoken of in the context of gender equality and women 's employment , but I would like to emphasise that this is not merely a care service , but also an educational service , and this base education creates a basis for success at school and later in life .
In this context , we also consider it particularly important , and definitely not an attitude from the past century , as we have just heard .
It is an approach for this century .
( RO ) According to the European Commission 's report in October 2008 on implementing the Barcelona objectives and the care framework for pre-school children , Member States have not met the objectives set by European Union leaders .
In this case , I recommend the following actions :
1. increase the involvement of national governments in this problem ,
2. create at national government level a team of specialists which deals exclusively with this problem ,
3. develop EU control over Member State governments through a set of specific instruments .
All these measures would help ensure equal opportunities between women and men , improve the quality of life , and also compensate for an ageing population as they would boost the birth rate .

Madam President , it is deeply disappointing that so many countries are not meeting the Barcelona targets - and perhaps if this debate had been at 9 a.m. rather than 9 p.m. we might have seen more colleagues in this Chamber .

Many have spoken about the economic crisis .
This is not a time to dismiss childcare but to increase quality , affordable childcare for all . We need , like never before , to invest in our children .
An investment in quality childcare will help families and children alike in providing families - mostly mothers - with an opportunity to work , by giving children the chance to a high-quality , nurturing environment akin to the home .
This weekend , I heard a talk from a leading Scottish psychiatrist and also someone from Barnardo 's .
Their views concerned vulnerable children and it was shocking to find out that , if there is no intervention to help vulnerable children , a vulnerable child could be damaged irrevocably by the age of three .
Childcare helps families and society as a whole , and it can help the most vulnerable children too .
I urge the Commissioner to keep the pressure on .
( RO ) The country which I represent featured for a long time on a list of countries which did not have a childcare social policy up to European standards .
Things have gradually improved , with the adoption of qualitative methodologies resulting from care staff receiving specialist training .
The Barcelona objectives have motivated the institutions whose objective is to protect children and the care standards have resulted in responsibilities and skills .
Children actually receive humane treatment .
With the birth rate currently in decline , we must offer equal opportunities to those who have special social circumstances .
Both Member States and the European Commission must make efforts to support their education and their subsequent integration into society .
They have inferiority complexes in relation to those children who have grown up in a normal family .
This is why programmes which allow these children being supported by social services to spend time in a family environment and socialise could give them another chance .
( RO ) The involvement of women in professional life and politics and encouraging them to take on more responsibilities depend on the availability of childcare facilities .
Women must be encouraged to plan their career , but this cannot be done without an efficient childcare system .
Every euro invested in childcare facilities means a profit of six to nine euros for society through the creation of jobs and better conditions for bringing up children .
The fact that in many EU Member States , you need , for example , to register for a place in a crèche even before your child is born or that there are waiting lists of several months to register for a place at nursery highlights that there are not enough childcare facilities in Europe .
Childcare facilities not only help women develop their careers , but , in particular , they develop children 's skills as members of society .
I would also like to say that during the current crisis , it is important for us to invest in education and health , which are practical investments in our future .
( PL ) Madam President , nurseries are an evil .
They may be a necessary evil , but they are an evil .
I shall never forget how I had to take my three month old little brother to the nursery because my mother had to go to work early .
He kept on holding on to me because he didn 't want to be picked up .
I believe that if we ask ourselves whether the good of the child or the parents ' careers are more important , the good of the child should always come first .
Kindergartens and nurseries are necessary , but only where there is a real need for them .
But what is needed above all is to be sensitive to , to give a chance to , to help , those parents , particularly mothers , who want to stay at home with their little children so that they can care for them .
They need both financial support and advice .
That is something we must remember .
When we speak of childcare , we are talking about children and what they need , and not about what we want for our own personal convenience .
( PL ) Madam President , I would like to say two things , as a psychologist and a politician .
Life is changing before our very eyes , career women are a new phenomenon , fathers are increasingly busy , and women are fighting for their rights .
It all sounds so logical and modern , socialist , even .
There is , however , one unchanging constant in all this , and that is the individual psychological needs of children .
In this area , there is no progress or revolutionary change .
Ensuring that these children grow into mature citizens requires the efforts of ordinary women and ordinary men , without ideology , without pretensions , without quasi-modern methods , but just with natural care , time and dedication , even if it does involve occasionally putting oneself and one 's own ambitions on hold for a while .
This is for the good of the children , and therefore also for the happiness of the parents , and effectively for the development of the normal European society in which I would like to live .
( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , I asked for the floor in order to disagree with Mrs Estrela .
It was in fact her caricaturing of the Czech Presidency 's intentions that motivated me to speak .
Nobody wants to send women into the home .
The problem is that there are women who want or would like to stay at home .
There are even organisations that seek to defend them !
These are women who are ignored , disregarded and discriminated against because they want to dedicate themselves to their families , and we are not listening to them .
Moreover , this is a question of freedom : it is a question of the freedom of choice that the Left likes to evoke so much , but is forgetting here .
It is about whether or not to respect couples ' choices about how to organise themselves .
It is about being able to provide a better quality of life and more quality care from fathers and from mothers to those who want to do it that way .
It is that which our society also needs to do .
We will not move forward or solve the problems with the birth rate and people 's happiness through prejudice .
They will be solved through policies that are adjusted to reality and to the spontaneous desires of people .
We will not move forward through an obsession with the state and with the market .
Let us move forward with a fair view of the family !
Member of Commission . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank you for what was , in my opinion , an exceptionally important and profound debate .
It is , of course , clear that both the family and childhood are going through a series of changes in the current historical period .
For example , in the middle ages , childhood was not recognised as a phase and children were seen as small adults and it can be said that the concept of childhood essentially developed in the Enlightenment , the period of Jean Jacques Rousseau and his novel Emil .
From this perspective , it is always necessary to take account of the fact that families depend on society and society of course depends on the family .
The Barcelona criteria are definitely not a policy of the last century , they are a policy which attracts lively discussion and which will surely continue to attract discussion .
Despite all this , both the current debate and the informal negotiations of labour and social affairs ministers have echoed the view that the Barcelona criteria are relevant for the current period and that it is right to continue with them .
I would also like to stress that the Barcelona criteria do not involve forcing a single solution on anyone but providing a real choice , a real choice for parents because , ladies and gentlemen , the fundamental point has been made in the debate and in my opinion very clearly in the last contribution , that genuinely attentive and loving parents naturally have a great ability to distinguish how to decide at a given moment , in a given phase of family life , or in a given situation , what will be best for their children .
And therefore I believe it is also good to provide choice through the Barcelona criteria .
Concerning the question of how the Commission will support the Barcelona criteria , it can be done through the structural funds .
In the new perspective , it is explicitly possible for the first time .
Previously , it was technically possible but the way was rather unclear and complicated , since this is an open possibility .
Of course , the Commission is also following the development of the Barcelona criteria , in the same way that it can assist in imparting good practice and good approaches to facilitate solutions for individual Member States .
Ladies and gentlemen , I firmly believe that the Barcelona criteria do not , in any way , conflict with children 's interests and I would like to emphasise what was been said by many people , that the Barcelona criteria represent a specific approach to the matter from a quantitative standpoint but that we must not , under any circumstances , neglect the qualitative aspect .
In the same way it is clear that the main decisions must always rest with the parents of course and I have to say that personally , at the end of the day and on the basis of my own simple family experience , I have faith in parents .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
The European Union Lisbon Summit in March 2000 set the strategic objectives for the following ten years as the achievement of sustainable economic development , the creation of more and better jobs and the improvement of social cohesion .
Based on the so-called Barcelona objectives , which the Member States accepted in 2002 concerning childcare facilities , by 2010 , Member States should guarantee child care for at least 90 % of children between the age of 3 and compulsory school attendance age and at least 33 % of children under the age of 3 .
In order to achieve the Barcelona objectives , an open co-ordination method was applied , but measures for reaching the objective were left to the discretion of each Member State .
Thus one must now recognise that several Member States are still quite far from reaching this objective and , as a result , the objectives approved in 2002 need to be reviewed now .
The present recession proves that disturbances in the financial market have noticeable negative side-effects on the real economy .
The negative influences on economic growth and employment are sufficiently serious , and are now influencing the achievement of the Lisbon objectives in Member States .
Since most EU States have now directed their attention and also their financial resources towards the struggle with the economic crisis , it is important that in the framework of that activity the Barcelona objectives should not be forgotten , since achieving them also supports the achievement of the Lisbon objectives .
The present situation also bears witness to the fact that we will not fully achieve this objective in the Member States by merely setting new dates for the Barcelona objectives .
In this area , another important issue for Member States is the EU 's supporting back-up measures , which will help towards achieving objectives for childcare facilities in all Member States .
Children of immigrants ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission on the children of immigrants , by Jan Andersson , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs - B6-0014 / 2009 ) .
deputising for the author . - ( RO ) I would first of all like to thank my colleagues in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and the PES Secretariat from the Commission for promoting this topic on the children of migrants , which we are debating today in this plenary session because , when we talk about children , we are talking about our future , about the future of the European Union .
The migration of labour is continuing to grow , not only at global level , but within the EU as well .
Migration offers great potential for development , but it also poses serious challenges in both the developed and the least developed Member States of the European Union .
We can talk about the positive impact of migration at the level of the economy in the migrant workers ' countries of origin because this can reduce poverty and boost investment in human resources .
On the other hand , the situation of migrants ' children who are left behind on their own in the country of origin when parents emigrate in search of a job in another country is an issue which has caused concern in some Member States during the last two years .
Although there are comprehensive policies for improving the living conditions and education of migrants ' children who have moved abroad with their parents , less attention has been focused on the children who have been left behind at home .
The migration of parents abroad for work is a social phenomenon with a complex impact on the dynamics and functionality of the family , as well as on the whole of society .
Children whose parents have gone abroad for work belong to a vulnerable group which is at risk .
The complexity of this issue , of its causes and consequences , of its dynamics and the way in which legal provisions are implemented effectively in the field , as well as the complexity of the professionals ' practices , have provided challenges , not only to the authorities but to civil society as well .
On this point , civil society and the mass media in Romania have presented studies which state that in Romania , there are more than 350 000 children whose parents are working abroad , including 126 000 where both parents have emigrated .
The adverse consequences of the parents ' departure are primarily felt by children at a psychological level .
The feeling of depression and a lack of interest in school and out-of-school activities may be direct consequences of their parents ' absence .
One direct consequence of the parents ' migration is the fact that the child is deprived of parental affection and the necessary supervision of his or her normal development .
In cases where parents have emigrated and the children have stayed behind in the care of people who cannot provide them with emotional and educational support , both these consequences may have , in turn , an adverse impact on the children 's health and psychological development , as well as push them into behaviour that is uncharacteristic or inappropriate for the children 's age and expose them to other kinds of exploitation and abuse .
As a mother and a European social democrat , I urge respect for the rights of every child , for their entitlement to equal opportunities and for the role of the state , as well as the investment required to mould future generations .
Identifying the most vulnerable , excluded or marginalised children must be the key focus of any research effort , thereby ensuring there is sufficient leverage generated to support the authorities ' efforts to safeguard the rights of every child .
Commissioner Špidla , I would like to thank you sincerely for the contribution you have made in broadcasting the video message as part of the European conference which I organised in Bucharest last November on this issue of children left alone at home .
Taking into account the complexity of this issue , especially during the current economic and social crisis that is primarily affecting vulnerable groups , which children also belong to , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I would like to ask you whether the Commission is in favour of carrying out a study to assess the extent of the situation and whether the Commission considers that the topic of migrant workers ' children is only a problem for the government in the country of origin or for the governments of the host countries which benefit from the presence of migrants on the labour market .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , there are disturbing signs indicating the appearance of a relatively new trend in a number of Member States .
Parents are leaving their home country to work in another Member State - so-called ' mobile workers ' - and are leaving their children at home in the care of relatives .
These arrangements are supposed to be temporary but it seems that they often become more long-lasting .
The question of whether arrangements for children left at home operate on a formal or informal basis depends on the length of time for which the parents intend to work abroad .
However , after some time , a number of these children often end up in institutional care because the relatives are no longer able to cope with the situation due to financial , personal or other practical reasons .
In Member States with high levels of emigration , this phenomenon is by no means unusual .
It is starting to be documented and it has also attracted media attention .
The Commission has organised a number of studies which will help to gather evidence and to find solutions , although such solutions can only be implemented at a domestic level .
At present , there is still not enough hard data for us to understand the nature , structure and main forms of this phenomenon , even though the evidence is already disturbing enough , as I have already said .
Within the framework of the open method of coordination in the social area , the fight against poverty and social exclusion is a priority .
Member States must reinforce preventative measures and focus on the most vulnerable families .
In concrete terms , this means supporting projects for strengthening families and supporting parental assistance for families in difficult circumstances in order to overcome the risk of children becoming separated from their parents at an early age .
A further aspect which must be addressed is the fact that this phenomenon is often perceived as a negative consequence of worker mobility .
The Commission , in cooperation with the EURES network , is focusing on how best to help those affected with the specific problem of children left at home by parents who are mobile workers and providing job-seekers and their families with information on living and employment conditions in EU countries .
Such an approach can contribute to relieving the negative consequences of this phenomenon which we are quite rightly debating today .
Madam President , my political group participated actively in the drafting of this motion and improved the text , so that it no longer conceals the hypocrisy which exists when it comes to the exploitation of workers from third countries .
We know that the parents of children from Member States working in any other country receive child benefit .
We know that countries which have bilateral relations can have the family connection .
So why does this phenomenon arise , which the Commissioner says cannot be measured ?
We have films , we have documentaries which have been shown on television all over the world , including from Romania and Ukraine and other countries .
One such film was shown here in Parliament and we saw the situation .
It is therefore hypocritical of us to say that we have no evidence .
It is hypocritical of us to say that there is no family and that is why there are abandoned children .
There is a family , but there are no proper bilateral relations and agreements to cover parents so that they do not abandon their children and there is no help from the European Union for these countries in building the infrastructures which will help to ensure that children that find themselves in this situation can be rehabilitated , without carrying the trauma with them their entire life .
I think that raising awareness among the parents who come to our countries to work is also our affair .
If one part of the body hurts , the whole body hurts .
If some of our fellow human beings , especially children , are suffering in our neighbouring countries , later we shall see them arrive here with other more threatening methods and then we shall lock them up in our prisons .
Madam President , Commissioner Špidla , I would like to start by thanking the Commissioner for his response and the committee for its initiative .
It is about time this issue was discussed in Parliament .
With the Treaty of Lisbon , issues relating to children will become objectives within the EU and will gain a legal basis .
A year ago , in anticipation of the Treaty , Parliament also adopted a children 's strategy .
It is scandalous that children are left to live on their own at all .
Of course , a mother and father may be forced to move to find work or to find refuge , but we MEPs must take responsibility when we adopt such rules , for example , to the effect that only the applicant receives asylum and not his family , as it is most often the men who flee and the women and children who are left at home .
Or when employers import labour and do not ask or care whether there are children back home or they ignore the fact that this is the case .
I therefore fully support the demands made by the Socialist Group in the European Parliament in its question .
An impact assessment is an urgent and necessary requirement .
The Commission must act on the basis of the studies that the Commissioner himself has ordered , and quickly .
Better information must be produced on children 's rights and schooling .
We must also provide information and ensure that children who are currently in this situation receive help .
We must include the parties concerned and NGOs and we must come up with proposals .
I also believe that the relatively new group of lone child refugees could also be included in the work described by the Commissioner .
Children should grow up with warmth and care and they are not something that the market should control .
We politicians have a duty and we must accept it , so give us child mainstreaming and give us child impact assessments in respect of this huge problem .
Otherwise , we will be forced to feel ashamed when we face the next generation .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for his willingness to embark upon studies and to expand the information on the EURES network , to provide greater information for individuals about family rights and the right of family reunion .
Colleagues have raised the issues of why people feel the need to move to look for work .
Certainly , the need to increase progress on combating poverty within the European Union is an extremely important issue .
We look forward to rapid progress on that , including the question of minimum income , so that people can live in dignity .
But we should also be aware that many of the parents who are moving are doing this in what they believe is in the best interests of their children , to provide greater opportunities for them .
Indeed , they often sacrifice their own careers , their own chosen path , as it were , in order to try and do this .
While we are trying to sort out the children 's problems , we need to beware of demonising parents who are moving .
Madam President , the European Commission should focus on this issue .
As UNICEF and other organisations have underlined several times , it affects a huge amount of children in the world and in Europe .
The situation in which social and economic risks are made worse by the absence of parents who cannot meet their children 's needs for care protection and education may lead to an increase in vulnerability .
The primary responsibility for the development of the child rests with the parents ; and parents , in fulfilling their responsibilities , are entitled to receive the necessary support from the community and the local authorities , whose efforts to meet their obligations unfortunately often fail .
So we expect concrete action from the Commission in such an important field .
( RO ) According to the study carried out by UNICEF and the ' Social Alternatives ' association , in Romania , roughly 350 000 children have one parent working abroad , while 126 000 have both parents abroad .
These findings are worrying .
I believe that this situation could be improved through adopting the following measures :
1 .
The national governments of the migrants ' countries of origin and the governments of the countries absorbing this labour force , alongside the European Commission , should create a joint programme offering migrant workers the opportunity to access specific childcare services , the school and education system , as well as language courses .
These services should be accessible to every migrant worker segment .
2 .
The European Commission , along with the governments of the states where the migrants are employed , should devise a strategy for offering certain facilities to employment bodies so that they can also offer employees a package of specific services providing migrant workers with the opportunity to take their children with them to the countries where they are working .
I feel that these measures would be conducive to the harmonious development and growth of these children as they , too , represent the future of Europe .
( RO ) I would like to highlight one thing .
The labour force flow we are talking about is from the less developed countries to the more developed countries in the EU .
The opportunity to access the labour markets in developed countries is usually considered to be a significant advantage and the large sums which go back to the countries of origin are always brought up in discussion as an argument for this .
However , the facts presented here show a different aspect : in addition to the advantages derived from lower labour costs , the developed countries externalise some of the associated costs .
These costs are considerable and it is down to the communities and states where the workers come from to pay for them .
In this respect , the cohesion and solidarity policies between Member States must not be regarded as some act of altruism performed by the rich for the benefit of the poor .
These policies are an absolute must , being acts of justice ensuring that the European Union consistently sticks to its values and maintains its citizens ' affection for these values .
Madam President , in the context of this debate , I wish to take the opportunity to emphasise another aspect connected with the issues already mentioned .
I was recently the shadow for the PPE-DE Group on the report on educating the children of migrants .
That report was based on the communication from the Commission on ' Migration and mobility : challenges and opportunities for EU education systems ' .
That document was very well structured and summarised very well the problems connected with migration and education .
However , one aspect was left out : the situation of thousands of European children left behind by parents who go to work in another European country , generally called the ' migration orphans ' , of which there are almost 350 000 in my country .
I have already tabled a written question to the Commission on this topic , but would like to take this opportunity to put that question again .
So , Commissioner , could you please tell us whether the Commission thinks this is only a matter for national governments , or do we need European action in this field ?
If we do , what action has , or will be , taken by the Commission in order to help those children in their school years ?
( RO ) We have a saying in Romania : a well-bred man is said to have had his ' first seven years at home ' .
Young children must be together with their family to benefit from the direct supervision and care of their parents .
Parents who decide to go and work temporarily in other countries must be supported in their efforts to reunite their family as soon as possible .
In many Member States , schools offer facilities for teaching the language of the country of residence .
Indeed , in some Member States , families who were living illegally have been able to make their situation legal if they had children registered at school , and have even received social housing .
Children are the most precious thing that society has and it is our duty to provide them with conditions conducive to their harmonious development .
Formal education , affection , children 's integration in society are essential conditions allowing social Europe to offer equal chances to all its citizens .
I congratulate Mrs Plumb for the initiative .
It is a topical subject which is hugely important for the future .
Congratulations .
( SK ) When workers emigrate , children often become the victims of their families ' improved financial circumstances .
The former Czechoslovak Republic experienced a great wave of emigration in the inter-war period , chiefly to the United States .
However , these were migrants living in conditions of extreme poverty at home .
And even if the children remained temporarily in the care of one parent , this would usually only be for a limited period of time .
In today 's consumer society and with family relationships under threat , there are considerably more tragic cases .
It is often not extreme poverty that motivates parents to work abroad .
One or both parents often never return and they can be indifferent to the fate of their children , whose best hope is to be cared for by close relatives .
We should keep this aspect in mind in relation to regional development policy and we should strive to eliminate regional variations , particularly in the new Member States .
Ladies and gentlemen , I think that the debate has clearly shown that this is an important topic which we must work on , regardless of whether or not , at a given moment , there may be sufficiently detailed information available for us to reach a final opinion .
After all , the facts that are known are sufficiently compelling for it to be clear that we must address the question and take an active approach .
I have stated that the Commission has already prepared some studies , one of which will be completed by the end of this year .
I think it is also clear that the main part of the response and the main part of the reaction must come from the Member States , as family policy is generally a matter for Member States .
Undoubtedly , of course , there are possibilities for the EU itself because questions which relate to migrant workers also relate to their social security , the transfer of social contributions and a range of other issues .
So my answer to your question would be that it is , above all , a matter for the Member States , but the EU does have a role to play and one which , in my opinion , is by no means insignificant .
I have received one motion for a resolution tabled in accordance with Rule 108 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 12 March 2009 .
Risk to close down the company QIMONDA in Germany and Portugal and the loss of thousands of jobs in Europe ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the risk to close down the company QIMONDA in Germany and Portugal and the loss of thousands of jobs in Europe .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , companies and workers are both beginning to feel the effects of the financial and economic crisis .
Although circumstances vary between individual Member States , the employment situation in Europe is generally deteriorating .
In 2009 , overall employment may go down by 1.6 % , which represents the loss of 3.5 million jobs .
The level of unemployment in the EU could be around 10 % in 2010 .
Day after day , companies are announcing restructuring measures or are relocating , often with the loss of many jobs .
The situation in the company Qimonda , which has announced the closure of plants in Germany and Portugal , is , unfortunately , not unique .
The Commission is aware of the negative effects which restructuring can have on workers , their families and the economic and social structure of a given region .
However , I would like to emphasise that the Commission does not have the power to overturn or postpone the decisions of individual companies and that companies are not obliged to inform the Commission of their decisions .
I have to say that neither Qimonda management nor employee representatives have approached the Commission .
The Commission would like to raise several points in connection with this situation .
It is essential , above all , to anticipate and manage restructuring better through intensive dialogue with representatives of employees and the other parties involved .
I think that the recently passed directive or amended directive on company councils constitutes one of the EU 's major contributions in this matter .
It is all the more important in this context that the companies affected are careful to abide by their obligations arising from EU directives relating to informing employees and consulting with them .
The Commission also invites companies to introduce measures aimed at maintaining maximum levels of workers in employment through flexible work arrangements and the use of temporary layoffs for economic reasons .
Most Member States have introduced targeted measures in an effort to support employment and limit the effects of the crisis on ordinary citizens .
These measures apply to four major areas : maintaining workers in employment , rapidly integrating workers back into employment , assisting the most vulnerable groups through income support , extending the period for paying unemployment benefits or increasing the family contributions and strengthening social protection and investments in social and health infrastructure .
The Commission has strengthened financial instruments at a European level with the aim of helping the Member States to overcome the crisis and its social consequences .
The European Social Fund , which provides assistance to 9 million workers every year , has been simplified so that advance payments can be released for projects amounting to EUR 1.8 billion .
I hope that the European Parliament and the Council will come to a rapid agreement over this matter .
The Commission also supports those Member States which would like to reprogram the European Social Fund .
Member States can also request intervention from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund to assist workers who have been laid off .
In the European Economic Recovery Plan , the Commission has proposed extending the eligibility criteria in order to respond better to the current economic crisis .
I hope that here , too , Parliament will reach an early compromise with the Council .
The Commission is prepared to work together with the German or Portuguese authorities to assess all requests for support from European funds .
The Commission also supports social dialogue at a European level , as the social partners have a decisive role to play in managing the crisis .
The European social partners are also due to submit a joint contribution on how to overcome the crisis at the tripartite meeting on 19 March .
It is important for the Commission that action is taken on a unified basis , because in that way it will be possible to combat the short-term effects of the crisis and to work towards future economic renewal .
The Commission had this aim in mind when it introduced the European initiative to support employment within the framework of the European Economic Recovery Plan .
On 4 March , the Commission also received a contribution designated for the meeting of the European Council on 19 and 20 March , which concentrates , among other things , on the requirement and the methods for supporting workers affected by the crisis and vulnerable persons on the labour market .
The Commission also welcomes the initiative of the Czech Presidency to organise a summit devoted to employment and social affairs in May 2009 .
The aim of this meeting will be to assess the situation and set out concrete measures .
It should lead to the adoption of a common approach for reducing the social impact of the crisis , reaching a new consensus with the social partners and other participants over the question of modernising social policies and setting out concrete measures for speeding up economic recovery and overcoming the crisis through resolving structural shortcomings on the labour market .
The possible closure of Qimonda puts nearly 2 000 jobs at risk in the north of Portugal , which has , in a few years , gone from being one of the most industrialised regions of Europe to being one of the continent 's poorest regions .
It must be understood that the industrial fabric of the north of Portugal was based on traditional sectors , in which textiles were of great importance .
This case has arisen precisely at a time when this industrial fabric was at a decisive stage in its conversion , undergoing restructuring processes that are always arduous and costly .
If this closure becomes a reality , it will have an enormous impact not just on the region , but on the country as well .
I know that whether or not Qimonda continues to operate depends , above all , on market forces and the will of the shareholders .
Nonetheless , it will also not be difficult to recognise that , as Qimonda is considered one of Portugal 's main exporters and as it is also an essential part of the conversion of the economic fabric of the region , we cannot accept that only market forces should decide its future on their own .
This circumstance explains why the authorities in Portugal and Germany have been tackling the issue at the highest level , specifically and very recently through the President of the Portuguese Republic and Chancellor Merkel .
It is also because of this , Mr Špidla , that if the Portuguese Government has not yet invited you to visit the region , which is facing a real social emergency , I myself am inviting you , Commissioner , as I want you to see for yourself the seriousness of the situation , support the efforts that are being made and mobilise all the instruments that the Commission has at its disposal to prevent the lack of confidence throughout the region from spreading even further .
Qimonda is a paradigm case in the current context of global financial and economic crisis .
It is a company that uses cutting-edge technology , employs highly qualified workers and promotes research .
Qimonda meets the objectives of the Lisbon Strategy .
The Portuguese Government has been doing everything to find a solution that makes this company viable , but the solution is also dependent on the involvement of the German Federal Government and the state governments of Bavaria and Saxony .
The Portuguese Government has already decided to make EUR 100 million available for this purpose .
As I said , it has been doing and will continue to do everything it can , as was , in fact , recognised by Qimonda 's German workers during the recent official visit by the President of the Portuguese Republic .
The European Commission and the Member States have been taking steps - and rightly so - to save many banks and to support certain industries such as , for example , the automotive industry .
Why not also support Qimonda ?
Leaving Qimonda to its fate will have extremely serious consequences .
Not only will thousands of workers in Germany and Portugal lose their jobs , but invaluable European intellectual property and a lot of Community funds that were invested in Qimonda will also be lost .
Keeping Qimonda going in Germany and in Portugal is of such strategic importance for Europe that European Union support is well justified .
Commissioner , we must be consistent and , if we are to be consistent , we will do everything to save Qimonda .
Qimonda is not just any company !
Mr President , the German Qimonda corporation , one of the largest memory chip manufacturers , has declared bankruptcy .
During the last year , it received EUR 325 million in subsidies , which proved to be inadequate .
In 2007 , Qimonda employed 13 500 people .
In December last year , they took a 10 to 15 % cut in their salaries , based on reassurances that the underpayment would be made up to them by April this year .
Instead , 500 workers lost their jobs overnight .
They have not received salaries or compensation for leave not taken or the severance pay owed them .
Another 500 will lose their jobs in the coming month , with a further 1 500 workers threatened further down the line .
There are many more such enterprises in our countries , including those in Krośno or Stalowa Wola in Poland .
What we expect from the Commission is a coherent programme for the protection of jobs during the crisis .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the bankruptcy of the company Qimonda is due to the massive fall in prices for outmoded DRAM chips .
In actual fact , Qimonda is months ahead of the competition when it comes to research into energy-saving chips , and it is specifically in this regard - in this potential for innovation - that investment should be made .
We hope that the Commission will focus on that .
Nonetheless , that could mean that not all the jobs are retained .
The Commissioner was right .
This is where the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund comes in .
In Qimonda , however , what we have is highly qualified workers who , through really well-chosen and specifically tailored re-training , could find new jobs in new sunrise industries .
Those workers who have made the switch to the solar power industry have shown that .
The Qimonda case shows that it is also up to the Commission to ensure that re-training takes place for jobs with a future rather than just taking a scatter-gun approach .
Only targeted investment , environmental restructuring of the economy and then a corresponding re-training of the workforce give people hope and real prospects for the future .
Mr President , Commissioner , you will surely not be surprised to hear that I am not happy with the answer you have given us , especially as we made great efforts several weeks ago to make contact with a very wide range of representatives of the Commission , in particular , Commissioner Verheugen , and demanded clear answers .
There was very much an opportunity today to provide a much more precise answer and to say how the Commission itself intends to assume its responsibility .
For me , there are two aspects that I would like to introduce to this debate .
First of all , Qimonda is capable of ensuring a crucial technological advance for the European Union in terms of semiconductor technology and nanotechnology .
Secondly , Qimonda has no competitors in Europe but does have some in Asia , where they are assisted by 70 % subsidies - that makes the crucial difference .
Thirdly , the closing down of production at Qimonda will mean the loss of the cooperative core of a network of around 40 000 jobs in a region like Saxony alone .
What do workers , their families and the people of the affected regions expect from the Union ?
First and foremost , they expect a clear and immediate undertaking that the Commission wants to retain the current sites of the European semiconductor technology and nanotechnology industry , that this head start for the future is not to be allowed to be thrown away and that the statements made about future research spending , in particular , in relation to the Eighth Research Framework Programme , are true .
We also expect that the Commission , the Federal German Government and the Regional Government of Saxony will support the necessary solution to prevent the closing down of production .
There is not much time left , just a few days .
Top management figures are already drifting away .
The alternatives to a solution would be that highly advanced research technology moves to Asia or is sold for peanuts .
That cannot , I would contend , be in the interests of the European Union .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Qimonda 's difficult situation has been made worse by the emergence of the financial and economic crisis .
The Portuguese Government has been doing everything that it considers appropriate and useful to help resolve the situation .
We wish that the Bavarian Government also knew how to respond to this situation with a great sense of responsibility .
Saving the plants in Munich will have a decisive impact on those in Vila do Conde and Dresden .
The Portuguese Minister for the Economy and Innovation , Manuel Pinho , has himself confirmed how very important it is to ensure the viability of this company .
Qimonda is extremely important to Portugal and , because it could be competitive on a global level , it is just as important to Europe .
Mr President , Portugal will continue to work towards a solution that guarantees the company 's viability .
We hope that the German Government - both at Federal and State level - will really strive to find a solution to this problem .
As for me , I would like to underline once again the strategic importance of keeping this type of industry in European territory .
I hope that no national or state government will make the mistake of allowing this company to close plants and destroy jobs in the Union 's territory .
Ladies and gentlemen , we understand the need to aid the large groups of the automotive industry with their restructuring , but the Union 's funds and the energies of the European Commission cannot be used up on this aid .

Commissioner , to avoid any possible failures in communication , we are appealing to Mr Špidla , to whom we are linked by ties of work and political solidarity , and to the President of the Commission , who will never forget that he is our fellow countryman as well as that of a significant proportion of Qimonda 's workers , for the Commission to pledge to support Qimonda .
Before finishing , we must stress that President Cavaco Silva of Portugal recently stated in Germany that there was new hope with regard to Qimonda .
Reference must also be made , as my fellow Members have already done , to the importance of the specific economic sector in which Qimonda operates .
Let us keep in mind , therefore , that the Portuguese Government is showing its readiness to support Qimonda by whatever means necessary , taking into account the economic size of the country .
Ladies and gentlemen , let us help save Qimonda .
Time is short !
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in this important debate that we are having it is essential that it be understood what is at stake , namely : the future of the strategic nanotechnology industry , together with research and development in a sector that is fundamental to the future of the information society , the central core and research centre of which is in Qimonda 's complex in Germany , with its semiconductor factory in Portugal .
The European Union cannot continue to allow its industries to be destroyed , particularly in a strategic area , and become dependent on the United States and the countries of Asia , which support their industries .
It is regrettable that Mr Špidla has demonstrated in this House serious insensitivity to the issue of Qimonda as a productive company .
There are many jobs involved in this process : almost 2 000 at Vila do Conde , 5 000 in Germany , more than 5 000 worldwide , as well as thousands of jobs that would be indirectly affected in supplier companies and in the research and development centres of Qimonda 's other partners .
There is an enormous amount of research threatened by the risk of closure of Qimonda in Germany and the knock-on effects that such a situation would have in Portugal .
It is out of the question that the European Union should not commit itself to this issue , at least on the same terms as it did with the banking sector .
It must be kept in mind that Vila do Conde is in the north of Portugal where unemployment has grown most , whether because companies in the textiles and clothing industry have closed down or because multinationals which manufactured footwear and cabling , amongst other things , have relocated .
It is now an area at high social risk if steps are not taken to slow the growth of unemployment and to guarantee production .
It is therefore essential for every necessary effort to be made in every possible way .
In the short term , this includes state aid , Community financial support and credit guarantees to maintain an industry of strategic importance to the European Union 's economy .
In the medium term , it includes developing this industrial area and creating more jobs with rights .
It would be good if the European Commission and the governments of our countries understood this .
As for us , we will continue this fight .
Mr President , I commend the priority given to this debate .
Losses of companies like Qimonda , due to their large size and importance as an economic anchor to regional and even national economies , have to be treated seriously by policy makers .
The demise or offshoring of these companies is often a function of globalising forces .
Globalisation - normally a positive force that increases global welfare - can , unfortunately , wreak huge havoc on regional economies when large companies move location .
This has happened in my own area in Ireland South , where Dell has announced layoffs of 1 900 of its staff at its factory in Limerick .
Likewise , in Waterford , where Waterford Wedgwood may be closing in the not too distant future , and again , between that and downstream jobs , another thousand jobs may be lost .
This has to be treated seriously by policy makers .
Therefore , I welcome Commissioner Špidla 's resolution to do his utmost to deploy monies available in the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund and the European Social Fund .
The EUR 500 million from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund could provide huge benefits by giving a second chance to laid-off workers to upskill , retrain and become the entrepreneurs to drive us out of this recession .
The ball is firmly in national governments ' courts to apply for this funding .
It might be worthwhile in this context to push for 75 % co-financing to make their applications easier and , therefore , deliver recovery on the ground to the affected workers rapidly and effectively .
( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , we have been talking about the Lisbon Strategy for years and these are perhaps not the most appropriate times to be discussing it .
Nonetheless , without doubt we need a strategy : a strategy that responds to the difficulties and challenges posed by the present crisis .
That is also what we expect from the Commission .
It is essential that the Commission not shy away from this subject but instead find the capacity to develop joint actions with the government of Portugal and the governments of Germany and the German Länder .
It is essential to keep in mind that this is an industry , as has already been said , that is important to Europe because of its quality and value , because of the research that it undertakes and because of the environmental quality that is associated with it .
It is essential that the Commission not shy away .
I second the invite issued by my colleague , Mr Peneda , for Mr Špidla and the Commission to visit Portugal .
It is essential that the Commission keep in mind that at the moment , Europeans are looking to Europe and expect responses from the European authorities : they need to feel like the European authorities are close by .
The European public does not understand a Europe that washes its hands of problems .
Instead , the people want a Europe that is bold enough to roll up its sleeves and get its hands dirty helping them to overcome their difficulties .
Ladies and gentlemen , the case we are debating is significant and forms part of the overall economic situation .
You will also be well aware that the strategy which the Commission is developing is a definite policy for industry because the Commission firmly believes that industry must always make up a substantial part of our economy and that it is the torch-bearer of high technology .
It is clear that the crisis in which we find ourselves has structural elements and therefore the Commission , in its strategies and basic documents , is formulating , on the one hand , the future green economy or ' green jobs ' , while also pressing very hard for innovation and modernisation .
It is also clear , as I stated at the beginning , that it is up to companies to take business decisions and that the Commission will not interfere in such affairs .
The other thing of course is that if a certain amount of restructuring takes place , certain decisions with social and community-wide consequences , there are instruments and European policies , which we , of course , always have a duty to mobilise and we are mobilising them .
As for the call made twice for me to familiarise myself with the situation on the ground , I am , of course , ready to do that because , at the end of the day , it is one of our normal and fundamental duties to make decisions on the basis of what is possible .
There has been mention of possibilities within the framework of European funds and mention of approaches discussed between the Portuguese Government and the German Government .
In any event , I can state loud and clear that the Commission always makes active use of all available options , that it is doing so in this case , and that it will undoubtedly do so in future cases .
That concludes this item .
Multi-annual recovery plan for bluefin tuna in the Eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the proposal for a Council regulation concerning a multi-annual recovery plan for bluefin tuna in the Eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean - C6-0081 / 2009 - .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Parliament 's decision to accept the Council 's request for application of the urgent procedure for this matter was a unanimous one , both in the Committee on Fisheries last week and here in plenary this morning .
We are , of course , all aware of the need for the European Union to honour the commitments made in Marrakesh last November by the competent international commission , the ICCAT .
We need , specifically , to put into practice the recommendations that this organisation adopted in order to curb the persistent problem of overfishing of bluefin tuna in the Eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean and to confront the resultant serious risk to the future of the species and thus to the fishing industry itself .
Two of my colleagues in the Committee on Fisheries , Mrs Fraga Estévez and Mr Romeva i Rueda , were in Marrakesh and will be talking about this during the debate .
For my part , I would like to remind you that our committee attaches great importance to this matter , which brings into play the main aspects of the common fisheries policy : resource management , fleet management , respect for international , regional and bilateral agreements , technical measures and , above all , monitoring , to which I will return shortly .
This defining issue is thus , in our view , a test of the credibility of the common fisheries policy .
For this reason , there was obviously no question of the new recovery plan being implemented without consulting the European Parliament .
I am therefore delighted that the Commission ultimately chose the only legally and politically acceptable route for implementing the ICCAT 's recommendations , namely , submitting a proposal for a regulation in due form on the basis of Article 37 of the Treaty .
The transposition into Community law of commitments made by the Commission on behalf of the European Union in regional fisheries organisations is , after all , hardly an uncontroversial operation , and we must insist that it should always be carried out under the democratic eye of this institution .
I am , essentially , very pleased with the various measures put forward as , although they are rather restrictive for our operators , they are in line with the challenges , and I would emphasise that the most important of these measures are , without doubt , those relating to monitoring , as it is certainly true that no recovery plan can be effective without monitoring .
I am therefore grateful to you , Commissioner , for this proposal , and I hope that you will show just as much determination in actually implementing the plan , once it has been ratified by the Council , as you showed in reaching a satisfactory agreement within the ICCAT .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , firstly I would like to stress the importance that the Commission attaches to the sustainability of the bluefin tuna stocks and fisheries , and also the importance of the European Parliament in this process .
Within the framework of the 2006 recovery plan for eastern bluefin tuna , and on the basis of an evaluation of its implementation during the 2006 , 2007 and 2008 fishing seasons , and in the light of new scientific advice , ICCAT decided to adopt a new recovery plan .
The ICCAT Scientific Committee clearly indicated its view that the 2006 recovery plan was insufficient to recover the stock and reiterated its concerns with respect to the level of TAC and excess of fishing effort .
Furthermore , ICCAT contracting parties identified certain failures in the implementation of the 2006 plan and so decided to adopt a new plan .
This plan addresses the concerns of the Scientific Committee , notably by reducing the TAC level and by introducing new measures to address fishing and farming capacity .
It should also be noted that , at the initiative of the European Community , the new recovery plan introduced the obligation for annual fishing plans at ICCAT level .
This is an effective instrument to avoid overfishing by identifying the vessels that are over 24 metres which are fishing for bluefin tuna and setting their individual quotas .
I am convinced that the establishment of the annual fishing plan is a key tool in ensuring the full respect of the quota .
The new recovery plan also improves the existing one and introduces new control measures to address those failures identified by the contracting parties , to which Philippe Morillon referred .
The main measures introduced in the new recovery plan are a substantial reduction in the TAC from 27 500 to 22 000 tonnes in 2009 and further reductions to 19 950 tonnes for 2010 and 18 500 tonnes in 2011 .
The EC quota for 2009 is thus reduced to 12 406 tonnes from the 15 641 tonnes foreseen in the 2006 plan .
The fishing seasons for all years are reduced , in particular , for purse seiners , which account for the bulk of this fishery .
The measures to freeze and reduce fishing and farming capacity are a brand new and decisive component of the new plan .
Overcapacity has been identified for some time as a key driver of overfishing .
Now is the time to address this issue in a real manner and the Community , like other ICCAT members , has to share in the effort to do so .
The introduction of the fishing plans I have already mentioned is another measure .
Furthermore , the derogations to minimum size are adjusted .
On the Atlantic , pelagic trawlers no longer benefit from derogations , while the derogations applicable to the artisanal coastal fishery have been removed , except for one case .
Indeed , only bait boats still benefit from previous derogations .
In the Mediterranean , the artisanal coastal fishery now benefits from a derogation .
The control measures are reinforced , in particular as regards joint fishing operations , the adoption of a general prohibition of transhipment at sea and the introduction of a regional ICCAT observer programme .
In conclusion , the situation of the eastern bluefin tuna is considered to be extremely serious .
The overshooting of quotas , the lack of compliance , notably as regards data collection and transmission , undermine the recovery process .
However , I am confident that our agreement to urgently adopt measures to eliminate overfishing and to ensure strict compliance with ICCAT measures can turn around the situation and bring the bluefin tuna stock to sustainable levels .
We need to ensure that situations similar to those that occurred last year do not happen again in the future .
The best means to achieve this is the speedy adoption by the Council of the new recovery plan for bluefin tuna .
Any delay in the adoption of this regulation should , therefore , be avoided , especially if we want to ensure the credibility of the Community at international level and to promote the process of the recovery of this stock .
I am convinced that , if this plan is fully respected , it represents a realistic chance for the gradual recovery of bluefin tuna .
Consequently , decisive and effective action is immediately needed at the European Community level .
After its adoption , the Commission is resolved to work closely with the Member States and with other ICCAT contracting parties to ensure and closely monitor the full implementation of the recovery plan .
Finally , I wish to express my appreciation for the constructive approach and the cooperation adopted by the European Parliament in dealing with this sensitive subject , reflecting our shared interest and commitment to ensuring that the Community fisheries policy and our international obligations are fully respected .
Mr President , my political group voted in favour of the urgent procedure for the recovery plan for bluefin tuna because it is essential that the new measures should be in force before the season begins in April .
I would also like to remind everyone , however , that no recovery plan will save the bluefin tuna until fishing capacity is reduced , starting with that of certain Community fleets , which are well-known and have been pointed out in this respect for many years .
For all these years , the Member States in question have allowed their vessels to multiply to scandalous levels , while the European Commission has stood by passively .
That has brought us to this situation , in which there is hardly any way out .
When the current recovery plan was adopted in 2007 , I tabled an amendment , which was adopted by the House and incorporated by the Commission in its final text , obliging the Member States to submit fishing plans showing that their fleet capacity was adapted to the quota allocated to it .
Despite that , the fishery again had to be closed early in 2008 , earlier in fact than in the previous year , when it was found that practically the whole Community quota had been used up in just a few weeks ; that is to say , we were doing even worse .
Article 5 of the new recovery plan now obliges Member States with overcapacity to eliminate at least 25 % of it by 2010 .
Not only does that reduction seem to me to be incredibly mild compared with the excesses that have been committed , but , given the precedents , I am exceedingly concerned at the ability of the Commission and the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas ( ICCAT ) to enforce this obligation , in view of the clear lack of political will that the Member States involved have more than demonstrated .
I therefore beg the Commissioner to give us guarantees here and now that this lack of political will will not rub off on the Commission and that this time , the Commission will show some firm action that goes beyond closing the fishery early again this spring .
Mr President , the proposal for a Council regulation concerning a multi-annual recovery plan for bluefin tuna in the Eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean puts into practice the binding decision adopted by consensus by the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas ( ICCAT ) at its annual meeting held in November 2008 .
As has been stated , this regulation should enter into force before the start of the fishing season in April , which means that this mandatory consultation of the European Parliament must be carried out during this plenary session .
We would like to help achieve an effective political agreement within the Council on this subject which , in our view , is extremely important and deserves our closest attention .
That is why Parliament 's Committee on Fisheries came out unanimously in favour of the urgent procedure .
The aim of the annual fishing plans , the reduction in the fishing season , the strengthening of the monitoring system , the spawning grounds in the Mediterranean and the presence of ICCAT observers in the purse seine fishery and on tuna farms , all measures included in the regulation , is to ensure compliance with the management measures adopted and to ensure traceability at all stages .
I think they will be successful .
Each contracting party - I think it is important to point this out - will have to submit a fishing plan for the fishing boats and pound nets that catch bluefin tuna in the Eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean which identifies , inter alia , the authorised fishing vessels over 24 metres and the measures introduced to ensure that individual quotas are not exceeded .
Another of the important measures to be adopted is the reduction in the fishing season and the extension of the closed seasons for purse seiners , long-liners , live bait and trolling boats , pelagic trawlers and recreational fishing .
The adjustment plans for countries with excess fleet capacity and bluefin tuna fattening farms are also important .
Ladies and gentlemen , I have read a considerable amount about tuna in recent days , and I would like to raise a few issues here in the short time I have left .
Adding to the almost non-existent governance to counter the concurrent interests of fishing nations and high market demand , numerous factors of various kinds combine to leave the bluefin , a highly exploited species nowadays , in such a precarious situation .
The fact is that the European Union , or rather three Member States ( France , Spain and Italy ) , together account for half of the world 's landings of bluefin tuna .
It is therefore crucial that the European Union should be able to supply ICCAT with statistics that are of the same quality as the fishing or the fishing effort expended , not least because statistics are essential if we want to carry out research to answer the needs or questions being raised today by bluefin biology and ecology , which present scientific research with a real challenge .
If we want to save this species , we have to learn more about it .
In my view , therefore , anything connected with data collection and statistics is especially important .
Mr President , the time has come to speak clearly .
I do not think that what we have here is a recovery plan ; instead , it is clearly what one might call a death certificate .
The lack of a sense of political responsibility on the part of certain governments and the Commission , added to a kind of blindness in part of the sector itself , has brought us to a scenario in which we have to ask ourselves not whether we will be able to help stocks recover , but when we will stop seeing and finding tuna in our seas and oceans .
I am not talking about a decade here , but five years at most .
In this context , the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas should really be called the International Commission for the Capture of All Tunas .
Governments and the Commission have turned a deaf ear to the scientific recommendations that have , time and again , alerted them to the collapse in the hope that there would be a political reaction , which has never come .
The consequence of this attitude - we must not deceive ourselves - is one more step towards the abyss .
Now that we have reached this point , I fear that we have few solutions left to save the tuna , although there is one that we can still use : we must work to have the tuna included on the CITES list as an endangered species and thereby , by banning its commercial use , guarantee its future .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentleman , I welcome the opportunity to tackle with all necessary urgency the discussion on measures to be adopted to safeguard stocks of bluefin tuna and the gradual reduction of quotas established by the ICCAT .
The European Union must stand by its commitment to support the recovery plan established in Marrakesh , to be complemented by monitoring by Member States to prevent illegal tuna fishing .
This is particularly common in the Mediterranean as recent journalistic investigations have revealed in the TV and press .
The European Union must also raise the topic of unfair competition by countries of the southern shores of the Mediterranean in the appropriate quarters .
I particularly welcome the following aspects of the proposed regulation : the decision to bring fishing capacity into line with the allocated quota ; the undertaking to produce information on the implementation of the respective annual fishing plans within the required deadlines ; the reciprocal international inspection programme to guarantee the efficacy of the recovery plan ; and regulations for sport and recreational fishing .
In other words , a tougher and more demanding plan than in the past , to govern these very considerable fishing activities .
( EL ) Mr President , the draft regulation on the conservation of bluefin tuna in the Atlantic and the Mediterranean , which we are debating as a matter of urgency this evening , makes provision for reduced quota levels up to 2011 , fishing restrictions in certain areas and over certain periods , a new minimum size , restrictive measures for sport and recreational fishery , a reduction in fishing capacity and in the capacity of fattening units , reinforced control measures and the application of the ICCAT international joint inspection programme , in order to safeguard the effectiveness of the plan .
I agree with the spirit of the regulation , given that overfishing of tuna has brought stocks to very dangerous levels .
We must not forget that in the last two years , the Commission has imposed a fast-track ban on tuna fishing before the end of the fishing season , because it emerged that certain Member States had overfished by up to 200 % , thereby palpably damaging those which had not broken the law but which were also forced to stop fishing tuna .
However , there are two points in the new regulation which bother me :
The first is the tight time scale allowed for Member States to adjust their fishing effort .
The ICCAT recommendation made provision for 2010 as the year of application , while the regulation makes provision for 2009 , this year , now .
This time scale is very tight and I fear that there will be problems .
The second is the increased cost involved in the reinforced inspection programme which has to be borne by the Member States .
Perhaps the possibility of Community assistance in this direction could be examined .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as we can see from what has been said so far , the ICCAT plan has not yet been fully implemented .
This means that the plan regulating tuna fishing methods , which vary greatly from one another , ranging from purse seining to traditional fishing using a system of fixed nets , requires additional fine tuning before it can be applied in full .
We must differentiate between the indiscriminate capture of specimens that takes place in the case of purse seining - which is even worse when fleets go over the limits , exceed their quotas , which are not sufficiently monitored , as some people pointed out - and traditional fishing with fixed nets .
Fixed nets , by their very definition , make it impossible to go in search of prey : using this system , the fishing season effectively lasts from 50 to 60 days .
When issuing the new regulations , ICCAT must take into account this diversity of fishing systems .
It must also consider that the system of fishing for tuna with fixed nets is also a cultural and historical activity that does not damage the environment and provides employment for thousands of people .
I also believe that UNESCO should think about protecting this system of fishing because it has cultural significance as well as having an impact on the economy and jobs .
It is my view that ICCAT should build additional control systems into its programmes : it should not be possible for tuna to be indiscriminately intercepted before they enter the Mediterranean ; it should not be possible for indiscriminate fishing to take place within the Mediterranean , driven by the commercial value of bluefin tuna .
I would like to conclude by saying , Commissioner , that it is worth making diplomatic efforts to seek to restrict fishing within the Mediterranean to the countries that line the shores of the Mediterranean Sea - prohibiting others from fishing there - because those countries have an interest in safeguarding the stocks of the Mediterranean fish population and because they share a interest in guaranteeing the future of their fishing .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank Members for their comments and the points that have been raised in this debate , and also for accepting the request for urgency .
As I stated at the start , the measures agreed in Marrakesh need to be transposed as soon as possible in order to apply from the start of this fishing season .
This year will clearly be a test of our ability to demonstrate our commitment to the sustainability of this endemic stock .
I cannot emphasise enough the crucial importance for all contracting parties , not least our own fishers , to respect the newly-agreed measures .
This is the only way to provide a chance for the survival of the stock .
Not respecting the new recovery plan will have serious consequences and will lead to a collapse of the stock .
On the point that was raised by Mrs Fraga Estévez , I cannot agree more that , for the recovery plan to succeed , we need to bring about a reduction of capacity , in particular , of the purse seine fleet , which is the one which causes most pressures on the bluefin tuna stock .
In this regard , I would like to refer to the fact that last year , we had agreed on a restructuring package which was triggered because of the fuel crisis and we are encouraging Member States to make use of this restructuring package in order to bring about a reduction of the fleet , in particular , of the purse seine fleet .
We are hearing some encouraging news with regard to one particular Member State , France , which is undertaking to encourage certain fishers to decommission their vessels in order to bring about a reduction in capacity .
We need to see this happening also in the other Member States such as Italy , in particular , which suffers from a significant overcapacity .
We are therefore , at this present moment , engaging in discussions with the Italian authorities in order to see whether they can effect something in this regard in the very short term .
I need to underline the fact that last year , we closed the fishery early so as not to come under any pressure from any Member State or any group of Member States .
We closed the fishery early : immediately when , according to our own calculations , the overall Community quota was exhausted .
This year , also as a result of the annual fishing plans that have been agreed on the Community 's insistence in Marrakesh , we are prepared to close the fishery early with regard to particular Member States .
If the fleet of a particular Member State overshoots its quota , we will not hesitate to close the fishery for that particular Member State .
In that way , only the fleet of that Member State will suffer the consequences of its overshooting , and not the fleet of the whole Community .
I hope that will be enough to fine-tune our action even further during the course of the fishing season .
If we do not deliver on this new recovery plan , then in the years to come , we will have to face the serious consequence that the whole fishery should not open at all in the coming years .
I hope that we will be able to deliver on this plan .
Therefore , I do not agree , regrettably , with what Mr Romeva i Rueda said that the recovery plan is a death certificate .
I think that the recovery plan , if properly implemented , gives us a realistic and reasonable chance to see to it that the stock does recover .
The fact that we have reduced quotas from 15 641 tonnes to 12 406 tonnes in 2009 , the fact that by virtue of what we are discussing today and by virtue of the Council Decision which , hopefully , will be taken later in the month , the fact that we are going to implement the Marrakesh Recovery Plan adopted in November , from this very fishing season , is indicative of the fact that we mean business .
We are not prepared to accept any abuse of the fishing possibilities that are based on what was agreed in Marrakesh .
We have not waited for the natural implementation of the Marrakesh agreement , which would have come too late in the fishing season for bluefin tuna .
We have decided to have all the parameters of the Marrakesh plan introduced from the very start .
I hope that these will be properly adhered to because , in that way , we will be able together to recover this endemic stock .
If not , however , then next year we will have to speak another language .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 12 March 2009 at 12 noon .

Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.20 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9 a.m. )
Statements by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to make a statement on the occasion of the fifth European Day for the Victims of Terrorism .
It is a day which must remain in our memory and a day on which we commemorate all the innocent victims of terrorism .
This weekend , two soldiers in the county of Antrim in Northern Ireland were murdered by the Real IRA and on Monday , a policeman was shot in the county of Armagh .
The policeman who was killed was married and had children .
This barbaric act of terrorism has once again torn a family apart and brought with it unimaginable suffering .
Yesterday , at least ten people died in a suicide bomb attack in southern Sri Lanka and more than twenty were seriously injured .
On behalf of the European Parliament , I would like to express my outrage at these abhorrent attacks on innocent people and send my deepest condolences to the families of the victims .
They will forever remain in our memories .
Today , we in the European Parliament would like to speak out loudly and clearly against the indiscriminate violence of terrorism .
We condemn utterly the senseless destruction of human life , the deaths of entire families as a result of blind fanaticism , which causes people to kill their fellow human beings and to trample human dignity underfoot .
Terrorism is a direct attack on freedom , human rights and democracy .
Terrorism is an attempt to destroy by means of indiscriminate violence the values which unite us in the European Union and within our Member States .
These acts of terrorism shock us all .
They cause us deep and heartrending pain , but they cannot and will not destroy the foundations of the democratic society which is based on our shared values .
Terrorism is a crime which deserves no leniency .
Terrorism represents one of the greatest dangers to the security , stability and democratic values of the international community .
It is a direct attack on our citizens , on all of us .
The European Parliament plays an active role in combating terrorism and in supporting the victims of terrorist attacks .
We cannot repeat often enough that there is no justification for terrorism .
For this reason , we must continue to work together to fight terrorism by applying the principles of the rule of law and using all the force of the law .
Today in the European Parliament , all our thoughts are with the victims of terrorism , wherever in the world they died .
We would like to express our solidarity with them .
I would like to ask you to remember in silence the victims of the Real IRA and of the suicide bomb attack in Sri Lanka .
( The House rose and observed a minute 's silence )
Ladies and gentlemen , the great European , Jean Monnet , one of the founding fathers of European integration , died thirty years ago on 16 March 1979 .
On the occasion of the 30th anniversary of his death , I would like briefly to honour and recognise his legacy and his life 's work in the cause of European integration at the start of this plenary sitting of the European Parliament .
Today we remember the priceless legacy of a man , who , together with Robert Schuman , one of the architects of the reconciliation between Germany and France , took the first step towards establishing a community with a common destiny based on peace , understanding , democracy and cooperation among the people of Europe .
Now , at the beginning of the 21st century , the principles highlighted by Jean Monnet and the methods he used to implement them have lost none of their relevance .
On the contrary , their importance is obvious to us all .
The major challenges presented by globalisation , the economic and financial crisis and global warming will cause Europeans to work even more closely together to provide an effective defence for our shared values and our interests in the world .
Jean Monnet would , of course , welcome the progress made in the Treaty of Lisbon towards a democratic European Union which is capable of action and of facing the challenges of the 21st century .
And finally , it is important to mention that it was the Action Committee for a United States of Europe established by Jean Monnet which , among other things , proposed direct elections to the European Parliament .
In the last thirty years since the death of Jean Monnet , this dream has become an impressive reality with the creation of the parliamentary dimension of the European Union .
We are all the heirs of this great European , Jean Monnet , and his work continues to have a lasting impact .
It has resulted in fundamental changes to the relationships between the European states and still influences the lives of all of our citizens today .
On the occasion of the 30th anniversary of Jean Monnet 's death , I would like us to think about the task ahead of us and our obligations for the future , which are to commit to continuing the great work started by Jean Monnet of unifying our continent .
Mr President , honourable Members , ' Between different countries , each one 's advantage is limited to the results of its own efforts , to the gains obtained in relation to its neighbour , and to the difficulties it manages to transfer to it .
In our Community , the advantage of each of the member countries is the effect of the prosperity of the whole . '
This is what Jean Monnet said in 1954 .
The words have lost none of their relevance , rather the contrary .
This March , as Mr Pöttering has just said , marks the thirtieth anniversary of his death , in 1979 .
This is why I wish to pay tribute to this founding father of the Europe that we all love , this great European whose heritage can only inspire us in these times of crisis .
Recently , and also to mark the fiftieth anniversary of the European Commission , we decided to dedicate the College room - the main room at the Commission - to the memory of Jean Monnet in a very simple , but very meaningful ceremony , at which I had the pleasure and the honour to have at my side not only the President of the European Parliament , Hans-Gert Pöttering , but also the President-in-Office of the European Council , Nicolas Sarkozy .
This tells you that we at the Commission are proud of Jean Monnet 's immense heritage .
As the first president of the European Coal and Steel Community , he was , in fact , the first president of the institution at the origin of our institution , the European Commission , which is doing its best to keep alive his ideals , which are the ideals of all Europeans who love peace , democracy and solidarity .
( Applause )
( PT ) I , too , wish to pay tribute to Jean Monnet , but I asked for the floor in order to congratulate the President on his statement on the European Day in Memory of the Victims of Terrorism .
It was at my suggestion five years ago that we adopted this position , which the Council approved in a meeting on 25 March , following the tragic attacks in Madrid .
However , my speech is an appeal .
Parliament has always faithfully celebrated this date , but unfortunately this date has not yet achieved the scope that it should have within the European institutions and Member States .
I believe that the celebration of this date is one of our most important ways of paying tribute to the victims , as the President has done , but also of raising the level of public awareness .
I know that there are some celebrations in Madrid today , but little else .
I therefore call on the Commission and the Czech Presidency to ensure that all Member States appropriately celebrate this date in future .
Preparation of the European Council ( 19-20 March 2008 ) - European Economic Recovery Plan - Guidelines for the Member States ' employment policies - Cohesion Policy : investing in the real economy ( debate )
The next item is the Joint Debate on the Council and Commission statements : Preparation for the European Council ( 19 and 20 March 2009 ) ,
the report by Mrs E. Ferreira , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on a European Economic Recovery Plan ,
the report by Mr J. Andersson , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the proposal for a Council decision on guidelines for the employment policies of the Member States - C6-0050 / 2009 - ,
the report by Mr E. Kirilov , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Development , on Cohesion Policy : Investing in the real economy .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , let me first join you in paying tribute to Jean Monnet .
We are in a time of crisis , and I think this is exactly the time when we need a strong institution , and it is a great opportunity to raise the importance of Jean Monnet as one of the founding fathers of European integration .
However , the purpose of today 's meeting is to discuss the upcoming European Council .
This Council , as we all know , comes at a critical time for the Union .
We face very significant challenges as a result of unprecedented stresses on our financial systems and our economies as well .
This issue , together with energy security , climate change and the financing of the mitigation and adaptation to climate change , will be the focus of next week 's meeting .
As this Parliament certainly knows , a wide range of measures have been taken by the Union and the Member States in the face of the financial crisis .
We have avoided a meltdown of the financial system .
Our top priority now is the restoration of credit flows to the economy .
We have to deal , in particular , with the ' impaired assets ' held by banks , since these discourage them from resuming lending .
At their meeting on 1 March , the Heads of State and Government agreed that we should do this in a coordinated manner , in line with the guidelines provided by the Commission .
We also need to do more to improve the regulation and supervision of financial institutions .
This is a clear lesson from the crisis , and prevention is no less important .
Cross-border banks hold up to 80 % of Europe 's banking assets .
Two thirds of European banks ' assets are held in only 44 multinational groups .
Strengthening supervision is , therefore , important in itself .
It will help prevent future crises , but it will also send a message of confidence to consumers and markets .
Important work is under way in that respect .
The Presidency is fully committed to working closely with the European Parliament with a view to the rapid adoption of the Solvency II Directive ( on insurance ) , the revised Credit Requirements Directive ( on banks ) and the UCITS Directive ( on undertakings for collective investment in transferable securities ) .
We are also working to get rapid adoption of the regulations on the protection of bank deposits and on credit-rating agencies .
However , we probably need to go further .
The High Level Group , chaired by Mr de Larosière , has produced , as you know , very interesting recommendations , and the Commission 's communication of 4 March also paves the way for significant reform in this area .
So the European Council must send a clear message that this is a priority and that decisions need to be taken as early as June .
As you are well aware , Member States ' budget deficits are growing fast right now .
Of course , deficits inevitably swell in times of economic recession .
Automatic stabilisers can , to some extent , play a positive role .
The Stability and Growth Pact was revised in 2005 precisely for that reason , to allow for sufficient flexibility in difficult times .
But this flexibility needs to be used judiciously , taking into account different starting points .
Restoring confidence also requires governments to give a clear commitment to sound public finances , fully respecting the Stability and Growth Pact .
Some Member States have already made efforts towards consolidation .
Most will do so from 2010 .
This will also be an important message from next week 's meeting .
The financial crisis is now affecting the real economy .
Member States have launched significant recovery programmes , which are now well under way .
The overall stimulus this offers represents , as was agreed , 1.5 % of GDP , but , if you include its automatic stabilisers , it comes to 3.3 % of the EU 's GDP .
Of course , Member States ' responses are different .
They face different situations and have different margins for manoeuvre , but they are coordinated and are based on common principles defined in the European Recovery Programme , which was agreed last December .
This is important if we are to ensure synergies and avoid negative spill-over effects .
Specific and targeted action has been elaborated on in a synergic way between the Commission and the Member States and the Presidency .
That enabled us to both keep the level playing field and , at the same time , face in a concerted and efficient manner the aggravations in some of Europe 's key industrial sectors , such as the automotive industry .
The European Council will assess the state of implementation of this programme .
Here , too , the Commission 's communication of 4 March sets out a number of important principles which should guide the action of Member States .
They include the need to maintain openness within the internal market , ensuring non-discrimination and working towards long-term policy goals , such as facilitating structural change , enhancing competitiveness and building a low-carbon economy .
As far as the Community part of the Recovery Programme is concerned , the Presidency is working very hard to reach an agreement in the European Council on the Commission proposal to finance energy and rural development projects .
As you know , there have been discussions within the Council over the precise list of projects to be supported by the Community and how they should be funded .
Given the important role of Parliament , as one of the branches of the budgetary authority and as co-legislator in this matter , the Presidency is committed to close cooperation with you over the coming weeks , with a view to reaching an agreement as soon as possible .
In addition to the short-term measures , long-term efforts are needed if we are to ensure the competitiveness of our economies .
Structural reforms are more urgent than ever if we are to promote growth and jobs .
Therefore , the renewed Lisbon Strategy remains the right framework within which to promote sustainable economic growth , which will , in turn , lead to the creation of new jobs .
At the moment , our citizens are particularly worried about the effect of the economic situation on levels of unemployment .
Next week 's European Council should agree on concrete orientations on how the EU can contribute to mitigating the social impact of the crisis .
This issue will also be the focus of the special summit which will take place in early May .
Let me be clear on one point : we will not protect jobs by creating barriers to foreign competition .
At their meeting 10 days ago , the Heads of State and Government were clear that we have to make the maximum possible use of the single market as the engine for recovery .
Protectionism is clearly not the right answer to face this crisis - quite the opposite .
More than ever , our companies need open markets , both internally within the Union , but also at the global level .
Which leads me to the G20 Summit meeting in London .
The European Council will establish the Union 's position in advance of the G20 Summit .
We want this summit to be ambitious .
We cannot afford it to fail .
Leaders will be looking at prospects for growth and employment and at reform of the global financial system and of the international financial institutions .
They will also be looking at the particular challenges facing developing countries .
The EU is active in all these areas and should be in a strong position to ensure that the international community takes the right decisions .
The other major item on the agenda of next week 's European Council will be energy security .
The recent energy crisis demonstrated all too clearly the extent to which we need to increase our ability to resist future supply problems , as we could see earlier this year .
The Commission has provided some very useful elements in its Second Strategic Energy Review .
On the basis of this review , the Presidency intends that the European Council agree on a set of concrete orientations aimed at enhancing the Union 's energy security in the short , medium and long term .
In the short term , this means having available concrete measures which can be called on if we are suddenly faced with a new disruption of gas supplies .
It also means taking urgent steps to launch infrastructure projects to enhance energy interconnections - this is certainly essential .
In the medium term , it means adapting our legislation on oil and gas stocks to ensure that Member States act with responsibility and solidarity .
It means taking adequate measures to improve energy efficiency .
In the long term , it means diversifying our sources , suppliers and routes of supply .
We have to work with our international partners to promote the Union 's energy interests .
We must create a fully fledged internal market for electricity and gas .
As you know , this is legislation which the Presidency very much hopes can be completed before the European elections .
Next week 's meeting will also discuss the preparations for the Copenhagen Conference on Climate Change .
We remain committed to a global , comprehensive agreement in Copenhagen next December .
The Commission 's January communication is a very helpful basis .
It is very clear that climate change is a challenge which can only be tackled through a concerted global effort .
Finally , the European Council will also launch the Eastern Partnership .
This important initiative will help to promote stability and prosperity on the whole continent .
It will also contribute to accelerating reforms and to deepening our commitment to work together with those countries .
The partnership includes a bilateral dimension which is adapted to each partner country .
It foresees the negotiation of association agreements , which might include deep and comprehensive free trade areas .
The multilateral track will provide a framework in which common challenges can be addressed .
There will be four policy platforms : democracy , good governance and stability ; economic integration ; energy security ; and , last but not least , contacts between people .
You will appreciate from this presentation that next week 's European Council has many substantial issues to address .
We are facing many serious challenges , not least the current economic crisis .
The Czech Presidency , through the leadership of Prime Minister Topolánek , intends to ensure that the meeting next week demonstrates through practical action that the European Union remains committed to its ideals and that it faces these challenges together in a coordinated manner and in a spirit of responsibility and of solidarity .
( Applause )

Mr President , Mr Vondra , honourable Members , we are living through testing times .
An economic crisis of this magnitude makes its effects felt on families , on workers , on all categories of the population and on companies , in the four corners of Europe .
It destroys jobs and tests the resistance of our social models .
It also puts strong political pressure on all the leaders .
The European Union is not immune from such tensions .
This is why it has decided to bring into play all the levers at its disposal to get to grips with the crisis and its consequences , by using what gives it its force : European institutions and Member States working together in a community based on the rule of law to provide collective solutions to common problems .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have already done much in these last six months to fight the crisis that we are experiencing .
We avoided a collapse of the financial system in the autumn ; we contributed to the launch of an international process with the G20 ; we were among the first to focus on the real economy by agreeing a recovery plan in December , a plan whose number one recommendation - a budgetary stimulus never seen before at European level - is beginning to be implemented .
This support for the real economy amounts to a total of 3.3 % of GDP and includes a real contribution from the European budget .
The recovery plan includes , for example , accelerated advances from the structural funds for an envelope of EUR 6.3 billion in 2009 , in addition to the EUR 5 billion already committed .

The actions carried out in the last six months are fully in line with the Lisbon Strategy for growth and employment .
Structural reforms , which have been of great help in strengthening our economies , must be pursued because they also help to maintain short-term demand , but we must now move on to the next stage and deploy the measures for combating the crisis more thoroughly .
We need greater coordination and wider-ranging effects .
Now is the time to move up a gear in our response to the crisis .
We must understand that this is a new type of crisis and that we never envisaged a crisis of such dimensions , of such magnitude , of such depth .
This will be the mission for the European Council next week .
With the very strong support of the Czech Presidency , whose commitment and complete cooperation with the Commission I welcome , I am convinced there will be progress in four areas that the Commission defined a few days ago in its communication , namely , the financial markets , the real economy , employment and the social dimension , and the global dimension via the G20 .
The informal summit of 1 March - thanks to a very large extent to the effective chairmanship of Prime Minister Topolánek - has already laid the foundations for a fruitful European Council .
I am proud to note that the Commission 's preparatory work has met with such a favourable reception .
Our guidelines on impaired assets , our communication on the automotive sector and the report that I have entrusted to Jacques de Larosière and his high-level group have enabled the Member States to build a consensus so that they can rally round common positions .
I welcome the broad support that is coalescing around these courses of action in the European Parliament .
I would mention , by way of example , the reports we will debate this morning , the Ferreira report on the economic recovery plan , the Andersson report on the guidelines for employment , and the Kirilov report on cohesion policy .
These reports and the resolutions on which your Assembly will vote this week , in particular , those from the Lisbon Strategy coordination group , will make what I consider to be an essential contribution to the European Council .
On the eve of the London Summit , they can only strengthen Europe 's position on the international stage , and I welcome that .
Mr President , I would like briefly to pick out three themes which I believe must guide this European Council 's work : stabilising financial markets , revitalising the real economy and helping people make it through the crisis .
Look at the financial system . Yes , we need immediate action to address immediate problems .
After our initiatives on recapitalisation and guarantees , our guidance on impaired assets targets the major obstacle now identified as blocking the flow of credit .
I believe , and it is in our communication , that without cleaning the banking system , we will not see the restoration of credit flow to the real economy .
But , as has often been argued in this Chamber , we also need to rebuild confidence through a major overhaul of our regulatory regime .
That is why we have set out a detailed calendar of new regulatory proposals .
Next month , the Commission will come forward with new proposals on hedge funds , on private equity and on executive pay .
However , we must also revamp supervision .
As you will have seen from the communication the Commission adopted last Wednesday , and which I had an opportunity to discuss with your Conference of Presidents the following day , the Commission is keen to accelerate implementation of the de Larosière report .
We will present the overall architecture at the end of May for endorsement by the European Council in June , and we will come with legislative proposals in the autumn .
In more general terms , beyond financial systems , using short-term action to target our long-term goals will pay double dividends .
It will make us stronger when the upturn comes , ready to face the challenge of competitiveness and a low-carbon economy .
Just look at energy security .
The fact that we are in an economic crisis does not make our problems of dependency disappear .
On the contrary , and I welcome the decision of Prime Minister Topolánek to have a discussion on this issue .
This is central to what we are doing .
Investing in infrastructure brings a stimulus today , and it is badly needed for the European economy , but it also makes us stronger and more competitive tomorrow .
That is why your support , the European Parliament 's support for the EUR 5 billion stimulus to energy and broadband projects is so valuable - the more so as I am rather concerned , to be honest with you , about the state of play in Council , where we are not making the progress I would wish to see .
Of course , we all know that the Community budget , at less than 1 % of GDP , can only make a limited contribution to a European-wide stimulus .
The money has to come , essentially , from national budgets .
However , we need to deploy all national levers in the European perspective in order to be effective .
The single market is the best possible platform for recovery .
In 2006 alone , Europe was richer by EUR 240 billion , or the equivalent of EUR 518 for every European citizen because of the single market .
The European Council should cement its place at the heart of our recovery strategy by agreeing principles that should shape the European recovery , including a shared commitment to openness and a level playing field internally and externally , thereby clearly rejecting protectionism but , of course , protecting the single market , the bedrock of European prosperity .
Most importantly , though , we must acknowledge that this is not a question of economic theory or dry statistics .
This crisis is having a major impact on people , namely the most vulnerable across Europe - now , today .
That is why my number one concern - by far the most important test we face - is the social impact of this crisis , namely the problem of rising unemployment .
We have to focus our energy on employment and on helping people make it through the crisis .
This requires determination and imagination .
We need to help companies to keep workers on their books , to use training imaginatively to serve long- and short-term needs , and we need to bring help to those already unemployed .
We need to be sure that we make the most of national actions to help the most vulnerable but we also need to make the most of the European instruments we have , from the Social Fund to the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
Launching a process now which takes us up to the Employment Summit in May gives us two months of intensive efforts to put plans in place and , if possible , to develop new and more ambitious strategies to tackle the unemployment problem .
We need to use this time well .
Though time is short , I believe we should try to organise a much more inclusive process in the run-up , involving social partners , civil society and parliamentarians .
It is particularly important that we take advantage of your privileged insight into what is really happening on the ground .
If we follow this approach of pooling our resources and coordinating action at all levels - at European level , at national level , at regional level , at social partners ' level - we will emerge from the crisis quicker and , I believe , stronger .
We will also carry more weight on the global stage .
It is no coincidence that the proposals we have made for the European Union 's G20 position have a strong echo of our approach within Europe .
They are based around the same principles .
With a unified European Union voice in the G20 , they will carry a lot of weight and the European Union will be - if the Member States are ready to really work together - in a very good position to shape the global response to this crisis .
Europe today has to find its strength in cohesion , in coordination , in real practical solidarity .
For that , we must all work closely together and stay in close touch as the task of recovery unfolds , including , of course , with this Parliament .
I look forward to making this a reality as we all work for recovery in the coming weeks and months .
Mr President , Commission President , ladies and gentlemen , the current crisis is the worst that the European Union has ever known .
Unfortunately , it is far from over .
Bankruptcies are still occurring and unemployment is continuing to rise .
Never before has the European project been subject to such a tough test .
Not only will the robustness of the recovery be dependent on our joint response , but also , in all likelihood , the very continuation of the European project , at least in terms of the speed of our development and expansion .
We did not create the European Union to be limited , in times of prosperity , to a huge market nor to return , in times of crisis , to the national selfishness of ' every man for himself ' .
The European project is a political project , and a guarantor of peace , freedom and democracy .
However , in economic terms , it is based both on competition and on solidarity and cohesion .
In fact , it thrives on the ability to offer quality and opportunities for progression to all citizens , whatever their origin .
Today , in this crisis , people are looking to Europe for protection and action to help them quickly get through the current critical phase , without any serious social breakdowns .
They are looking to Europe to help them rediscover their future and to boost employment and business , based around new and more sustainable approaches to development .
The Lisbon Agenda and the environmental commitments are inspirational intentions , but we need to urgently give them substance and force .
In this respect , Parliament 's call to the Council and the Commission is clear , firm and loud .
The consensus achieved in the vote in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs shows this common intention .
I hope that the vote in this House today will be further proof of that .
The various rapporteurs and the various political groups have worked together , and I hope that this message will be conveyed to and perceived by the Commission in this sense .
In this context , I should like to thank the shadow rapporteurs , particularly Mr Hökmark and Mrs in ' t Veld .
I hope that , with this same determination , today 's vote will allow us to confirm and convey this message .
As for the causes of this crisis , the most important point today is to learn the lessons .
The Larosière report is , in fact , a very important guide that we must follow .
It forms an excellent working basis and encompasses much of what we have already proposed in this House .
Its conclusions must , however , lead to immediate and planned action by the Commission .
It is also vital that the European Union adopts a determined stance in this respect at the next G20 meeting .
In this context , I believe that there are elements which are symbolic , and I hope that Parliament will today unequivocally vote to fight the offshore system and tax havens .
It is not enough , however , just to correct the errors of the past , particularly with regard to financial regulation and supervision .
The damage has now been done and we need a recovery plan that is in line with the EU 's responsibilities .
We welcome the Commission 's rapid initiative , but we are aware , and must be clear , that the means and tools for action are clearly inadequate .
Parliament is giving the Commission a vote of support as regards the flexibility , forward-thinking and swiftness of the available instruments , but we cannot forget that 85 % of the funds currently available are in the hands of the various countries making up the European Union .
Yet the EU countries have never been so different from one another as they are today .
Some countries have the power and instruments to act , while others are completely vulnerable and their toolbox is totally empty .
There are countries without any national room for manoeuvre , which are unable to resist the simultaneous and violent forces of the internal market , single currency and globalisation .
Among these are the new countries which have just joined the European project and which are among those suffering the most .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that at this point in time , the message from Parliament can be broken down into a series of very clear and very precise messages , but with one common idea , which is : that we need people , jobs and national resources , but also European resources , in order to restore , as the people expect , dynamism , growth and solidarity in the European space .
rapporteur . - ( SV ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , there has been some discussion as to whether or not the Employment Guidelines need to be amended .
It is not a particularly important discussion , as the Employment Guidelines contain every opportunity for action .
The problem at the moment is the lack of ability to act .
We have been , and are currently , in a financial crisis that has turned into an economic crisis .
Now the employment crisis is coming crashing in , with the prospect of social problems further down the road .
It is good that an employment summit has been organised in May , but we must not isolate employment issues from the economic issues .
They must , therefore , be integrated into the discussion .
I think that we have done too little , too late .
One and a half percent of Member States ' GDP - that was right when we said it , but now the crisis is even worse than we thought at that time .
We need to do more , to make more coordinated efforts - certainly more than two percent - in order to deal with it .
The risk of not doing enough or of doing it too late is much , much greater than the risk of doing too much , as it will result in increased unemployment and in reduced tax revenue , which will affect the social problems experienced in the Member States .
What should we do , then ?
We know very well what .
We should tie together what is good in the short term with regard to combating unemployment with what is needed in the long term .
It is about environmental investments , new infrastructure projects , energy efficiency in homes , and it is about education , education , education .
We have talked about lifelong learning .
We have never done enough , but now we have the chance to invest seriously in education .
We also need to stimulate demand , and for this we need to turn to those groups that will use the funds for consumption : the unemployed , families with children , pensioners and others who will use an increased amount as consumers .
We must do what we can at EU level and try to deal with the Social Fund and the Globalisation Fund quickly so that the resources get out to the Member States .
However , if we are to be totally honest , we know that the major economic resources are in the Member States and if the Member States do not do enough , and in a sufficiently coordinated way , we will not succeed .
If we look around and summarise what the Member States have done , there is only one Member State that has achieved 1.5 % , and that is Germany , which was not initially the country on the front line when it came to taking action .
Other countries , the Nordic countries , for example , where I come from , are doing very little , despite the fact that their economic situation is good .
Now we come to the social consequences .
You have mentioned them and they are particularly important .
They affect not only the social security systems , but also the public sector .
The public sector is doubly important .
It is about providing people with childcare , care for the elderly and social security , but it is also important for employment .
There are huge numbers of people in the public sector and we must ensure that it has sufficient economic resources .
I would also like to say something about young people .
Young people are currently becoming unemployed straight from education .
We must create opportunities for young people to find employment or further education or whatever it may be .
Otherwise , we are storing up problems for the future .
In conclusion , we must act .
We must act in a coordinated way with solidarity , we must act now and not wait , and our action must be sufficient .
( Applause )
Thank you , Mr President , Mr Vondra and Mr Barroso .
It took very little time to draft this report entitled ' Cohesion Policy : Investing in the real economy ' .
Regardless of this fact , we produced a document which was agreed on and unanimously supported .
This fine result would not have been possible without the involvement and assistance of my colleagues on the Committee , the shadow rapporteurs and the cooperation between the political groups , for which I would like to thank everyone .
I would like to dwell on the basic messages conveyed in this report .
First of all , this report supports in every case the measures proposed by the European Commission for accelerating and simplifying the implementation of the Structural Funds , which include increasing the advance payments , introducing more flexible schemes for settling expenses etc .
We actually require these measures now just when we need to have an adequate response to the economic crisis : investment in the real economy , the preservation and creation of jobs and the encouragement of entrepreneurship .
However , these measures are not the only indication of the need for us to act more effectively and efficiently .
The proposals on simplifying the rules have been long sought after and expected by users of EU funds and come in response to the recommendations from us and from the European Court of Auditors .
Secondly , the Cohesion Policy and solidarity policy .
We not only require in this case a declaration of solidarity but also to see solidarity in action .
In a context where European economies are mutually dependent , the adverse effects of the crisis affect every economy .
To counter these effects , we must achieve positive results which will generate extensive benefits and be used to meet the goals that have been set for growth and development in the Lisbon Strategy .
It is also important for EU citizens ' social standards to be preserved , for us to protect the socially deprived , as well as for competition not to be distorted and the environment to continue to be protected .
In this respect , solidarity and cohesion are required to the maximum extent so that we succeed in finding together a way out of the crisis more quickly .
Thirdly , it is important for us to learn the lessons from the current crisis and that the measures which will be adopted are not treated as isolated cases .
The analysis of the mistakes made and experience gained must continue .
In addition , the process of simplifying the procedures must continue .
The rules must be made clearer , information more accessible , the administrative burden lighter and procedures more transparent .
This is the only way in which mistakes will be reduced and the opportunities for any infringement and corruption limited .
Finally , I would like to call on the Council to adopt as soon as possible the measures proposed for accelerating and simplifying the use of the Structural Funds .
I also appeal to the members of the European Commission whom we expect to monitor the impact of the new measures and make new suggestions , as well as the process as a whole .
Last but not least , I want to emphasise the fundamental role played by Member States on which depends the action to be taken and the achievement of real results from the implementation of the Cohesion Policy .
I will end by mentioning again that we need to see solidarity in action .
Mr President , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets I would like to state , first and foremost , that this economic recovery plan is much more intergovernmental than Community in nature , and that it demonstrates the real financial limitations of the European Union .

From the Community viewpoint , we are going to use EUR 30 000 million which will be , in practice , mobilised by the European Investment Bank , and in respect of the EUR 5 000 million which belongs , strictly speaking , to the Community budget , we are encountering major problems .
There are no new resources ; what is happening is a redistribution of existing resources .
With regard to the European Investment Bank , we are fully in agreement with having recourse to it , but we should say that we are worried we are entrusting it with many commitments without having a guarantee that they can be taken forward .
Finally , we regret the Council 's inability to reach an agreement on the EUR 5 000 million for energy interconnections and rural broadband .
We believe that the unused margins should not be used . What the European Commission and the Council must do is to turn to the resources given to them by the interinstitutional agreement itself .

Mr President , Mr Barroso , it is the unanimous opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs that I should like to share with you this morning , for we are looking to see a real promotion of social cohesion in this recovery plan .
Social cohesion means being integrated into the labour market .
To begin with , then , we want to keep all employees in their jobs and get the unemployed back to work by , among other things , directing the Globalisation Adjustment Fund towards new training courses , so that the workforce is prepared for when we emerge from the crisis .
Therefore , in the short term , we need to keep people in work .
In the medium term , we need to provide better training for employees for when the crisis ends and , in the long term , we need to innovate , including in social organisations via employer groups .
Europe is obliged to innovate if it is to survive globalisation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , next week 's European Council must not be a summit like any other .
It must not be a routine summit .
Europeans are expecting concrete signals from it , as is my parliamentary group .
This summit must be the one that affirms Europe 's strength and determination in the face of the crisis .
This strength has been shown in the past when Europe adopted the rules of the social market economy , which limits the damage done by an unprecedented crisis that is hitting every region in the world at the same time .
This strength was also proven 10 years ago when Europe armed itself with a currency , the euro , which is undergoing its first major test but is holding its own .
However , a strong Europe must not be a protectionist Europe .
A Europe which protects by dint of its rules must not be a fortress Europe , as turning in on ourselves will not bring us out of the crisis .
Rather , we must rely on openness and on the affirmation of our identity .
Europe 's strength in a storm , even more than in calm times , lies in its taking action on behalf of our fellow citizens , including the most underprivileged , and , above all , in doing so as one .
Together with the Commission , and with Mr Barroso , whose series of measures inspired by the de Larosière report I welcome , Europe is fighting to save the banking system .
It is fighting and we are fighting with it not , as some would have us believe , to save the jobs of the traders , but to avoid a general collapse of our entire economy and because there can be no lasting recovery without a healthy banking system .
Europe is fighting to good effect , and I welcome the agreement reached yesterday on reduced VAT rates for the catering and construction sectors , on the introduction of real supervision of the financial markets , on saving jobs , on maintaining or restoring confidence and on ensuring a future for Europeans .
Ladies and gentlemen , I have spoken of strength , I have spoken of unity , I have spoken of effectiveness , but the raison d 'être , the motivation for all this is solidarity .
This is the Europe of Jean Monnet and of all the founding fathers .
What use would it have been to have created Europe in the aftermath of the last war if it were only to be renounced in favour of the ' every man for himself ' approach 60 years later , with the arrival of the most severe economic crisis since 1929 ?
Our fellow citizens sometimes ask what the purpose of Europe is .
It is up to us to prove that Europe is standing by its 500 million fellow citizens , many of whom are suffering in this crisis , and is also showing solidarity towards the countries of the Union - I am thinking of Ireland , Hungary and others that are experiencing particular difficulties .
I ask , on behalf of my group , that each Head of State or Government in the Twenty Seven reject the lure of isolation which - I choose my words with care - would be suicidal for all our countries .


I ask Mr Vondra , Mr Barroso , and you too , Mr Pöttering , to intervene in the European Council on behalf of our Parliament , to opt for solidarity and innovation .
Yes , I do say innovation because I am convinced that we will emerge from the crisis only if we use new resources and make massive investment in the knowledge-based economy , and in research and development .
We must exploit the immense potential the European Union has in the area of new green technologies as soon as possible , since these green innovations must be included in all European policies .
This would give a real industrial boost to the economic recovery .
In the same way , the regulatory obstacles to the internal market that still hinder the development of these technologies must be removed as quickly as possible .
A real internal market for renewable energies with clear rules must be introduced since , in a crisis , nothing will remain the same , and we must prepare for the new situation .
This is the meaning of the Lisbon and , now , post-Lisbon Strategy .
My parliamentary group , like the centre-right in Europe , is a responsible political organisation .
We are for an economy which has rules , we are for a social market economy .
This prevents us from engaging in demagogy and populism .
This obliges us to speak honestly to the people of Europe .
I hope that the next European Council will take inspiration from this approach .
( Applause )

Mr President , with all respect to you , Mr Vondra , it is unacceptable that , in a situation like the current one , the President-in-Office of the Council is not present .
This also indicates the nature of his attitude to the current situation .
( Applause )
We have heard many of the old familiar phrases being repeated .
We have been listening to this sort of thing for months and we could use the phrases to produce templates .
Mr Daul , I would like to congratulate you on your wonderful speech !
If you go on making speeches like this , the people in Lipsheim and Pfettisheim will begin to think that you have joined the French Communist Party .
It is really wonderful and it all sounds excellent .
However , now we actually need to deliver something .
We must make the necessary decisions .
More must be done in the European Council .
The crisis is deepening and jobs are being lost .
We have seen EUR 40 billion wiped off the value of shares in the last six months .
This means that people 's livelihoods are being destroyed .
This means that jobs are being lost .
This means that companies are being threatened with closure .
This means that national economies are being threatened with collapse .
Then the Council comes up with nice little resolutions , such as the fiscal stimulus of 1.5 % of GDP this year or next year .
Three Member States have implemented the resolution so far , which means that 24 states have not .
Great Britain , Germany and Spain have done this , and incidentally , all three were pressured by social democrats and socialists , and the other Member States have not .
You must do more !
You must tell the absent President-in-Office of the Council this .
Mr Barroso , you have made a wonderful speech .
It was excellent and we support it fully .
Solidarity between the Member States is urgently needed .
For us as social democrats and socialists , solidarity is the central concept in this situation .
Solidarity between people in society , but also solidarity between states .
Solidarity within the eurozone and solidarity between the eurozone and the states outside it .
It is important for the Commission to urge the Member States to show solidarity .
It is also important for the Commission to provide us with the draft directives we need to control private equity and hedge funds , to ensure the transparency of credit rating agencies , to keep managers ' salaries within reasonable limits and to close tax havens .
These initiatives are urgently needed .
We hope that you will implement them and we are relying on you to do so .
If it is no longer possible to achieve this within this parliamentary term , we will be making all these demands again on the first day of the new Parliament .
When I hear the head of Citigroup , which has once again made a profit , and when I hear Mr Ackermann from Deutsche Bank , which has once again made a profit in the first quarter , I wonder whether these people believe that they can just go on as before , now that they have been bailed out by the state .
No , we must put in place controls and transparency to ensure that these people cannot repeat what they have done in the past .
My third point is that I am fascinated when I hear the members of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats speaking .
It is wonderful .
You are saying all the things which we have been saying for years and which you have always voted against .
You seem suddenly to have woken up .
However , when it comes to Amendment 92 , to a resolution to do more , in other words a fiscal stimulus of 1.5 % of GDP , the PPE-DE does not vote in favour .
Amendment 92 will be the litmus test for you when we vote on it at midday .
On the question of solidarity , you have just said on behalf of your absent group , Mr Daul , that this is a good thing .
Let us see if you vote in favour of Amendment 102 , in which we are demanding solidarity .
One final remark which is of crucial importance for our group relates to Amendment 113 concerning tax havens .
The people who serve us in restaurants , the drivers who drive our cars , the ground staff at the airports who unload our suitcases , are all taxpayers whose taxes are being used to prevent the big banks from failing , because governments and parliaments require these people to make a contribution .
These are the people who must pay for the safety nets that have been put in place for the banks and the large companies .
Now the managers of these large banks , who are still paying themselves bonuses of millions of euros , for example , at ING which has deficits of several billion , are to be given the opportunity to put their money into tax havens and to avoid paying tax .
This is a class war from above , which we at least do not want to be part of .
Therefore , the question of whether we decide today that the European Parliament is against tax havens is a decisive question for the credibility of the PPE-DE and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe .
You are talking like the socialists , but we want to see whether you vote like the socialists at midday .
We have put our three demands on the table and I would like to state quite clearly that if you do not vote in favour of them , then we will not have a joint resolution .
Then it will be clear that we stand for social justice and that the PPE-DE can only produce empty words .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , over recent months , our Union has had more summits than our former colleague Reinhold Messner , and our Parliament has had a string of reports on improving the economy , but what those summits and those reports have done is provide Member States with stepping stones across the river of recession .
Now we need the Council to cross without fear or flight , and I congratulate the authors of the Andersson , Ferreira and Kirilov reports .
They offer a consistent and pragmatic perspective written in the light of the unemployment avalanche on our horizon .
And their underlying message is this : jobs , jobs , jobs .
The Lisbon Strategy , employment guidelines , cohesion policy - these have always argued for flexicurity in our economies , for public investment in research and development , for the rapid transition to the knowledge economy .
They are the foundations on which a healthy , dynamic and secure job market is built .
And from today 's vantage point , one thing is clear to everyone - except , perhaps , some on the benches to the left .
It was not the Lisbon Strategy that brought hardship to our kitchen tables , rather it is the Member States which ignored it that are suffering the deepest and will suffer the longest .
So now is the time to put our foot on the floor and drive forward a ' Lisbon plus programme ' and employment guidelines that reflect the realities of our Union .
National parliaments , regional governments , city halls : each must be empowered to rise to that challenge , and named and shamed when they do not .
Nor should we accept heel-dragging over the need to protect the planet .
The Council will consider the EU 's negotiating stance for the Copenhagen climate conference .
Just how much money , Mr Vondra , will the 27 allot to adaptation and mitigation in the developing world ?
Climate change will not stop as the economy slows , and the poorest countries will suffer - still - from our carbon consumption .
So recession must not mean inaction .
Member States must commit the cash to counter climate change and to create green-collar jobs in the process , perhaps by using the money we have , as Claude Turmes suggests , to leverage more through the EIB or the EIF .
However , the Council knows that the ravages of recession will return without root and branch reform of the financial system .
Next month 's G20 is tasked with recasting the mould , and I welcome the tone taken by European leaders when they met in Berlin .
The IMF should be financed effectively , tax havens should be subject to scrutiny , and financial institutions should be regulated robustly , with an effective European financial services authority overseeing the system : not to drag our economies back into the past , but to create an open , honest and transparent system of trade that is free and fair .
London , Paris , Berlin : each is keen to stress that Europe stands united , but the President of the Council tells us that differences persist .
I hope the President of the Council will be here to report back to us from this summit , because he should be here today .
If differences persist , it will not do .
We need Europe to be strong in mind , fleet of foot and united in purpose over the weeks and months ahead , ready to strip out the toxic assets that are crippling bank balances , ready to reform bank practice to restore creditworthiness , and ready to accept that the current stimulus package may not be enough , because it is no good topping up the IMF if there is no global financial system to support , and while it is rough justice that responsible Member States must mitigate against default by those who lived it up , that may be the price to pay to avoid the contagion of economic meltdown .
Put simply , we need Council , Commission and Parliament to work together : coolly , calmly , collectively , preventing procedure from getting the better of purpose .
Europe can fight fire no longer .
The time has come for the fundamental reform that will provide jobs now and security in the future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Vondra talked of ' strengthening supervision ' , but we want some information on how many OTC derivatives are still in the possession of European banks ; how much the bill comes to at world level .
It may be that the Commission and the Council will decide to freeze derivatives , at least to propose it at world level , and to suspend trading in these commodities .
Is it possible that in banks that have been nationalised , these derivatives are still a toxic asset but obviously also worrying for development ?
Strengthening supervision also means that we must not only , as the Commission says , have the capacity to make a clean sweep of the banking system and review the system of regulation , but we must also make new proposals .
So , if we are worried about the crisis in the motor industry , we ought also to concern ourselves with small and medium-sized enterprises and the unfair competition coming from outside our borders .
The Council has not yet decided to ratify and promote origin labelling , the only system that is not protectionist but protects consumers and products , as President Barroso himself just said .
In order to help businesses we must , in addition to promoting new lines of credit , give small and medium-sized enterprises faster and cheaper access to mobility , if we want these businesses to adapt rather than go under .
Many of them are now suffering a 50 % drop in orders , forcing them to turn to the banks for help .
The banks are not lending , however , and the bank shares have collapsed because of derivatives .
It is a vicious circle .
You must come out from this muddle and look for real solutions , not just useless proposals .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on the occasion of the fifth debate in this parliamentary term on the successes and failures of the Lisbon Strategy , I would like to ask how it can be that we have stated every year that the strategy is a successful one and that its success has been assessed and that we now suddenly wake up in the middle of the most serious crisis of recent times , as if it were a natural disaster .
This should not be the case and a dishonest assessment of the Lisbon Strategy is , I believe , one of the problems which we must resolve .
A year ago in the same debate , the European Parliament urged the Commission to ensure the stability of financial markets because we had identified signs of an impending crisis .
Mr Barroso , nothing was done in response to this request .
We have now been discussing the collapse of the system for months , as Mr Schulz has said , without ensuring that the new regulations are mandatory .
My view of this is slightly different to that of my fellow members .
I believe that many members of the Commission and of the national governments are still convinced that a deregulated market made up of strong players can regulate itself .
If we limit ourselves to injecting funds quickly into the banking system and to giving public guarantees , without establishing a completely new structure for the financial markets , we are sure to fail .
We will not emerge from this crisis and there will be no real recovery .
The discussion on the links between climate policy , sustainability strategies and crisis management is just as inconsistent .
Every year , we hear many comforting assurances on this subject .
However , if you look at the current economic recovery plans at European and national level , you will see that they consist of a lot of words , but that the objectives of sustainability , climate protection and the efficient use of resources are still not being taken seriously .
These economic recovery plans will not equip the European economy to face the future .
They are simply more of the same .
Ladies and gentlemen , the joint programme for growth and jobs , also known as the Lisbon strategy , came into being in 2005 .
It is now 2009 and , despite everything , we are faced with increasing poverty and an economic and financial crisis without parallel in history .
Furthermore , the latest forecasts predict that the number of people unemployed in the EU will rise by almost 3.5 million in 2009 .
Despite all of the measures adopted to date , unemployment is rising .
I am not the only one who thinks that something is wrong .
The current situation shows the failure of the policies to date which have mainly supported the accumulation of large profits by large commercial and financial groupings , the creation of huge monopolies and a deterioration in the living standards of workers and ordinary people .
Europe must take a different route .
At its spring meeting , the Council should adopt a European strategy for solidarity and sustainable development and a new set of economic , social and environmental policies for supporting investment especially in the quality of work , improving qualifications , infrastructure support programmes , policies of cohesion , environmental protection and improved health and safety protection at work .
A major problem confronting Member States , including the Czech Republic , is company relocations .
The EU should set up a regulatory framework which would penalise firms for relocating , for example , by making EU financial support conditional on the fulfilment of obligations involving job protection and local development .
Especially now , at a time of financial and economic crisis , we need not only solidarity but also strict and fast-operating rules and instruments as a common defence against the crisis .
In this way , we would also be making a dignified link to the inheritance of Jean Monet , whom we are commemorating today .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , the term ' European solidarity ' has been bandied around this morning as if it were a given .
I want to call that into question .
We cannot sign a blank cheque to bail out the countries of eastern Europe .
We do not have the money .
Economically , the plan is quite unsound and , most important of all , it is politically unacceptable to the taxpayers in France , Britain and Germany that we should do so .
Yet the British Chancellor of the Exchequer , Alistair Darling , seems now to be an advocate of this plan .
He has lost his marbles !
He says that this is the time for Europe to build on shared values of cooperation , as if we are one big , happy family .
Well , the Hungarian Prime Minister , Mr Ferenc Gyurcsany , rather blows that idea of European solidarity apart .
He demands that the European Union bail out countries such as his to the tune of EUR 180 billion , and he says that , if we do not do that , he promises us that five million unemployed migrants will head west into our countries .
That is nothing other than blackmail , and it shows the folly of having allowed countries like Hungary into this political Union and highlights even more deeply the folly of having open borders .
The only response I really hear in this House today is that somehow we have to have more European Union - that more power will work !
Well , look : you were sent a message by the voters in France , by the voters in the Netherlands and by the voters in Ireland .
You do not have the legitimacy to take more power for the European Union .
The economic crisis will , I believe , be what voters will vote on in the European elections this year , and I hope this time they send you people a message that is so big and so loud that , for once , you simply will not be able to ignore it .
Nigel Farage , we might not always be happy in our European family , but you belong to the family as well .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , in contrast to the previous speaker , I firmly believe that the forthcoming European Council should fully live up to the motto of the current Czech Presidency , which is ' Europe without barriers ' .
I hope that the absent President of the Council , Mirek Topolánek , will not give way under pressure from the Obama administration to the temptation for new regulations and for more taxpayer 's money to be poured into the economy .
The forthcoming Council should also reject the green-lobby plan of the Barroso Commission involving massive multi-billion support for renewable energy .
Economic theory and historically proven practice both clearly show that this will not do anything to reduce the economic collapse or to halt the rise in unemployment .
On the contrary , it will only deepen the crisis and add another risk for the future , namely inflation , ladies and gentlemen .
I do not believe that any sensible politician would want to contribute to a massive growth in prices and a devaluing of the savings of ordinary citizens .
I hope that the Presidency will continue its stout defence of liberalisation together with the elimination of trade barriers and protectionism .
As we know , ladies and gentlemen , government regulation of economic policy in the US has played a key role in causing the current crisis .
Instead of learning from this fact , EU bodies have approved an incredible 519 regulations and 68 directives since 1 July last year , in other words over the space of 9 months .
If the Czech Presidency wants to be credible and useful in its motto of ' Europe without barriers ' , rather than organising more summits , it should immediately check through all EU legislation and throw out as many environmental , gender , social and employment restrictions as possible .
The Council should also give some thought to how to rein in the bloated social state and to reducing high taxes and insurance .
Only in this way can we achieve a rapid resumption of rational human and market activities , without which it will simply not be possible to overcome the current crisis .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , sometimes I do not believe what I hear .
Mr Schulz , the initiative on regulation and on transparency rules for hedge funds and private equity comes from the Committee on Legal Affairs .
In 2006 , the members of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats on the Committee on Legal Affairs began actively asking for rules to be put in place .
The legislative own-initiative report which we commissioned did not come about because the chairman of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , who we all know is a member of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , began a completely unnecessary dispute over authority .
The result of this was that we spent months , if not years , in reaching an agreement and were then finally able to adopt the legislative own-initiative reports on this issue in September of last year , in the form of the Rasmussen and Lehne reports .
The person who spoke out against regulation in this area in the Council was Gordon Brown .
He is obviously not a member of the PPE-DE , but belongs to your group .
In recent years , Mrs Merkel and Mr Rasmussen have always spoken in favour of regulation in these areas in all the debates , both in the European Council and the G8 .
The problem lies in the fact that the socialists in the European Union have always been a major obstacle to the inclusion of these non-regulated areas .
Opinions have recently changed and that has resulted in us being in the position in which we now find ourselves .
This is one of the historical facts in this area .
I simply want to say that there is a big difference between the rhetoric which we are hearing now and the reality of recent months and years .
Unfortunately , that is the case .
Finally , I would like to mention a number of areas of common interest .
Today , the atmosphere between the parliamentary groups during the preparation for the resolution on the Lisbon process in the steering group was exceptionally good .
For this reason , we have come to an agreement in almost every area and produced a good resolution .
We should not discuss this until we are blue in the face .
Instead , we should make it clear that this is an area of common interest .
The citizens of Europe expect us to act jointly in this crisis and not to oppose one another .
( Applause )

Mr President , this is the worst crisis since 1929 and it is getting worse : unemployment is in free fall now .
What I said to the President of the Commission a couple of months ago was : ' Please do not oversell what the European Council decided in December 2008 .
Please do not paint too rosy a picture of Europe . '
However , that is exactly what you are doing .
You have not made a financial stimulus of 3.3 % in Europe - you have not !
When you talk about automatic stabilisers , it is already in the prognosis .
According to the Commission in January , the prognosis is -2 % ; now the European Central Bank tells us it is -3 % .
When you talk about a financial stimulus of 1.5 % , it is not 1.5 % , because , according to the Bruegel Institute , it will be 0.9 % , which is documented .
Now we have the following situation : we are not taking care of employment , unemployment is in free fall , and your stimulus in Europe is not 3.3 % but 0.9 % .
If you are now telling us to wait for better times and if you agree with Jean-Claude Juncker , who said yesterday that we have done enough , then I say : you have not done enough - people expect more from Europe than you are saying today .
My point is the following : in a few weeks , you will meet Mr Obama , the new President of the United States .
He is coming with an investment package of 1.8 % to his gross national product .
We are coming with less than half .
How could you imagine that Europe would put itself in a position where we are the ones who are doing less than our American friends , and where we are the ones who are demanding more of our American friends ?
How could you imagine respect for the European Union ?
What I am saying is that we need to do more and we need to devise a comprehensive plan , which will cover the summit on 19 March - which is nine days from now - the summit in London , on 2 April , the summit on employment in May in Prague and the June summit .
I appeal to you , President of the Commission , to make a comprehensive , new recovery effort .
If we do not do that , we will lose .
It is not about getting better times next year : this is a fundamental world crisis that we need to take seriously .
My final point concerns solidarity .
The time has come not to accept new demarcation lines between those who have been members of the European Union for many years and those who came to the European Union with a promise that this would be a better time for ordinary people .
Let us now avoid new economic demarcation lines between the new ones and the old ones .
Let us show solidarity in real terms .
That is why I ask you , President of the Commission , to consider new financial possibilities to help our new friends - Eurobonds is one possibility , the European Investment Bank is another .
Please , take it seriously and let us not do too little too late , like they did in Japan , but let us show that Europe is about people , Europe is about showing solidarity with the weakest countries in this Union .
( NL ) Mr President , now that the original period of the Lisbon Strategy is coming to an end , we can see that the objectives which the Heads of Government prescribed in 2000 have not been adequately met .
Particularly in the current economic crisis , though , it is of paramount importance for the Lisbon Strategy to be taken seriously .
Had this been the case , Europe would probably have been better able to stand up to the economic setbacks .
One of the key agreements in the Lisbon Strategy is the intention to spend 3 % of Gross Domestic Product on research and development : two thirds financed by the private sector and one third by government .
The fact , however , that hardly any country in the European Union has met this objective acts as a brake on innovation in the European Union .
In a worldwide crisis , Europe will need to find the strength within itself to bring the economy up to the required standard once more .
At the same time , it is , of course , surprising , that a considerable share of the EU 's budget should still be used to over-subsidise the old economy that includes agriculture and regional funds , while the targets for investments in research are not being met .
There are plenty of options .
Just think of clean environment or medical technologies or the growing sector of European computer games , for example , where specific support is proving effective .
Mr President , a dynamic and highly innovation-oriented economy can help new industries , technology and products get off the ground .
This is precisely what is needed to recover from a recession .
The crisis is allowing us , and indeed forcing us , to carry out desperately needed reforms .
I would urge the Member States to take their own agreements seriously , because when major goals are set , we need to have the determination to achieve these .
If not , the EU will lose its credibility .
Common policy requires an all-out effort from everyone and does not allow any slacking from any of the Member States .
( PL ) Mr President , everything points to the fact that the ten-year goals of the Lisbon Strategy will end in a fiasco .
Neither that strategy nor the constantly referred to Treaty of Lisbon is a real answer to the global economic crisis .
During the forthcoming Council , the Prime Minister of Ireland will inform us of the steps taken to incorporate the Treaty of Lisbon .
Following the example of the French and the Dutch , Ireland rejected the amended version of the European Constitution in a referendum .
The citizens of that country could not be persuaded to relinquish part of their sovereignty in favour of a bureaucratic structure named the European Union .
Presently , instead of waiting for a ruling from the German Constitutional Court which might finally bury the Treaty , attempts are being made to persuade the Irish with promises of privileges which are not to be found in the document which has been submitted .
In the face of a huge economic crisis , I appeal for an end to pointless internal EU disputes and for specific measures to be taken based on the existing treaties and in a spirit of solidarity .
( FR ) Mr President , in this time of crisis , we need a strong impetus at European level .
Nation states acting alone will be unable to give a sufficiently strong and coordinated response .
We therefore urgently need a boost from Europe .
What are we seeing again today , though ?
A Commission which , like its President , is tired , lacking in vision and bereft of political courage .
A recovery plan of EUR 5 billion is not a recovery plan since 50 % of the projects on the list will see no investment in 2009 or 2010 because the licences for carbon sequestration , for example , will not be in place !
Mr Daul is quite correct .
Now is the time for us to show solidarity and innovation .
If the Commission heeds Margaret - ' I want my money back ' - Merkel and draws up a list that gives more money to the strong economies than to our colleagues in the countries of the East that need our support right now , we will be unable to make progress .
We therefore need innovation in two areas .
First , we should not squander these EUR 5 billion on State aid .
Instead , we should concentrate the money on the European Investment Bank .
The Bank is currently increasing its capital by EUR 76 billion and is negotiating with the European Central Bank to make improvements in relation to liquidity .
Therefore , we should use most of the EUR 5 billion as guarantee funds to leverage EUR 20 , 25 or 30 billion of public and private investment .
Secondly , we must widen this recovery plan to include green technologies , renewable energies and investments in buildings in Europe 's towns and cities .
At present , President Obama is allocating 10 times more venture capital to green technologies than Europe is .
We are therefore losing the battle when it comes to the next big thing in the economy .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the decisive question in relation to all the economic recovery plans which are being put in place throughout Europe is , of course : who will receive the money ?
Will more blank cheques be drawn up for the banks , although in the long run , it would be significantly cheaper for the taxpayer if they were nationalised straight away ?
Should we relieve the burden on large companies and high wage earners although they have benefited from tax concessions across the whole of Europe for years ?
The more money is wasted on things like this , the more likely it is that the programmes will fail and that the European economy will find itself in a very dangerous downward spiral .
The long-term policy of privatisation , deregulation and liberalisation has resulted in an increasing concentration of wealth among the top ten thousand .
In addition , it was this policy which was responsible for the crisis that we find ourselves in today .
Anyone who believes that the crisis can be overcome by continuing this policy with just a few modifications has completely failed to understand the situation .
What we need is exactly the opposite .
Instead of buying up banks ' toxic assets , we should be spending taxes on renovating schools and hospitals and on greening the European economy .
If public funds are given to private companies , the rule of no taxes without guaranteed jobs and , in particular , no taxes without public ownership rights must apply , so that the state and , above all , citizens can benefit from any future earnings .
The best economic recovery plan of all would be a radical redistribution of wealth and assets from top to bottom .
The low pay sector in Europe must be reduced in size rather than continually being fostered .
We need higher minimum wages and better social services in Europe .
We need tax rates which ensure that the millionaires and profiteers from the old finance market party take responsibility for the huge losses which have been incurred , not the majority of citizens who have not benefited at all from the financial boom .
I believe that social justice is now the only sensible economic policy .
It is the only way of bringing this disastrous crisis to an end .
( SV ) Mr President , the Lisbon Strategy is among the EU 's best projects .
Member States are to voluntarily reform their economies to create prosperity and an ability to adapt , both to foreseen changes such as an ageing population , and to unforeseen changes such as collapsing financial markets .
The idea behind the strategy is to promote efficient markets , entrepreneurship , education , research and stable state finances , and now we are being tested .
If , when the financial crisis occurred , we had all had a flexible economy , the right monetary policy and sound state finances , Europe would have coped a lot better .
We did not have these things , however .
The Lisbon Strategy has not been implemented while , at the same time , the euro has resulted in much too easy a monetary policy for Ireland , Spain , Italy and Greece .
In addition , several countries have been able to mismanage their public finances under the protective umbrella of the euro .
The imbalances are therefore huge .
The Lisbon Strategy is a good idea that has been botched .
The euro is a bad idea that has exacerbated the problems .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is in this time of crisis that the value and usefulness of structures will be shown , and this crisis is showing us that the Europe of Brussels is no use at all .
The recovery plan , pompously termed ' European ' , is , in fact , the sum of the finances decided on by the Member States .
The contribution from the European budget accounts for only a very small part of it .

Whilst EUR 200 billion is being given to support the real economy and jobs , EUR 2 billion of it is going to the banks , with no guarantee that they will use the money to finance companies and private individuals .
Privatised profits , public ownership of losses : this is the latest word from these economic policies , be they liberal or socialist .
Is it a case of European solidarity or support for the States ?
The participants of the informal summit of 1 March collectively rejected conditionality for aid given to the automotive sector , for the sake of the market and of competition .
There has been no change in policy , no change in logic , and no break with the system that led us to catastrophe !
We are on the edge of the precipice and , in a few days ' time , the Heads of State and Government are going to ask us to take a great leap forward .
( NL ) Mr President , as coordinator of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats for regional policy , I should like to say that the desired move towards a more flexible approach and a more emphatic focus on investment and employment are becoming a reality .
Precisely in this time of crisis , cohesion policy has its uses when it comes to Community investments .
At the moment , we deploy an annual sum of some EUR 50 billion , and 65 % of it goes to the priority areas in the Lisbon agreements .
In doing so , we make an active contribution , qualify workers and take all kinds of regional initiatives for the years following the crisis .
The PPE-DE would like to maintain this integrated financial approach , rather than bring about any more fragmentation .
The idea behind adopting a more flexible approach is to accelerate expenditure schedules , simplify approval and deal with the preparation costs effectively , extend the EIB 's scope considerably by means of specific programmes , including sustainable reconstruction in the urban environment and more scope for energy efficiency , not least in the old Member States .
I welcome these moves towards a more intensive approach and flexibility .
In March II , we will hold a priority debate in this plenary meeting about the adjustments to the cohesion policy .
We will also adjust the regulations for the funds accordingly , and lay the basis for a new cohesion formula : territorial cohesion , the framework for the period after 2013 .
As was confirmed a moment ago , we are committed to high-quality activities , including clusters , R & D , innovation and rural development , and we will ensure that the knowledge economy and competitiveness in Europe are given a shot in the arm .
This applies to all the regions across all the Member States .
In this way , Europe will remain visible , and we will contribute to greater solidarity in Europe , even after the period of crisis .
Mr President , I would like to start by responding to Mr Farage .

If so far it was not certain that Parliament would be united , I think Mr Farage convinced all of us that we must remain united as a European Union .
The systematic crisis has hit the EU and we have to ask ourselves why our Lisbon Strategy of 10 years could not save us .
Could we have a better target ?
Could we have a better delivery ?
Could we do it in a more cognate manner , or were we waiting for somebody to do it instead of us ?
The Socialist Group answer is that it is right to have a single , comprehensive strategy for the future , to drive competitiveness and social and environmental sustainability in one single strategy .
The Socialist answer is that we need delivery on Lisbon targets for all of Europe and we need it for all Europeans , including the most vulnerable , the poor ones .
We need to stabilise the financial markets and reduce the risk of similar crises for the future .
But we will not support policies which drive our resources to tax havens and to the bank accounts of the few .
We need to stabilise real economies throughout Europe for all sectors , and especially the small and medium-sized enterprises , but we have to take the responsibility of supporting employment and not just allow those companies to generate profits .
We need to go for R & D innovation and the digital switch-over , as well as building up skills to enable all citizens of Europe to use those technologies .
We will commit funds to save knowledge throughout IPR policies .
We need to stabilise Europe as a whole but we have to look beyond Europe to even more vulnerable parts of the world and we will not build new demarcation lines within the European Union .
We need to mobilise actors to act .
Action , action , action , and delivery .
Words alone will not drive us to succeed .
It is not enough to do a lot but it is necessary to do enough .
We ask the Commission , we ask the Council to go beyond the Spring Summit and deliver our messages to the G20 .
This is what people in the street are waiting for from us .
Let us act together .
( LT ) I would like to draw attention to some circumstances which seem important to me in resolving the matter of retaining and creating new jobs .
Firstly , this is a global economic crisis which is forcing us to rethink and re-evaluate the Employment Strategy .
Secondly , we must make a critical evaluation of what we have already created , and of the effectiveness of implementing the strategies we have adopted .
Therefore , I urge the Commission to assess very critically how Community Members are using funds intended to stimulate employment .
The practice in force until now of mostly allocating funds towards qualification , requalification and various kinds of training is , to my mind , ineffective .
Investing in small and medium-sized businesses and micro-credits are the most effective measure to create new jobs .
Funds from both the Social Fund and Globalisation Fund could be used more effectively to this purpose .
Member States must submit reports on the use of Social Fund and Globalisation Fund money , indicating , in particular , how many new jobs have been created .
There must be penalties for inefficient use .
The number of employees taking so-called voluntary redundancy is increasing .
They are left without a job , without social or financial support .
Therefore , we ought to involve unions here to protect the interests of our people .
I urge the Commission and Member States to unite on this important matter .
( LV ) Thank you , Mr President .
In the current crisis situation , it is better to do more , rather than to wait .
Therefore , the proposed economic stimulus instruments should certainly receive our support .
For the new Member States in eastern Europe , however , with few exceptions , the international lending markets have closed their doors , there is an outflow of capital , and western European banks , which account for the majority of the market in the region , have changed the expansive lending policies they were pursuing not long ago for a more cautious approach .
The opportunities for these Member States to use financial and fiscal instruments are limited , or completely non-existent .
In addition , in the majority of those countries preparing to join the eurozone , the convergence criteria will , in the medium term , also limit what economic stimulus measures can be taken .
The only real instrument for stimulating the economy and for the implementation of the Lisbon strategy in those countries is finance from the European Union 's funds .
In obtaining funds , however , finding co-financing may be a problem , and that may lengthen the time taken to obtain funds .
In order to stimulate the economy in eastern Europe we need urgent agreement on changes to the rules for obtaining European Union funds .
The procedures for receiving funds need to be significantly simplified , the volume of state and private sector co-financing needs to be reduced and the deadlines for obtaining resources need to be extended .
We need to find real opportunities to use financing from the European Investment Bank and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development for the acquisition of funds .
These decisions will send an important signal for the recovery and stabilisation of the market in eastern Europe . Thank you .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioners , thank you .
We must take the opportunity offered by the financial crisis to undertake radical greening of the European economy and to put a stop to climate change .
However , the Commission is not making use of this opportunity and is relying on a rescue package involving outdated concepts such as road building and the car industry .
Even investment in ailing economic structures seems to be a possibility .
This is not a forward-looking concept which would stop people from worrying about the loss of their livelihoods .
The relaxation in the rules for the use of the Structural Funds must be aimed solely at sustainable , environmentally-friendly investment .
Without a climate check of this kind , the co-financing must not be increased .
Commissioners , I believe that your approach of using the financial crisis to erode the rights of workers is also a cynical one .
The posting directive should reinforce workers ' rights and not help to weaken them .
Reform of this kind is long overdue .
What you are offering in the new document is unacceptable .
( PT ) The neoliberal Lisbon Strategy has been one of the European Union 's basic instruments for promoting financial deregulation , privatising public services , liberalising markets and world trade , deregulating labour relations and damaging workers ' rights .
The proposals on the Working Time Directive and flexicurity are clear examples of this .
There is no sense in continuing to insist on developing the Lisbon Strategy when the economic and social crisis which the application of this Strategy has helped to create is getting worse .
We therefore need to break with these policies of neoliberal capitalism , which is responsible for worsening unemployment , precarious work and poverty and which has increased social , regional and territorial inequalities .
We need an integrated European strategy for solidarity and sustainable development which is based on defending productive sectors and public investment , by effectively boosting Community funds to support countries with weaker economies , which respects nature and creates jobs with rights , and which promotes public services , increases purchasing power and ensures a fair distribution of income to reduce poverty .
This is exactly the opposite to what the Commission and the Council are proposing .
( NL ) Mr President , during the debates on the Spring Summit in recent years , we urged the Member States to work on the Lisbon process .
After all , economic growth and low inflation provided scope for reform .
Reform was necessary in the competition with up-and-coming economies and is , indeed , still needed .
The current crisis shows that Member States that responded to this request now perform better than others .
The other Member States show major budget deficits , and the fact that the Member States that were deaf to our request are now transferring these deficits is threatening the stability of our currency .
I should like to ask the Commission to monitor Member States to ensure they observe the Stability Pact .
Only in this way can we avoid the costs of this crisis getting out of hand .
Temporary support measures that meet the sustainability test can therefore be applied on a limited scale .
In addition to all new plans , it is obvious that old agreements should be observed .
( SK ) Western Europe likes to talk about the need to assist the countries of Central and Eastern Europe to overcome the crisis .
However , the very same people , or Mr Sarkozy to be precise , speak of these countries as a black hole which represents a risk for the European Union .
I reject such a trivial generalisation of a problem which is affecting western countries in exactly same way .
The result of such pronouncements is a loss of faith in the institutions of the Central and Eastern European countries and they look more like a stab in the back than a form of assistance .
European leaders last week rejected protectionism , which would have meant erecting a new iron curtain across a united Europe .
At the same time , however , the European Commission has approved enormous state aid for French car makers .
However , this unequal and discriminatory approach is also apparent in other areas and particularly in agriculture .
Europe is becoming two-faced and the Euro sceptics will reap the rewards of this .
Mr President , this debate is about jobs , and jobs and new prosperity .
That is why I am a little surprised to hear , from the Socialist Group , criticisms of those who have been responsible for realistic policies in Europe , because the Socialists , more than anyone else , called for lower interest rates at the peak of the economy , just as they implemented monetary policy in the US .
It is lax monetary policy , more than anything else , that has eroded the US economy .
Mr Schulz should feel thankful that Europe and the European Central Bank did not listen to him , because , if it had , the European economy would have been much worse off .
I appreciate we can agree on that point .
That also goes for the policy that you are recommending today , because now you are talking about Eurobonds which , among other things , would lead to higher interest rates for the countries of Central Europe .
That is not solidarity in a time of financial crisis , and we would do well not to listen to Mr Schultz this time either .
We need to take action , but we need to take the right actions in order not to deepen the crisis and to secure stability .
( Interjection from the floor )
No , you have not been in power , but you are guilty of a lot of things too , and if we had listened to you we would have been worse off .
That was an agreement between you and me , was it not ?
I appreciate the consensus in Parliament that your policy was wrong .
Mr President , what we need now is stability .
We need to abide by competition rules and state aid rules in order to secure open barriers and trade , because exports need more imports and imports need exports .
That is the way we can achieve more jobs .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , one minute is only enough for a telegram .
The title of mine , which I shall send to the European Council , has already been conveyed by Mr Schulz and Mr Rasmussen , who said that more must be done , above all with regard to the social emergency , through new tough financial and fiscal policies .
Let me add an additional message : it is , of course , vitally important as we go through this crisis to minimise the social impact , but it is also important to hold a firm course so that we will know whether we are to emerge from it as winners or losers in terms of global competition , which will become increasingly fierce in the search for a new green , smart , low-carbon economy .
Therefore , all measures at all levels , from local to European , must be consistent with this objective .
The Council needs to give a strong mandate for the negotiations in the run-up to Copenhagen so that we do not miss this opportunity , which is also an economic one .
The mandate must be supported with the necessary funding of developing countries that will enable them to join with us .
( NL ) Mr President , this crisis is a test for Europe .
Citizens now expect Europe to act , and this is why it is mystifying that many national leaders , even now , remain caught in the ' each to his own ' policy .
Europe is not the sum total of 27 times the national interest .
In this respect , it would be a capital error to divide Europe into east and west once again .
Mr President , the Liberals would like to invest in the future , not in the mistakes of the past .
The objectives of the Lisbon Strategy should not be put on ice .
If anything , we should be more committed to education and research , innovation , sustainability and a strong European market .
Mr President , bankers who squander our money are despicable , but Mr Schulz , politicians who now run up deficits and debts on the back of younger generations are just as irresponsible .
The Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe subscribes to the gist of the Ferreira report .
Only with actual European and future-oriented solutions can we meet this crisis head-on .
It is now or never for Europe .
( PL ) Mr President , a true strategy for economic recovery is essential for the European Union .
For that strategy to be effective , it must fulfil the following conditions .
Firstly , the EU needs a larger budget , and not one reduced from 1 % to 0.8 % of GDP , as some countries are advocating .
Secondly , freedom of budgetary and tax policy should be restored , and attempts to impose and standardise these policies abandoned .
Thirdly , the pressure being put on new Member States to enter the eurozone should be ended .
Fourthly , precise control of the flow of finance capital should be introduced and transfer of capital from new Member States to rich ones stopped .
Today , that predatory procedure runs to tens of millions of euros and is ruining new Member States .
Fifthly , we should direct support and aid first and foremost to countries and regions which have been worst affected , and not , as is being done today , close down shipyards in Poland , while in France and Germany , jobs are being protected .
Sixthly , the program of infrastructure investment should be directed at eliminating differences and underdevelopment , especially in the new Member States .
( HU ) Mr President , we are all aware that under the circumstances of the current economic crisis , the importance of the employment policy and the Lisbon Strategy has increased , and therefore we , the European legislators and decision makers , must strive to make the implementation of the employment policy guidelines as effective and successful as possible .
As the result of the vote in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs has also demonstrated , there is complete agreement among the political groups that the employment policy guidelines for the period between 2008 and 2010 constitute a suitable - and yet sufficiently flexible - framework for the objectives to be attained .
Within these frameworks , the task of the Member States is to determine the key aspects that are suited to their distinctive situations , and to flesh out the various guidelines with actual content .
The framework system is thus a good tool , the creation of which is a joint European success .
The task of the Member States , on the other hand , is to truly put into practice this outstanding tool .
Thus , there are two prerequisites for success : setting the right goals and the practical implementation of a policy that fits these objectives .
The first prerequisite - let us say - has already been met , and therefore , in my view , we must focus our attention in the next period on following up on the fleshing out and application of the content of the employment policy guidelines by the Member States .
We cannot ignore the fact that the divergent economic situations and debt levels among the various Member States mean differences in their freedom of movement when it comes to the size of the investment they can make in the area of employment and human resources .
In another respect , however , we need to be united : that each Member State must increase the level of investment related directly to employment in proportion to its own capacity .
We must recognise that the success of the economic stimulus packages launched by the Member States is closely related to the attainment of EU goals .
This is why we must harmonise our approaches in the area of economic policy more closely than in the past and , in light of this , trusting that there is agreement among the political groups , I ask that we support the Andersson report and vote to adopt it .

( FR ) Madam President , Mr Vondra , Commissioner , Europe can do a great deal if it wants to but , to do so , it has to make the correct diagnosis : currently , however , it is under-estimating the crisis .
It needs to provide the appropriate resources : currently , however , the recovery plan is not enough .
It has to release the financial resources required : currently , however , the debate on the Eurobonds is at a standstill ; it must be relaunched .
If Europe wishes to act intelligently on the international stage , then it must also set an example in relation to the regulation and supervision of the financial markets .
Mr Barroso , your initiation of the work carried out by Jacques de Larosière 's group has been useful , intelligent and exceptional .
This work is now on the table .
Do a Delors and use this work as a basis for implementation !
This report has been adopted unanimously , even though the group was composed of cultures and people of very different origins .
The European consensus that we have sought for years has therefore been found .
If you allow the nations to tear themselves apart following this result , there will be no European supervision of the financial markets .
( BG ) The contribution of the Cohesion Policy is becoming even more significant in the context of an economic crisis .
The banking sector , closure of production capacity , lack of fresh money and the contraction of the labour market are basic problems for Member States .
Until now , the Cohesion Policy had its own financial instruments , but the crisis is forcing the streamlining of appropriate , innovative solutions .
Support based on EU funds should now be aimed at the targeted areas .
The Structural Funds should be used more actively and more in keeping with the situation .
Member States should focus their attention on enabling the beneficiaries to control the funds .
I rather hope that the Commission will simplify the procedures for the Structural Funds , which must not be done at the expense of controlling the distribution and spending of the funds .
I believe that the report on the Cohesion Policy and investment in the real economy will provide ideas for dealing with the crisis and will be useful for subsequent measures aimed at stimulating economy activity which we are expecting from the European Union summit .
Thank you .
( DE ) Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Kirilov 's report primarily concerns changes to the three Structural Funds Regulations 2007-2013 with the aim of improving cash flow and liquidity in the Member States .
This is one measure for combating the economic crisis which we can support unconditionally .
Member States are now required to make full use , for example , of the opportunities for supporting investment in energy efficiency and renewable energy in housing and the new investment opportunities in housing in general .
These planned measures will contribute to accelerating , simplifying and increasing the flexibility of the use of the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Funds .
I must emphasise that these measures do not conflict with free competition , social standards and the implementation of environmental and climate protection regulations within the Community .
It is now the responsibility of the Member States to guarantee the co-financing of the money provided by the European Structural Funds in order to be able to make full use of it .
The demand in the report for increased simplicity in the administration and implementation of the funds is to be welcomed and supported .
Commissioners , we are looking forward to further proposals on this subject from the Commission in 2009 .
It is important to emphasise the significance for a successful economic recovery of measures to support employment and business .
However , Member States should be urged to make extensive use of the Structural Funds for promoting or creating jobs in small and medium-sized businesses .
The committee has taken full account of our amendments .
We must support this report unreservedly .
Congratulations , Mr Kirilov .
( ES ) Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the best homage we can pay to Jean Monnet is to act with unity , decisiveness and perseverance , as he did in organising the logistical effort during both world wars - the effort by the Allies which enabled them to win the war .
This means that we , the 27 Member States , must act together .
We , as socialists , would urge that this involves three priority actions : firstly , strengthening our stimulus and recovery plan in the budgetary sphere and also with regard to the scrutiny and organisation of Europe .
Secondly , we need to develop genuine solidarity between the 27 Member States .
I do not know if the Czech Government and its parliament , who are sitting on the Treaty of Lisbon , know that in the second article of the Lisbon Treaty the word ' solidarity ' appears for the first time .
Thirdly , we need to combat tax havens , the black holes of globalisation .
Madam President , I want to refer to our strategy and preparations for the Copenhagen Conference on climate change later this year , where we have taken a leadership role , but one which is threatened by the economic recession and demands that we relax our standards .
Let me give you one example .
More than three years ago , we agreed that new requirements would be placed on car manufacturers to change the air conditioning refrigerants they use , which currently have a global warming potential 1 400 times greater than carbon dioxide .
We said that should take place in all new car models from 2011 .
But now we hear that some manufacturers - led , I understand , by Ford and General Motors - are trying to exploit loopholes to get out of that obligation .
Later this month , there is a meeting of the national type approval authorities .
It is very important that Commissioner Verheugen takes a lead and makes it clear that we are not going to relax our standards , and that these refrigerants must be replaced by 2011 .
If we weaken now , we open the floodgates to lobbying from industry across the board , and our leadership role on climate change will be seriously undermined .
Madam President , these three very extremely important reports have been drafted by Socialist rapporteurs .
This , of course , is not by chance .
The thrust of these reports , the amendments that will be presented by the Socialist Members to improve them , and also I think today 's debate , show very clearly that there are distinctive policies : distinctive right-wing and Socialist policies towards the crisis .
The right-wing policy is pretty simple : the crisis is a bad thing but we need to be patient , it will pass ; we need to take some technical measures and things will calm down by themselves and we must express our sympathy to the people who will be hit .
The Socialist position is much more complex .
We say that we must attack the roots of the problem , the roots of the crisis , that we must radically change the economic paradigm , that we must change and that we must curb all the speculation that has led us to this financial crisis .
This has not been a neutral crisis but a crisis inflicted by specific policies , mostly by right-wing governments .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in these times of crisis , our fellow citizens are expecting much of Europe .
Europe must not let them down .
Of course , if we are being realistic , we have to acknowledge that European financial resources are limited , and we need to look at how they can be improved .
However , Europe will come more to the fore and will have more success if it shows greater political will .
This involves firstly , of course , acting as a catalyst for the actions and efforts of the Member States , but also taking a coordinated approach at European level .
The recovery plan is essentially a toolbox to promote restructuring .
The role of the EIB must be strengthened .
Europe must act to define a clear , innovative economic strategy .
Economic operators need prospects and legal stability .
It is important , first , to put financial services in order so that the banking institutions can play their main role , which is to finance economic development .
The texts currently being prepared for directives on the capital requirements of banks and insurance companies , and the regulations on rating agencies , must contribute to this task .
The text on rating agencies must implement the lessons learned from the proven shortcomings .
There is an equally urgent need to provide for European supervision of regulated financial activities .
The report by the de Larosière group makes some useful and timely proposals that should be implemented quickly .
Europe also needs to be given a proper , effective , modern industrial policy .
In this respect , we need to reconcile the needs for sustainable development and the requirement for a high-quality industrial base to produce wealth and create employment .
In these times of crisis , it is preferable not to hamper those sectors that are operating normally by producing rules or regulations whose effectiveness has not been properly shown .
For example , in the automotive sector , which is today experiencing severe difficulties , it is important to extend the regulation exempting vehicle distribution , which expires in 2010 .
We must also be vigilant , for example , when negotiating the bilateral agreement with Korea , as it could be very conducive to our industry .

Madam President , my contribution today will be one that highlights the need for investment : investment in jobs ; investment in our environment ; and investment in all our economies .
In that regard , investment in our transport infrastructure and , in particular , in our railway infrastructure , is crucial , not only in providing us with a world-class rail network but also in protecting and creating jobs and social cohesion .
Let us prioritise the electrification of our rail network , giving us both transport and environmental gains .
Let us invest in our TENS transport network .
Let us have a recovery plan with substance and with action , and not just words .
Doing nothing and letting the markets decide has failed .
The time for concerted European action is now based on putting people first and vested interests last .
We on this side of the House are not prepared to play Pontius Pilate , washing our hands of the problem .
We want to act and we want to act decisively .
( HU ) I am convinced that the current economic crisis has its roots in over consumption and in the environmental crisis , and that it is in this area that we must seek the solution as well .
We are coming to an important period with regard to climate policy since , at the end of this year , we must reach an agreement in Copenhagen on new common goals for combating global warming .
The task is therefore great , and we must not err or procrastinate .
The legal texts before us not only define the framework and set out the main guidelines , but the real , concrete steps to be taken are yet to come .
In order to reach a 25-40 % decrease in greenhouse gases , as the scientists recommend , and in order to halt the decline in biodiversity , we need significant financial resources .
In recent years , I had the pleasure of visiting , with Parliamentary delegations , Bangladesh , China , India and , most recently , Guyana , and my conviction in this regard has become even stronger as a result .
On the one hand , we must support developing countries , but this can be done only through transparent , closely monitored investments and , on the other , the revenues from the European Union 's emission trade auctions should also be used to support developing country 's measures to promote adaptation .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety recommends a total of EUR 30 billion for this purpose up to 2020 .
This is an enormous sum , and to use it properly is a great challenge .
Moreover , the struggle against climate change offers Europe an excellent opportunity to increase new technologies and create new jobs in order to promote energy security .
The UN and the new US administration as well as several European governments have also recognised that in order to emerge from the global crisis , we need not only a fresh , effective energy source but also an engine that runs according to new organisational principles , for the current economic recession is concealing the true problem facing humanity and Europe , namely the environmental crisis .
The green ' New Deal ' is an historic opportunity to solve both crises at once .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I think it was a mistake , above all on the part of the Commission , to underestimate the extent of the crisis initially , and that it is a mistake today to repeat ourselves at summits that produce declarations of principle but are not followed by coherent and practical decisions .
The responses given by our reports to the very serious problems of the European public are convincing and up to the task .

The House is called on , however , to bridge a gap by introducing the Eurobonds instrument , repeatedly advocated by Mr Mauro , myself and almost 200 Members , an instrument - perhaps the only one - able to generate the financial resources that our lifeless budget does not have , to fund crisis measures , trans-European networks , clean energies , research and broadband , the fight against poverty and the Erasmus scheme for young people .
The great Jacques Delors - I shall finish here - has shown us the way .
Let us follow it with courage .
Madam President , with the backdrop of the global economic and financial crisis and the multi-billion stimulus packages , there is a huge opportunity to increase energy efficiency , to increase energy security from reliable renewable sources and to drive green technology in a green ' new deal ' .
In other words , to turn this crisis into an opportunity , and to the benefit of us all in the long term .
I welcome the two alternatives for innovative funding for combating global climate change in the recent Commission communication .
As the original author of the resolution on today 's paper , I urge Member States to act on these proposals and also , at next week 's summit of Heads of State and Government , to honour the declaration of the summit of 12 December last , which should be put officially on the record , preferably along with the final text of the EU-ETS report , as otherwise it will not appear in the Official Journal .
For this - and I urge the President-in-Office , the Commissioner and Madam President to remember this - we need a tripartite declaration from all three institutions .
This December declaration states : ' The European Council recalls that Member States will determine , in accordance with their respective constitutional and budgetary requirements , the use of revenues generated from the auctioning of allowances in the EU emissions trading system .
It takes note of their willingness to use at least half of this amount for actions to reduce greenhouse gas emissions , mitigate and adapt to climate change , for measures to avoid deforestation , to develop renewable energies , energy efficiency , as well as other technologies contributing to the transition to a safe and sustainable low-carbon economy , including through capacity-building , technology transfers , research and development . '
It continues .
' In the context of an international agreement on climate change in Copenhagen in 2009 , and for those who wish so , part of this amount will be used to enable and finance actions to mitigate and adapt to climate change in developing countries that will have ratified this agreement , in particular in least-developed countries .
Further steps are to be taken at the spring 2009 European Council in this regard ' .
I await eagerly an honourable outcome of the declaration from next week 's meeting of Heads of State and Government .

( FR ) Madam President , too little , too late , inadequately coordinated , lacking in solidarity , undersized : these are the real reactions provoked by the European Union recovery plan and the Commission proposals at this stage .
The reason is really simple : looking at the initial forecasts , we are all obliged to acknowledge that the depth of the crisis was under-estimated , be it in terms of the truly spectacular fall in industrial production in the United Kingdom and France , for example , the fall in international trade and German exports , or the forecasts of increased unemployment .
I therefore truly believe that , today , we are very far from a response that matches what is being implemented , for example , by the Obama administration in the United States .
There is , once again , a perceived lack of solidarity and a high degree of timidity .
In March , we saw Ecofin refuse to increase the recovery plans , and we are seeing the countries of Eastern Europe be reduced to calling on the IMF .
This is a lamentable failure where European solidarity is concerned ; we are allowing more and more national rescue plans for the industrial sector and we are reduced merely to calling for a rejection of protectionism .
The fact is , the only true response would be a European rescue and recovery plan for the automotive sector .
I believe that , today , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament 's demand is extremely clear : we want massive investment .
As we often refer to the crisis of 1929 , let us look by way of comparison at the example of Roosevelt 's New Deal , which spent 3.5 % of GDP over seven years .
For Europe , today , that would be the equivalent of EUR 400 billion per year over several years .
We therefore believe that borrowing facilities and Eurobonds should be made available , that there should be huge investment in green innovation , in the insulation of buildings , in modern transport and in the energy sector , and that there should be a support plan for the victims of restructuring and unemployment , and an indication of how all those faced with unemployment can be helped , by means , for example , of extending the scope of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
( NL ) Madam President , in this time of economic crisis , the European Parliament should play a guard dog role , particularly when it comes to preventing protectionism .
We have established the internal market , which has brought us much prosperity , together .
Not only in western Europe , but also in central Europe , have countries enjoyed the full benefits of this .
We should not let these achievements slip out of our hands in the face of any old headwind .
We in the European Parliament should oppose proposals such as those surrounding the support of the French automotive industry , which could adversely affect other European countries .
Parliament should also play a guard dog role when it comes to the strength of the euro .
We cannot accept that countries should run up national debts without limitation .
In Europe , we agreed to the so-called Stability and Growth Pact .
We know that as a result of the financial crisis , we should temporarily offer more scope for supporting the banks .
This should be an exception , though .
There is no need to provide any structural support to other sectors in the economy .
Member States do not have the funds to do this , and if they were to borrow with Eurobonds , future generations would be saddled with the burden of debt and the euro would become weak .
I am opposed to this .
In short , we should be a guard dog when it comes to fighting protectionism and protecting the value of the euro .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , in my short contribution today , I would like to focus on an important area which I hope will be successfully discussed and resolved at the European Council meeting , and that is the area of energy policy .
We all know that the European Union needs to strengthen its energy security and independence and to strengthen its energy infrastructure which means linking up and extending oil pipelines , gas pipelines and power lines between individual states and regions .
We also need to increase our reserves of oil and natural gas .
We want to increase the share of renewables , to increase the energy efficiency of buildings and products , and to increase investment in research and in measures for mitigating the effects of climate change .
I firmly believe that the measures and investments that must be introduced in the area of energy policy cannot only solve our energy and climate problems but can also have a very positive and powerful effect at a time of economic crisis by kick-starting economic growth and increasing employment .
( BG ) Ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the efforts made by the European institutions in outlining the measures for coordinated actions by Member States and the Commission in dealing with the economic crisis .
As is already well known , the European Union 's Cohesion Policy is making an important contribution to the European Economic Recovery Plan and is the Community 's largest source of investments in the real economy .
As a gesture in recognition of these efforts , the European Parliament supports the amendments to the regulation on the European Regional Development Fund , the European Social Fund and Cohesion Fund , in order to simplify and speed up financial management of EU funds .
I hope that the beneficiaries will gain from this simplification , those whom the funds are actually targeted at .
This is particularly important for the European Union 's poorer Member States .
One important task which still faces Member States is to guarantee the necessary funding so that EU resources are spent as intended .
Without breaching the rules on free competition and the standards of good management , Member States should use the simplified procedures for funding projects .
Thank you for your attention .
Madam President , it is clear that the European aspect of the economic recovery plan and its financial backing is very negligible compared to the efforts of the Member States .
I hope , however , that the Council will adopt a plan to support energy interconnections between countries so that a future gas crisis will be mitigated in its effects .
However , solidarity could be expressed by making more flexible the criteria for ERM2 , the eurozone and the adoption of the euro for those countries wanting to join .
It is clear that Member States that now have to make great efforts to maintain a stable currency exchange rate need more support to be able to pass all the necessary steps to become members of the eurozone and thus prevent the effects of the economic crisis .
I hope that will be one of the decisions taken in the near future , bearing in mind that there is already flexibility for the existing Members .
( LT ) While I basically agree with the European Economic Recovery Plan , I would like to draw attention to two matters : the issuing of Eurobonds and expansion of the eurozone .
The issuing of Eurobonds is neither an appropriate instrument to strengthen the eurozone , nor is the timing right in a Europe which is affected by the financial , economic and social crisis .
We have 16 eurozone members , whose economies will receive support , but what about the other 11 countries ?
It is proposed that we should only allow the purchase of Eurobonds with Swedish and Danish Crowns .
Where would this leave the new Member States which , for many objective reasons , are not in the eurozone ?
What is the cost of borrowing they would have to pay ?
Lithuania was not allowed to introduce the Euro because inflation was 0.07 % above the indicator 's maximum limit , although in 10 years , not a single eurozone member has met all the indicators .
The Lithuanian Litas has already been pegged to the euro for 4 years .
Is it not time to look more creatively at changes in the world and expand the eurozone , thus making it easier for the EU to exit the crisis ?

( PL ) Madam President , the title of Mr Kirilov 's report , on which I congratulate him , suggests that we may also speak of an unreal economy .
A virtual economy and virtual money have arisen , but the signatures of the bankers and auditors are real , indicating that everything is in order .
It turns out , however , that this is not true , and that it is a bluff .
Today , we have to face up to the challenges of an economic and moral crisis .
In this context , investment in regional development and cohesion is sensible and necessary .
This will mean real kilometres of roads , modernised railway lines and airports .
We should invest in knowledge and education and in innovative solutions , especially in relation to small and medium-sized enterprises .
We should really restrict bureaucracy .
This will produce jobs for thousands of people , thus providing them with a livelihood .
It will also amount to genuine implementation of a policy of solidarity , and not protectionism .
It will make Lisbon a reality .
( EL ) Madam President , specific measures need to be taken to mobilise sectors of the economy so that they can be helped in dealing with the crisis .
More importantly , where they relate to regional policy and cohesion policy , it is certain that they concern the majority of citizens and enterprises , especially small and medium-sized enterprises .
Initiatives to simplify the regulations of the European Regional Development Fund and the other structural funds and measures such as strengthening investment in the use of renewable sources of energy in homes , simplifying regulations and paying advances and eligible expenditure and lump sums are certain to help towards maintaining jobs and the survival of small and medium-sized enterprises in this uncertain economic climate .
Efforts must be stepped up with other initiatives which the European Parliament awaits and will take an active part in formulating .
The need to take measures which impact directly on financial support for citizens still remains .
( HU ) The European Union has never been in as critical a situation as now .
Two fundamental principles are being called into question : solidarity and the unity of the internal market , due to protectionism .
Martin Schulz is perfectly right .
The European Commission has taken no concrete steps towards putting markets in order or regulating financial matters .
If we do not safeguard our solidarity , the unity of the European Union may be shattered by selfishness and protectionism , for there are problems not only outside the eurozone but also within it .
Greece , Hungary and others have similar problems .
I would like to remind Mr Farage that western European banks , western European companies bought out the banks and businesses of the new Member States and now , shirking solidarity , they fail to do anything to make possible a secure financial basis .
( DE ) Madam President , thank you for allowing me to make a personal observation at the end of this debate .
I would like to respond to the comments made by Mr Lehne .
I understood from what you said , Mr Lehne , that the crisis was caused by the socialists in Europe .
Of course , we already knew that .
It is a well-known principle in Germany that when the sun shines in the morning , the Christian democrats are responsible , but if there is ice and snow , that is the fault of the social democrats .
We are all aware of this .
However , you , the members of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , could now demonstrate whether you will put into practice what you , Mr Lehne , have said when you attacked me for saying something wrong - I may have been mistaken .
Therefore , I would ask you now to tell us about the Ferreira report , Amendment 113 , which concerns solidarity between the Member States and the closure of tax havens .
This is about our decision to ensure that the EU urges the G20 summit to close tax havens .
Will you vote for or against the Ferreira report ?
Community solidarity between the eurozone and the states outside it and solidarity within the eurozone .
Will you vote in favour ?
And finally the fiscal stimulus of 1 % or 1.5 % of GDP as the Community 's attempt to bring the crisis to an end .
Will you vote in favour ?
These are Amendments 92 , 102 and 113 from the Socialist Group in the European Parliament .
If you vote in favour , then you will receive an apology from me , Mr Lehne .
If you do not vote in favour , then I would have to say that you are a person who makes big speeches and then does not vote accordingly .
( DE ) Madam President , thank you very much .
I will be really brief .
Firstly , of course , the socialists are not responsible for the crisis .
No one in the Chamber has said that .
We all know whose fault it is and this has been investigated in great detail .
However , I have rightly pointed out that over many years , the socialists have been responsible for blocking the implementation of clear transparency rules relating to hedge funds and private equity and I have given examples of this .
This is quite simply a fact .
As far as the amendments which have been referred to are concerned , I would like to mention just one point , the subject of tax havens .
We are in complete agreement on this .
The question is simply at which point we vote in favour of it .
Today we will be debating Amendment 25 on the resolution concerning the Lisbon Strategy , which covers precisely this subject .
The group will vote in favour of this .
Therefore , I have no problems with the questions that have been mentioned .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , we have had a very long and useful debate , and the Presidency is grateful to all the Members of this House for their comments .
They have rightly identified the very significant challenges that we currently face and , in particular , the consequences of the financial and economic crisis .
As I pointed out in my introductory remarks , this issue will be at the centre of the debate at next week 's European Council meeting .
Despite the scale of the crisis , the Presidency considers that the European Union can agree on the various components of an approach which will take us forward .
There is no other option than to work together in the face of this deep crisis .
I therefore support the many calls this morning for greater responsibility and more intensive cooperation .
I also consider that we not only can and must act together to solve Europe 's problems , but also that the European Union is well placed to be part of the global solution .
This crisis may be deep , but if we work together , Europe has the necessary intellectual , financial , human and regulatory resources to continue to define and implement the appropriate responses .
Joseph Daul said that the next European Council is not just another summit , and he is certainly right .
Delivering on a global solution starts with playing a leading role in the G20 conference in London at the beginning of next month .
At yesterday 's Council meeting , Ecofin ministers endorsed the terms of reference for the EU 's participation in that important meeting .
They agreed , in particular , on the need for closer international coordination of macroeconomic policies and global financial regulations based on increased transparency and accountability - and that brings us back to our debate on hedge funds and other sensitive issues .
They all agreed on strengthened cooperation between the financial authorities at international level , on strengthening the IMF , and on the need to address the role of multilateral development banks in countering the effects of the crisis on the world 's poorest populations .
While we are talking about the need for solidarity , we have to be aware that this European solidarity must be accompanied by nationally responsible policies on sustainable financial development in Europe .
It is true that the Americans are spending , but they are not asking for assistance from the IMF , and they do not have a Stability Pact ensuring the integrity of their currency zone .
We have to invest in our future , but it must be done in a way that will not undermine the long-term sustainability of our public finances or the rules of the game on the internal market .
Many of you referred this morning to the very real concerns of citizens in the face of rising unemployment .
Martin Schulz said that the issue is ' jobs , jobs and jobs ' - and he is right .
We do indeed need to maintain employment , and while many measures remain the competence of the Member States , there are certain things we can do .
Let me give one example .
Yesterday , Ecofin reached an agreement on reducing VAT in labour-intensive services sectors , such as restaurants , etc .
If you remember , this had been on the agenda for many years without a solution being found , and it was only yesterday , under the presidency of my country , that we were able to reach agreement on that sensitive issue .
Employment should be , and is , the key theme of the three reports before us this morning .
We intend to address that issue at next week 's meeting .
It is a key part of the Lisbon Strategy .
I agree with those who say that the current crisis is not a reason for jettisoning the Lisbon Strategy .
It is , in fact , all the more reason to ensure that we deliver on the Strategy 's key aims .
The Presidency is devoting particular attention to this issue , which is why we have called an additional meeting in early May on the problem of growing unemployment .
Next week , we intend to agree some concrete orientations which will create a basis for our discussions and possibly for the decisions to be taken in May .
Some of you also mentioned the need for reaching an agreement on mitigating and adapting to climate change , in preparation for the meeting in Copenhagen .
Graham Watson asked how much we will have to pay .
I think that is premature .
There are some estimates - such as in the Commission communication on this particular matter , which contains estimates from the various NGOs and institutions - and these are pretty high .
However , it would be premature to give an estimate now .
We have to wait for the US and other stakeholders in the process to inform us of their plans , and that is what we intend to find out about at the meeting with Mr Obama 's Administration in Prague in early April .
To open the account now would not be the correct tactical move .
We shall , of course , keep you fully informed of all aspects of the next European Council meeting , and I will ensure that Prime Minister Topolánek is fully aware of the views expressed here this morning .
He will report to Parliament , at the next plenary session , on the outcome of the European Council , and I look forward to a constructive exchange of views on that occasion .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I agree with those who said that for a long time , the crisis has been underestimated and not properly understood .
Therefore , it is probably a good thing if we can at least agree at the start that we do not know how serious this crisis will become .
In addition , we do not know how long the crisis will last and therefore we also do not know whether we have already done enough .
I am sorry for once to have to contradict Mr Juncker .
We do not even know whether what we have done will have an impact or not .
At the moment , we do not even know that .
The only thing that we really know is that we will not emerge from this crisis unless we are very quickly able to make the financial sector function again .
This was the start of the problem and , in the meantime , it has become relatively clear how all of this came about .
We also know why the measures already taken to stabilise the financial sector have not had any impact , or at least not a satisfactory impact .
This is because the banks are aware that they are still faced with a series of problems .
The banks are currently making provision for risks because they know that some of the risks on their books have not yet been disclosed .
We must take the appropriate political measures in this respect .
However , one thing is clear .
The financial sector does not have the option of returning to the time before the crisis .
Anyone who imagines that the state and the European Union is now responsible for regulating this , and that afterwards everything will go on just as before , is very much mistaken .
It is clear that we need a robust , long-term supervisory system for the financial sector and the financial institutions which does not only cover Europe .
It is very important that , together with our partners , we put in place a system of global governance .
We will only be able to do this in cooperation with our partners if we Europeans take a clear , joint approach .
The more we can agree on this question , the better our chances are of achieving the results we want .
If the capitals of Europe send out conflicting signals to Washington , Beijing and Tokyo , the prospects of establishing a useful system of global governance are small .
However , we are agreed that the current situation is potentially highly explosive in social terms , simply because whatever we can do to stabilise the financial sector will not be sufficient to support companies in the real economy which are in difficulties as a result of the financial crisis .
We all know that .
The European response to the crisis in the real economy , the crisis amongst businesses and industry , is a response which focuses on jobs .
This really is not about dividends for shareholders or bonuses for managers .
It is about ensuring that the people who have very little or , indeed , no responsibility for the crisis , in other words , the workers , can keep their jobs .
It is essential for them to keep their jobs because otherwise , they cannot live an independent life in freedom and dignity .
We want to protect jobs in the European economy , which is why the spending programmes were necessary .
We can argue about whether or not they could or should have been larger .
However , the problem is that there is no flexibility in this respect in the Community budget .
It is easy for us in the European Parliament or in the European Commission to say that we need a large economic recovery package , we must pump large amounts of money into the economy , because it will not be our money , we do not have any money .
It will always be money from the Member States and please do not forget that the national parliaments , of course , also play a role here .
We have tried to ensure that the spending programmes are organised in such a way that the short-term necessities do not put the long-term objectives at risk .
This is precisely what several speakers from all the parliamentary groups have said , in other words , that we are undergoing an economic transformation , a transformation to a low-carbon economy , to a resource-efficient economy and to a knowledge-based economy .
This transformation must continue during the crisis .
This is why we are telling companies not to cut back on research and development or on innovation and to keep their core workforce in place .
The financial measures that we take must support these objectives .
I agree with everyone who says that things could perhaps have been done better .
However , we must always remember that the money which is being spent here is not European Union money .
It is money from the Member States and in the Member States , there are other factors to be considered as well as what we believe to be right in this case .
The economic model of the Lisbon Strategy , which was also discussed today , does not involve an independent market .
The Lisbon Strategy is not based on the assumption that the best market economy is one which is left to develop on its own in radical free market terms .
Instead , the strategy states that the market needs rules if it is to meet its social and environmental responsibilities .
Politicians are responsible for establishing these rules and we must not be diverted from this task .
This is why I believe that the objectives of the Lisbon Strategy remain unchanged and that ' How is it that we have got into this crisis despite the Lisbon Strategy ? ' is actually the wrong question to ask .
A different economic strategy in Europe would not have been able to prevent the macroeconomic imbalances and the mistakes made on the international financial markets which led to this crisis .
Let me conclude by saying that we want to ensure that as many European companies as possible come through the crisis intact .
This means that we must help them to obtain funding .
At the moment , this seems to me to be the main problem , because the credit crunch is affecting both large and small organisations .
The European Investment Bank is doing whatever it can .
We should thank the European Investment Bank for its highly flexible approach .
However , it has now reached the limits of what it can do .
It is already clear that it will not be possible to meet the lending requirements of large and small European companies in the second half of this year , because the European Investment Bank is already at its limits .
Everyone should be aware that the situation will become very serious and therefore it is worthwhile considering whether we in this Parliament can improve the situation of European companies , for example , by quickly considering and adopting proposals from the Commission which aim to prevent European companies from having to pay unnecessary costs .
We have presented proposals which could result in European companies ' costs being reduced by up to EUR 30 billion per year .
The rapid adoption of these proposals would make an important contribution to overcoming the crisis .
The Commission is convinced that in the run-up to this summit , the opportunities and risks of European integration will become clearer than they have seldom been before .
The opportunities obviously involve gathering our forces together , acting in a coordinated and focused way , and using all our creativity with the aim of emerging stronger from this crisis .
This will allow us to compensate for the fact that , unlike the United States of America , we cannot make central decisions which are implemented everywhere , but instead we must ensure that 27 Member States agree .
However , at the same time , the risks are more obvious than they have ever been - the risks which we will all be exposed to if one or more Member States in this situation opt for protectionism or economic nationalism instead of solidarity and a joint approach .
Without a shared compass which will guide us through this crisis , we will unfortunately all get lost together in the fog that caused the crisis .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the crisis is worse than we expected and unemployment will rise more than we predicted .
There are good reasons to think that the planned European stimulus will not be sufficient , but it is already clear that it is taking too long to reach the people .
Parliament 's position is , and has been , firm and clear , and I hope it will continue to be so .
Our objective is to maintain employment and create new jobs with both territorial and social cohesion and solidarity .
At this time of crisis , the people cannot resign themselves to a Europe which has no answer , to a Europe which is powerless to tackle the problems that they are facing .
What will Parliament therefore ask of the Commission ?
Through these reports , it is , of course , asking for national actions to be coordinated and for the Commission to use every means currently available to it in order to act .
It is also giving the Commission every opportunity , as a budgetary authority , so that this can happen .
It is asking the Commission to launch a clear European initiative for employment and saying that it is essential to have a scheduled agenda for implementing financial market regulation measures and also for offering credit to the real economy .
However , what is Parliament asking of the Council ?
It is asking the Council , in particular , to rediscover the political will that is at the heart of the construction of the European project .
The European Union is about competition , but it is also about cohesion and solidarity .
We cannot have a single market without this guarantee of solidarity and cohesion .
That was why we all delegated to Europe the national independence that we had prior to joining this project .
Madam President , the crisis is now beginning to become a reality for people , unemployment is starting to rise , and it is rising rapidly , and we are starting to see the social consequences of the crisis .
The downturn is becoming larger than we thought at the start .
There will be higher unemployment and greater social consequences .
I would like to say something to the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats here in Parliament .
Mr Hökmark is not here , but he blamed this crisis on the proposal by the Socialist Group in the European Parliament .
This is like shooting the pianist if you do not like the song .
We do , of course , have governments of the centre and of the right in Europe .
It is these governments that are failing to act , these governments that are demonstrating a lack of coordination and a lack of solidarity .
Now it is a matter of jobs , of the social security systems and of the public sector .
I say to the Commission and the Council prior to the summit : we need to act now , we need to act in a coordinated way , we need to make sufficient efforts and we need to do so with solidarity .
It is now that we need to do this .
We cannot wait until the summit in May .
The employment issues must be top of the agenda right now .
( Applause )
Thank you , Madam President .
The Cohesion Policy has demonstrated its contribution to overcoming social and economic problems and implementing structural reforms in Member States and their regions .
The experience acquired so far and the significant resources earmarked , we are talking about more than EUR 340 billion over a 7-year period , are a vital necessity during the current economic crisis , and it is of paramount importance that this money is actually used , in the best way possible at that , for the benefit of European citizens and business .
At a time when every single euro matters to the European economy 's recovery , we cannot allow these funds to be spent in the wrong way .
This is why we also welcome the simplification of the rules and we call for them to be properly implemented .
Mr Verheugen , when you spoke today , you said something which is true : we do not know how long the crisis will last .
However , there is one thing we should say today : the decisions which we make and , obviously , the decisions which the European Council takes next week , must produce results this year .
I would even say that these results must be achieved by this summer .
This is what European citizens are expecting from us so that they can see the light at the end of the tunnel and hope of a way out of this crisis , and quickly at that .
I would like to make a comment aimed at the few fellow Members who tried today to impose an economic dividing line between old and new Member States .
I believe that this very Cohesion Policy , which we will make a decision on today , runs counter to these ideas they are proposing .
This all seems to me to be extremely damaging and we must join efforts to overcome it .
Thank you .
I have received five motions for resolutions tabled in accordance with Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today , Wednesday 11 March .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - Guidelines were adopted as part of the renewed Lisbon Strategy in 2008 and shall remain valid until 2010 .
All Member States , including Malta , had to set out their strategies to deliver growth in jobs .
Employment guidelines were set out .
Financing the same is essential and the European Social Fund can finance immediate actions to be taken by Member States with regard to both flexicurity and skills .
Flexicurity is an integrated policy approach that seeks to facilitate adaptability of workers and enterprises .
Secondly , we have to make a massive effort in improving the level of skills .
This improvement has to take place at all levels of qualifications .
Firstly , the improvement in skill levels will be useless unless it matches the needs of a labour market .
Secondly , priority has to be given to three strategies :
improving the adaptability of workers and enterprises ;
attracting more people into employment and retaining more people in employment so as to increase the labour supply and to make social protection systems workable ;
increasing investments in human capital through enhanced skills and better education .
Mr President , while listening to this debate , I could not help feeling that there is an atmosphere of competition in the Chamber , a kind of tug of war - the old Member States against the new .
It seems to me that blaming and pointing the finger at each other about who deserves to be in the EU is not a panacea for our problems .
Above all , let us remember that the citizens are listening to us , and they expect protection from us .
It is precisely now that they want to see what the united Europe is for .
We should use this debate as an opportunity to think about how to limit the social effects of the present crisis .
We say ' yes ' to the Lisbon Strategy because it brings results - it is thanks to the Lisbon Strategy that almost 7 million new jobs have been created in the EU .
What kind of jobs are they , however ?
Very often , they involve temporary or part-time work and , in fact , the employment rate remains unchanged in terms of full-time jobs .
This simply proves that Europe has to learn to use its potential .
We should invest in high-technology products which need highly qualified workers - this is our added value , a sector in which we are unrivalled .
In this regard , extending the periods for benefiting from financial resources and simplifying the application procedures , especially for the new Member States , are extremely important .
The global economic crisis has taken us all by surprise , whether we are talking about banks , multinational companies or even transnational institutional structures .
The global economy is badly affected , and the survival of the global financial system is actually at stake .
I do not think anyone will contradict me when I say that the magnitude of the current problems requires a concentrated effort at European level .
Indeed , solidarity is an absolute must to get through this crisis .
I represent Romania in the European Parliament , a country in south-eastern Europe .
All I can say is that the impact of economic growth of more than 7 % in 2008 seems about to vanish in the face of the turbulent economic conditions which are starting to hit hard .
The economic recovery plan drawn up by the European Commission must have an impact in every corner of the old continent .
Certain parts of Europe must not feel abandoned and helpless against a hostile situation which they have not provoked .
I think that this is the most important test for the European Union , the boldest political project over the last few hundred years .
The countries on this entire continent must show that they are a single force .
According to José Manuel Durão Barroso , President of the European Commission , Europe will be judged primarily by its results .
I totally concur with this statement .
I believe that the initiative proposing an economic recovery plan during the current crisis is welcome .
The EU needs to adopt a common , clear and effective approach so as to minimise the effects of the crisis as much as possible in terms of its intensity and duration .
We need clearer regulations for the financial sector , especially with regard to investments involving a high degree of risk , such as hedge funds .
At present , solidarity between Member States is of paramount importance .
It goes without saying that Member States will adopt measures specific to their national context , but they must not run contrary to the internal market and EMU .
The priority must be to facilitate credit , especially for SMEs , which are a driving force for economic growth and have the ability to create jobs .
Intervention measures by the state must , however , be temporary , after which competition regulations must be strictly complied with .
In addition , measures to combat the crisis must be integrated as part of a responsible budgetary policy .
Although we are going through a crisis , I feel that it is particularly important to adhere , as far as possible , to the Stability and Growth Pact , since increasing the budget deficit may be a disastrous solution in the long term , especially for future generations .
in writing . - Commissioner Joaquín Almunia has said recently that member countries of the eurozone which are confronted with substantial difficulties could benefit from assistance from other EU members .
Why has this indication of collective response not been firmly signalled to non-eurozone new Member States ?
Arguably , there is something wrong with the assistance packages extended to Latvia and Hungary .
Reducing very large imbalances is , fundamentally , sound . But how this is done does matter to the utmost .
Are budget deficits to be compressed drastically while the private sector is cutting its activity dramatically ?
Pro-cyclicality has to be averted both during an upswing and a downswing .
If public budgets are not the main explanation behind large external deficits , why should they bear the brunt of downsizing them ?
Just remember the lessons from the Asian crisis a decade ago .
Policy also has to think about how to discourage speculative attacks against the currencies of new Member States .
Just cutting budget deficits drastically would not help much in this regard either .
Hopefully , future Ecofin meetings would enhance better approaches regarding financial assistance .
And , whenever the IMF is brought on board in assistance packages , it should consider the suitability of its traditional approach in dealing with macroeconomic imbalances in view of the extraordinary current circumstances .
in writing . - ( RO ) Romania must make use of the new opportunities provided by the Structural Funds .
Central and local public authorities in Romania must capitalise as quickly and effectively as possible on the opportunity offered by the European Commission in terms of facilitating access to the Community 's Structural Funds .
They must access these funds in order to create new jobs , offer professional training through life-long learning programmes with a view to professional retraining , as well as provide support for SMEs .
Speeding up and simplifying the distribution of Community finances may help the economic recovery , thanks to an injection of cash into the targeted areas .
These payments will be quicker and more flexible and there will only be a single payment , which will enable the required projects to be implemented in a short time in areas such as infrastructure , energy or the environment .
On the other hand , the Romanian authorities must provide , in keeping with EU procedures , the cofinancing portion for implementing the projects so that they can be implemented as quickly as possible once the EU money has been received .
The European executive 's proposals are aimed at a series of measures for accelerating priority investments at national and regional level in Member States , while also simplifying access to grants and increasing the financial resources available to small and medium-sized enterprises .
The main features common to European Union Member States are democracy , stability , accountability and cohesion .
Evgeni Kirilov 's report on the Cohesion Policy and investments in the real economy underlines the importance of these features common to Member States as a first requirement in the common strategy for pursuing social and economic policies .
The European economy is suffering nowadays as a result of the consequences of the global financial crisis and of the most far-reaching and serious recession in the last 60 years .
We must encourage Member States to look at opportunities for synergy between funding from the Cohesion Policy and other Community sources of funding , such as TEN-T , TEN-E , the Seventh Framework Programme for research and technological development , the Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme , as well as the funding granted by the European Investment Bank and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development .
At the same time , Member States must simplify and facilitate access to finances offered through the financial instruments JESSICA , JASMINE and JEREMIE to encourage SMEs and relevant beneficiaries to use them more frequently .
I would like to conclude by congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Kirilov , for his contribution in compiling this report .
We are living in a period of economic uncertainty .
The European Union has a responsibility to see if it is possible to allow national and regional authorities flexibility so that better ownership can be taken of EU funds to deal with the unprecedented situation .
The measures in Commissioner Huebner 's plan Cohesion Policy : Investing in the real economy are practical and they are measures which should be adopted by domestic authorities without delay .
The European Regional Development Fund ( ERDF ) can now be used to provide partial funding for ecological investment in low-income housing , something that should be used to create and maintain jobs in the building industry - which is very hard hit - and that would help us to get closer to fulfilling our climate commitments at the same time .
Acknowledgment payments from the European Social Fund could really stimulate the struggling public sectors and small and medium-sized enterprises ( SME ) should benefit from the recommended changes to make cash flow more easily available .
This is a step in the right direction .
I find some of the language in Kirilov 's report in relation to the Lisbon strategy regrettable .
How can we combat the financial crisis ?
( European Economic Recovery Plan ) The financial crisis can be tackled in the short-term or the long-term .
The short-term method is based on the elimination of diseases which have developed in recent decades and which lead to loss of liquidity by banks , the circulation of ' infected ' bonds and a lack of coherence of financial policy with actual overall policy .
Countries which help banks financially are not eliminating the causes of the crisis .
The fundamental cause of the crisis is , in my opinion , the neoliberal mechanism at work in the economy , that is to say , its orientation to short-term profit while ignoring long-term interest , to name but one feature .
The long-term method should , therefore , correct the mechanism governing the operation of the economy by breaking with the dogmas of the so-called free market .
Member States and the European Commission should not take the place of competitively sound market mechanisms , but they do have an obligation to prevent diseases .
This means that , firstly , short-term profit should not obscure the long-term interests which result from the development of infrastructure , construction of public buildings , protection of the natural environment or the search for new , and sometimes less profitable , sources of energy , for example .
Secondly , all forms of ownership should be treated equally , and choice of one or another should be based on the effectiveness of management of each form .
Thirdly , Member States and the European Commission should assume the function of coordinator of the areas of both financial policy and overall policy .
Fourthly , Member States and the European Commission should develop methods for coordinating the international currency and financial market , which is vulnerable to speculation because it acts spontaneously .
The economic crisis has now reached Europe .
First , it affected developed economies , then it spread to developing and emerging economies .
The latest forecasts for 2009 predict economic growth at a level of -1 % or lower .
We find ourselves , therefore , in one of the most serious recessions ever to affect the European Community .
I agree with the rapporteur that individual measures taken by countries are now not enough , even if they are supported by transfers of capital to the sectors most endangered by the crisis .
Our economies are integrated with each other , and the crisis is a global one , and this is why the recovery measures proposed must also constitute a response which is global in character and extent .
In addition , they must enshrine the fundamental principle of the EU , namely the principle of solidarity .
Only this will allow us to retain territorial and social cohesion within the EU .
I think that at such a time of crisis , the principle of solidarity is also gaining a new political dimension .
Furthermore , I endorse the concern expressed in the report for ordinary people caught up in the crisis .
We must make loans available once again to families and firms and , most of all , to SMEs , which are the cornerstone of the European economy .
Only such an objective , together with protection of citizens ' savings , justifies the use of public funds for a rescue plan .
If , as part of the European rescue plan , we could also manage to put an end to tax havens , the fight against the crisis would surely be easier and more effective .
in writing . - As the financial crisis is deepening with no end in sight , I think that more funds will be necessary in order to stabilise the European economy and stop the downward spiral .
Other bottlenecks include the spiralling rate of unemployment and enormous insecurity in the labour market .
Non availability of credit , together with the increase in the public deficit , is still a major problem and is a key factor if we really want to successfully and effectively tackle economic recession .
It is very important that adequate credit supply is re-established and that money should be used as an economic stimulus i.e. to flow to families and companies .
It is necessary to create incentives to attract capital investment .
Unfortunately , at the moment , there is no European mechanism or institution capable of coordinating an integrated continental recovery and therefore we are reapplying patchwork solutions that may fail as a whole , since Member States ' economies are highly interdependent .
The European recovery efforts must go hand in hand with regulatory changes to avoid repeating the mistakes that brought us into the crisis .
Lack of regulation and poor supervision have been at the root of the problem and we need to re-establish effective regulations .
We will only be able to understand the serious socio-economic situation affecting the countries of the EU , including Portugal , if we bear in mind the objectives of this ' integration process ' and how its policies are at the root of the current capitalist crisis , of which the EU is one of the epicentres .
In the last 23 years , the EEC / EU has promoted the circulation of capital and the financialisation of the economy ; it has liberalised markets and encouraged privatisation ; it has merged companies and encouraged over-production ; it has relocated and destroyed productive capacity ; it has promoted the economic mastery of some , at the cost of the dependence of others ; it has encouraged worker exploitation and the increasing transfer of labour productivity gains to capital ; it has centralised the wealth created ; and it has increased social inequalities and regional asymmetries , all under the control of the major powers and the large economic and financial groups .
These are the root causes of the irreparable capitalist crisis .
It is not the ' crisis ' , but the policies inherent in capitalism which are at the root of unemployment , insecurity , low wages , worsening living conditions , poverty , disease , hunger and the growing difficulties faced by workers and the general population .
We therefore welcome the huge demonstration planned by the CGTP-IN , the general confederation of Portuguese workers , for 13 March , in order to change course towards more jobs , more wages and more rights .
in writing . - The Union needs to maximise its efforts to implement a consistent framework to tackle the global financial crisis .
If we want to restore public confidence and a sound financial system , we ought to act rapidly to sustain employment and economic activity .
To alleviate the negative effects of recession , maintaining social standards and employment levels , some adjustments should be made to simplify access to available resources while ensuring more transparency and better management .
The last EIT Council conclusions called for ' rapid additional action by the ESF to support employment , especially for the most vulnerable groups in the population , paying particular attention to the smallest undertakings by reducing non-wage labour costs ' .
I would therefore like to ask the next Council Summit to seriously consider the creation and retention of jobs through co-financing measures related to reducing non-wage labour costs , on a temporary basis , in countries seriously affected by financial or economic downturn .
The utmost attention should indeed be given to the most vulnerable groups in the population , those who suffer the most from the consequences of the economic and social downturn , to avoid further asymmetric impact of the crisis which jeopardises the balanced development of all territories within the Union .
in writing . - Solidarity is one of the most precious values for Europe today .
Yet in the current economic crisis , there are signs that European solidarity is being undermined .
More than ever we have to avoid divisions between Member States - to avoid categorisation of old and new , big and small .
The division which exists between euro and non-eurozone Member States must not give the eurozone states a privileged position from which to dictate the common future .
All Member States need to be involved equally in decision making .
All Member States have to be guaranteed the right to communicate their problems and concerns in order to find possible European solutions .
Europe needs a driving force to overcome the economic crisis with the least amount of damage .
Protectionism cannot be the answer to the economic crisis .
On the contrary , openness and the spirit of competition need to remain the basis of our activities .
Therefore , to take advantage of the current depression , more money should be invested in innovation , research and development .
In other words , the crisis should be seen as an incentive to implement the Lisbon strategy .
Only by using fully this strategy based on solidarity can we ensure jobs and the sustainability of the European economy .
It is not worth trying to rank grievances .
However , the mutually felt pain mobilises resources and intentions .
Many evoke the crisis of 1929 , although the Second World War that followed in its wake divided Europe between two different paths .
The countries of the former Eastern bloc , moreover , experienced the change of regime as a trauma as well , but in this case , we are all equally threatened by the global financial and economic crisis which , in spite of certain early signs , was nonetheless unexpected .
From the moment of the crisis , Europe 's path can no longer diverge , even into several parallel paths - there cannot be two speeds .
In the devaluation of speculative capital , everyone stands to lose ; only the degree of the loss differs .
The paradigm of the common market can only survive and remain competitive in such a situation if we provide joint , coordinated solutions .
The ghost of protectionism does not offer good advice !
The task of the Member States is to work out their financial plans in collaboration with each other .
The European Union can supplement this task by assessing how each can give support according to its means , to ensure that the Member States and citizens who are further back in the queue also end up with a positive balance .
The Central and Eastern European region is further back in this queue , partly for historical reasons , partly because the lack of the euro has caused a lack of confidence and turned speculative capital against us .
And although it is impossible to treat certain Member States on an equal footing , I firmly state that we need to work out a system of support at European level that makes it possible , in the name of solidarity , to offer assistance that is appropriate to each Member State .
All the principles in the European Economic Recovery Plan must feature in national economic recovery plans .
The EU funds made available must be used for top priority projects and be distributed fairly among Member States , taking into account , however , any special cases .
We must make effective use of every opportunity available to us .
This is why bringing forward the opportunities to use EU funds is of paramount importance because it will speed up and ensure flexibility in implementing this plan .
The projects must be implemented quickly and efficiently in order to pick up the section of the labour force going through difficult times .
This is why the administrative procedures , especially the timeframes for applying the procedures , must be radically reduced to guarantee the immediate effectiveness of this process .
In addition , among the measures which need to be adopted , those concerning the adoption of a legislative framework to effectively combat tax havens are an absolute must .
It is obvious that state aid must be used prudently to avoid creating problems with competition .
At the same time , however , we must closely analyse the beneficial effects which aid like this can have with regard to using labour , bearing in mind the situations where this aid is more than necessary .
The European Commission allocates significant sums for investments in energy efficiency , in producing renewable energy , as well as in the construction of Trans-European transport and energy networks .
We can only ensure that the gas and energy crisis situations which occurred in certain regions of the EU will not happen again in future by implementing a sound policy in this area .
Connecting up all the gas and energy networks in Europe ensures that the principle of solidarity is applied : a Member State will be able to import , or even export , natural resources in normal conditions , even during a crisis .
In this context , Member States must use the funding opportunities offered by the Structural Funds to develop projects in areas such as infrastructure , energy and the environment .
To improve the quality of these projects and the effective impact of their implementation , EU Member States must avail themselves of the maximum technical assistance which the European Commission can offer .
I welcome the speed which the EU institutions have shown in identifying some solutions to the current economic crisis .
However , I would like to highlight a few aspects which require closer attention .
Firstly , the funding for energy infrastructure projects .
I believe that it is fundamentally the wrong approach to distribute money to as many projects as possible as there is the risk of not being able to cover the budget required to complete them .
Recently , following the discussions about Nabucco , I get the impression that we are playing with fire .
We cannot announce EUR 250 million for Nabucco , then say that we are cutting funding by EUR 50 million , and finally conclude that this should actually be a purely private investment .
The benefit of the Nabucco project is indisputable and we cannot afford to procrastinate on this for political and economic reasons .
Secondly , I believe that we must avoid falling prey to protectionist tendencies , which would affect the operation of the internal market .
Even though this crisis is having an uneven impact throughout the EU , we must provide a single response to it , in accordance with the objectives of the Cohesion Policy and the principles of the internal market .
I think that it is absolutely necessary to evaluate the impact of these amendments in order to improve the efficiency of the measures in the new 2014-2020 financial framework .
Accounting for a third of the EU budget without being a crisis management instrument , the Cohesion Policy is , however , the largest source of investment in the real economy , offering a huge opportunity , especially for permanently disadvantaged regions .
Consequently , I would like to draw attention to the need to find solutions ensuring a better vertical involvement of regions at European level .
In the conditions created by the current extraordinary economic situation , I would like to emphasise the importance of improving flexibility in terms of accessing the Structural Funds .
I also welcome extending the opportunity of support to investments in energy efficiency and renewable energies in the housing and clean technology sectors .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , last week , the Commission submitted its communication on the economic crisis to the Council for its meeting at the end of this month .
The Commission also gave its first assessment of the results of the European economic stimulus package .
The Commission considers the initial results to be good and estimates that recovery action at national and European levels together will have an overall value equivalent to around 3.3 % of GDP in the period 2009-2010 .
I congratulate the rapporteur on a very creditable report .
In my opinion , the need to coordinate action by the Member States , which it emphasises , is particularly important .
The emergence of tendencies is very worrying .
Member States might make assurances in speeches that they are ready to pull together , but something quite different is evident where the action taken is concerned .
It is extremely important that EU leaders take decisions with reference to what they say and do not give in to protectionist pressures which , in several countries , are unquestionably drastic .
The EU needs to take a new , ambitious step that constitutes a continuation of the Lisbon Strategy .
The EU needs a stimulus package that gives support to new industries as a basis for competitiveness and growth .
With investment in such areas as eco-modernisation , renewable energy sources and information technology , it is possible to establish healthy sectoral change .
A crisis is also an opportunity .
It is an opportunity to reorganise the whole pan-European and global financial architecture .
The crisis is also an opportunity to steer economic growth along an entirely new avenue , based on renewable energy sources and energy efficiency .
The ' New Green Deal ' , as it is known , must be a basis for recovery and new growth .
Thus , as we create jobs and introduce innovation , we will also be addressing the challenges of climate change .
The European economy is suffering the effects of the global financial crisis , seeing the greatest and most serious decline in the last 60 years .
The crisis is an enormous test for Europe .
It affects companies and , at the same time , ordinary people and their families .
Many are living in fear , particularly of losing their jobs , and are looking to the EU to save them .
Europe cannot just be the sum of 27 national interests .
It must be based on solidarity and the willingness of Member States and regions to implement their programme objectives as quickly as possible .
At a time of economic crisis , it should be clear to us that we must concentrate on the Lisbon objectives , particularly in the area of employment .
It is cohesion policy that has the financial instruments which must be applied intensively and flexibly during the crisis .
The financial resources of EU Cohesion Policy for the period 2007-2013 can significantly help to fulfil the objectives of the EU 's renewed Lisbon Strategy for growth and employment , which brings together ordinary people , companies , infrastructure , the energy sector and research and innovation .
We need to improve coordination and to abandon protectionism and all forms of demagoguery .
We must restart capital flows and capital transfers .
I firmly believe that investments in innovation , new technologies and eco-innovations will bring the new opportunities which are essential for securing an effective response to the current financial crisis .
We must eliminate all barriers and create a genuine internal market in renewable energy .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Ferreira , for a relevant and timely report .
In the present crisis conditions , it is crucial that existing funds be fully utilised .
It is regrettable that the majority of Member States that are entitled to receive support from the Structural and Cohesion Funds in the new financial perspective have been unable to utilise those funds .
The same applies in my homeland , Estonia .
There are several reasons for this : the first major problem is Member States ' own administrative capacity ; in this area , Member States could do a great deal themselves and they could improve administrative functioning .
A second reason originates from the European Union .
It is important that the EU should make conditions more flexible .
There is a problem , for instance , with those programmes where expenditure must be made in advance , and which are then financed afterwards .
It is now difficult to get loans to make those expenditures .
The question of what action the European Commission plans to take regarding advance payments is very important .
The next important matter is the rate of self-financing under present conditions ; in this area , greater flexibility should be considered .
The third important matter is the supervisory mechanism - the present bureaucracy is clearly unwieldy .
Thank you for the report .
In the case of some Member States , including the Baltic States , Romania or Hungary , the financial crisis and global recession have highlighted structural imbalances which have accumulated during the periods of economic growth , based on inflows of direct foreign investments and external debt at rapid rates .
Any EU economic recovery plan must take into account that these countries need considerable external financing to be able to cover the deficit in the trade in goods and services .
Failing this external financing , the countries in question are destined for huge , abrupt adjustments which will wipe out the welfare benefits acquired during previous years , will weaken cohesion within the EU , and may even jeopardise stability in the area .
The Council and European Commission have a definite responsibility to find solutions to produce the external financing that is required .
The Member States in question have the responsibility , by gaining time through the external financing obtained , to carry out the structural reforms which will correct the accumulated imbalances .
Regional policy is the primary source of European investment in the real economy .
Speeding up and simplifying its financing can help the economic recovery by releasing liquidity into targeted sectors .
The faster , more flexible payments , at flat rates and in lump sums , proposed by the Commission , will allow the immediate implementation of projects in the areas of infrastructure , energy and the environment .
National and regional authorities must take advantage of these opportunities and make intensive use of the Structural Funds in order to boost employment , SMEs , the spirit of enterprise and work-related training , whilst making their contribution under the cofinancing rules , so that the allocated funds can be utilised in full .
I call on the regional councils and the prefectures in the French overseas departments , as Structural Fund management authorities , to anticipate these changes so that their regional programmes can be focused immediately on projects showing the best potential for growth and jobs .
In the face of the current unrest in the French overseas departments , and with the protest movement now affecting Réunion , we must explore new indigenous development initiatives and activate all the levers at our disposal , including those provided by the European Union .
The EU Communication on the European Economic Recovery Plan in December 2008 lists the areas in which the EU will be investing over the next few years in order to ensure economic growth and preserve jobs .
These are : support for small and medium-sized enterprises , with a financial estimate of EUR 30 billion via the EIB ; accelerating investments in infrastructure projects for Trans-European energy and broadband interconnections , with a financial estimate of EUR 5 billion for improving energy efficiency in buildings ; research and innovation .
These measures must be supported by legislative proposals which also guarantee the financial allocations .
The proposal for a regulation from January 2009 for financing energy projects as part of the European Economic Recovery Plan does not contain financial allocations for energy efficiency in buildings .
I believe that the EU is wrong if , during this economic crisis , it fails to back priority projects financially .
Energy efficiency in buildings is an area which can generate roughly 500 000 jobs in the EU , improve citizens ' quality of life , and contribute to sustainable economic development by promoting renewable energy sources .
I personally feel that it would be a failure on the part of the current European Commission if it is not going to support making buildings more energy efficient through the use of financial measures and instruments , suitable fiscal measures and through giving a strong political signal at European level .
Madam President , today we are debating a plan to revive the economy in relation to the priorities of the Lisbon Strategy .
Although several years have passed since the Strategy was announced , we can see that it is not being put into effect .
In other words we produce documents which we do not then implement .
This is confirmed by a certain custom , which has become the norm in this Parliament , namely snowing citizens under with regulations which , in many cases , make their lives difficult and which do not have a significant effect on their standard of living .
In addition , the growing financial crisis shows that the European Commission and the Council are completely detached from the everyday problems of society .
Essentially , the Commission has no genuine plan of action in response to the growing crisis .
Everyone can see that individual countries are undertaking rescue measures on their own , and that the centrally managed market worth five hundred million is not capable of having a real effect on the scale of the crisis .
In recent years , the countries of Eastern Europe have been told that they should privatise their banks , in other words , that they should subordinate them to Western European banks .
This they naively did , and today it is those very banks which are speculating and killing off the economies of the new Member States of the EU .
Agenda
As regards the draft resolution by the Committee on Foreign Affairs on the humanitarian situation in Sri Lanka , I have received a written objection to the inclusion of the said draft resolution from Robert Evans and 40 other signatories .
In accordance with the provisions of Rule 90 ( 4 ) of the Rules of Procedure , the draft resolution is included for debate and vote on the agenda of the current session .
I therefore propose to you that the debate this evening be included as the last item , and the vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The deadline for tabling amendments is 3 p.m. this afternoon .
Madam President , on Monday evening , the Committee on Foreign Affairs adopted a motion regarding the deteriorating humanitarian situation in Sri Lanka , pursuant to Rule 91 .
The situation in Sri Lanka is clearly very serious , but exactly what is happening regarding the humanitarian situation is far from clear .
I am conscious that there are many differing views across this House .
So I suggest that the most sensible course of action would be to timetable a proper debate , which cannot seriously be fitted in in this part-session but could be in our next part-session , which is just 10 days away .
I am grateful to Mr Daul of the PPE-DE Group for indicating his group 's support for this course of action .
As we are a serious Chamber , I suggest and ask colleagues to support a debate with resolution and full participation at the next part-session , to do justice to the gravity of the situation in Sri Lanka .
( FR ) Madam President , when someone proposes something , someone may always speak against it prior to the vote .
I therefore wish merely to say that the situation in Sri Lanka is extremely tragic .
There are 150 000 people trapped with no way out .
This is exactly the same as in Burma .
This is why Sri Lanka should be left on the agenda today , to show our determination to support those who are trapped .
1 .
VAT exemption on the final importation of certain goods (
2 .
Europol staff : adjustment of basic salaries and allowances (
3 .
Mobilisation of the EU Solidarity Fund (
4 .
Amending budget 1 / 2009 : floods in Romania (
5 .
Common rules and standards for ship inspection and survey organisations and for the relevant activities of maritime administrations ( recast ) (
6 .
Common rules and standards for ship inspection and survey organisations ( recast ) (
7 .
Port State control ( recast ) (
8 .
Community vessel traffic monitoring and information system (
9 .
Investigation of accidents in the maritime transport sector (
10 .
The liability of carriers of passengers by sea in the event of accidents (
11 .
Civil liability and financial guarantees of shipowners (
12 .
Compliance with flag State requirements (
13 .
The charging of heavy goods vehicles for the use of certain infrastructures (
14 .
Public access to European Parliament , Council and Commission documents (
Before the final vote :

rapporteur . - Madam President , under Rule 53 , I would like to ask the Commission to respond and tell us whether it intends to adopt all of Parliament 's amendments as adopted today .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , I have the honour of giving the following declaration on behalf of the Commission .
The Commission takes note of the amendments voted by Parliament that it will study in detail .
The Commission confirms its willingness to seek a compromise with Parliament and Council .
The Commission will only consider its proposal after the two branches of the budgetary authority have adopted their positions .
The Commission intends to continue to pursue a constructive dialogue , in the meantime , with both institutions .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I do not know where the Commissioner has been , but we adopted a position this morning .
I would therefore like to request that the plenary vote to refer the report back to committee , which would give the committee the flexibility to enter into negotiations with both the Council and the Commission .
I therefore ask for the House 's support for a referral back to committee .
rapporteur . - Madam President , my thanks to the House for its patience on this , my final intervention .
Can I now ask you , Madam President , to write a formal invitation to the Czech Presidency , as well as the incoming Swedish Presidency , to open a formal dialogue with the European Parliament as soon as possible ?
Equally , as announced in the voting list and for the sake of clarity and coherence of the text that we have now adopted , I kindly ask that you request the plenary services to proceed , without any substantive change , to do the following : to group the articles according to their content under specific thematic titles , to re-order recitals and definitions accordingly and to produce and publish Parliament 's position as a consolidated text as soon as possible .
Finally , may I pay due thanks to the enormous and supportive work which I have been given not only by the secretariats , but by the tabling services .
( Applause )
I will pass on this request , then , Mr Cashman , and the results will be made known .
15 .
Guidelines for the Member States ' employment policies (
16 .
Extending the applicability of Rule 139 of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure until the end of the seventh parliamentary term (
17 .
The social situation of the Roma and their improved access to the labour market in the EU (
18 .
Facing oil challenges (
19 .
Greening of transport and internalisation of external costs (
20 .
Lisbon Strategy ( vote )
Before the vote on Amendment 28 ( concerns the vote on Amendment 27 ) :
( FR ) Madam President , I may be mistaken but I think that you have held a vote on Amendment 27 which , in reality , was a technical amendment that simply asked for paragraph 47 to be moved .
On the other hand , there is a request for a separate roll-call vote on the original text .
I therefore believe that we have agreed to move paragraph 47 , and we now need a two-part roll-call vote on paragraph 47 itself .
Let us clarify matters : there was no objection to paragraph 47 being inserted after paragraph 49 .
We then voted on Amendment 27 , which has been adopted .
We could not therefore vote on paragraph 47 , as we have voted on Amendment 27 .
There is therefore no problem .
21 .
Combating climate change ( vote )
Before the vote on paragraph 20 :
Madam President , a very brief amendment to the original text .
Paragraph 20 , line 3 should read : ' reducing emissions from deforestation and degradation ' .
At the moment , it reads ' reducing emissions for deforestation and degradation ' .
I want to change the word ' for ' to ' from ' .
In the English version it is wrong .
This is not contentious .
22 .
Employment policy guidelines ( vote )
Before the vote on paragraph 13 :
Madam President , this is a very simple amendment , just to change ' the disabled ' to either ' people with disabilities ' or ' disabled people ' .
We never use the words ' the disabled ' in English .
Madam President , this , again , is a fairly standard amendment with reference to the role of these consultations of the social partners .
It just adds , at the end , the phrase : ' in accordance with national custom and practice ' .
This is normally built into an amendment , but for some reason it got left out .
The Socialists are supportive of this amendment , and hopefully the other groups will be too ; they usually are .
23 .
European Economic Recovery Plan (
Before the vote :
Madam President , I would like to inform our group that there is a mistake in our voting lists regarding Amendment 113 : there should be a plus in the voting list , and not a minus .
rapporteur . - Madam President , it is just to change the wording in Paragraph 93 concerning sound state finance to ' as soon as possible ' , instead of ' when economic conditions allow ' , as agreed with the shadow rapporteurs .
( FR ) Madam President , this is a purely technical amendment .
There is a misprint in our amendment .
There is an indent that was worded as follows : ' intensify the elimination of barriers ' .
We have replaced this with ' remove unjustified barriers ' , but , unfortunately , the old paragraph , the old indent has remained in the wording of the amendment .
It is therefore the third indent that we have amended slightly , and there is no need to keep the old version .
( DE ) Madam President , you can tell by the enthusiastic response from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats to my intervention how well things went during our vote .
I would like to thank my colleague Mrs Ferreira who has done a huge amount of work in order to bring about this result .

I would also like to thank specifically Mr Hökmark , Mrs Herczog , Mr Bullmann and Mr Lehne , who have , in my opinion , worked very hard on the similar Lisbon resolution .
However , you can see from the reaction of the PPE-DE group that there was a mood of excitement .
We would like to thank you for voting with us on the closure of tax havens and on solidarity with the Member States .
Until a few minutes ago , things looked quite different .
It is to your credit that you have encouraged the spread of social democracy .
This is good for the European Parliament , which has moved to the left .
( Applause from the left and protests from the right )
( FR ) Madam President , I would just like to remind the Socialist Group in the European Parliament and the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats that there are groups in this Parliament other than the two large ones .
( DE ) Madam President , one item relating to the agenda .
Perhaps you could explain to the House under which rule in the Rules of Procedure Mr Schulz was permitted to take the floor .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am , of course , going to tell Mr Nassauer that he is quite correct .
Sometimes , however , for democracy 's sake , one has to be able to cross the lines a little .
I mean by this , ladies and gentlemen , that I gave the floor to Mr Schulz in accordance with Rule 141 of the Rules of Procedure .
He was perfectly entitled to speak .
( FR ) Madam President , did he speak on behalf of the Commission ?
Because he wants to become a Commissioner ?
Or did he speak as the Chairman of the group ?
( IT ) Madam President , I would like some clarification .
As far as I know , the final vote has not been taken on the Reul report .
Can you confirm if this correct ?
Mr Prodi , we have adopted Amendment 3 , which therefore replaces the whole resolution .
24 .
Cohesion Policy : investing in the real economy (
Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For details of the outcome of the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote

Madam President , I welcome the fact that this report looks at what can be done at European level to stimulate the economies , whilst I recognise that most of the instruments to do so remain at national level : 99 % of public expenditure is national , not European ; most regulation is national , not European .
But if we look at what we can do at European level , the plan proposed by the Commission for a EUR 30 billion contribution , including advance payments from Structural Funds and new loans from the European Investment Bank , can and will make a real contribution to coming out of this crisis .
We must also make sure that we avoid protectionism in Europe .
A beggar-your-neighbour approach by different countries would weaken our common market and seriously damage the prospects of job creation and economic growth in the long term .
On the contrary , freedom of movement for workers and initiatives to help businesses ' exports to the single market will help provide the stimulus needed for our economic recovery .
( IT ) Madam President , I voted in favour of the joint text on improving safety for those who choose to travel by sea .
I think it is very important to add that more should be spent on the professionalism of all seamen responsible for navigation - from the captain , to the chief engineer , to the boatswain , to the master-at-arms , to the helmsman and to all seamen - because the lives and safety of men at sea depends on them .
I therefore call for more professionalism and better salaries for those who hold the lives of maritime passengers in their hands .
( MT ) On this report I would like to say that despite its initiative in favour of the environment , there was still a lack of consideration regarding the negative and disproportionate effects that it would have on the regions and countries that are situated on the periphery of the European Union , as Malta is .
This initiative could potentially bring about a substantial price hike in the transportation of cargo for transport operating to and from these peripheral regions .
This rise in costs , in turn , could lead to higher prices on the products that enter and leave these regions or countries .
Therefore , I voted against this report .
( PL ) Madam President , imposing additional charges on heavy goods vehicles represents an increase in taxation .
Lorry transport provides a service to the whole economy , including the citizens .
Its costs have an effect on the price of all the products we consume .
Burdening road transport , alongside the taxes which already have to be paid , with the additional costs of excise duty on fuel and vignettes , when we are faced with the problem of a crisis to which no end is in sight is socially irresponsible .
Air pollution , the greenhouse effect and accidents are , to a large degree , dependent on the construction of vehicles and on the road system .
In the last ten years , significant progress has been made in this area and we have all felt the benefits .
I do not endorse the directive in its present form because it requires radical revision .
( FI ) Madam President , firstly I would like to say that I support this report by Mr Cashman , and I thank him for it .
It improved greatly at Parliament 's reading , when we consider what the Commission 's original proposal was .
The basic assumption we have to make is that decision making is transparent .
People must have the opportunity to have access to documents , because that is the only way to inspire confidence , and , with this in mind , it is very important that we should be able to get to a position where people can see how the legislative process progresses .
Transparency must apply at each administrative level with regard to documents .
Everyone obviously understands that there are some areas , such as matters to do with a private individual 's health and so on , which need to be kept private , but in the legislative process , everything should basically be transparent , and in this respect , I am happy with this result and believe that honest and open decision making are the way we will be able to gain the trust of the people .
Madam President , a recent report by the UK-based NGO , the Taxpayers ' Alliance , said that EU membership costs every man , woman and child in the United Kingdom GBP 2 000 each year .
I have to say that many of my constituents in the North East of England think they get very bad value for such a large sum of money .
Therefore , ensuring public access to the documents of the European institutions is the very least that those constituents could expect in return for handing over such large sums to the EU every year .
In the eyes of many people , the EU remains a very obscure and monolithic entity .
Anything that we can do to improve access , to give more information to the public on some of the things that perhaps some of our Commissioners and others would rather keep confidential , is very welcome .
Already we see whistleblowers and others that have been vilified and hounded out of their jobs for exposing confidential information .
If all that information had been available in the first place , then perhaps many of those over-the-top reactions would have been unnecessary .
Madam President , I am grateful for this opportunity to explain how I voted on this very important report .
We all know that , when different parties are involved in sensitive political negotiations , sometimes there is a need for secrecy in order to avoid a deal being scuppered .
However , this is not really what we are talking about in this case .
Recently , there have been negotiations on the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement and some of the issues that have been debated include a massive erosion of individual civil liberties .
There have been proposals , for example , to search people 's iPods and laptops when entering countries to check for copyright and non-copyright material .
Were we able to debate these in an open and transparent manner ?
No , because these documents have been kept secret - perhaps for justifiable reasons , but reasons that we do not really understand .
Therefore , what we really need is more openness and more transparency in order for us to really get to the heart of the issue .
I completely agree with my colleague , Mr Callanan , when he says that the fact that they were not transparent does not bode well for the EU .
( IT ) I would like to thank those fans who have been tirelessly listening for so long .
Madam President , I am one of the 74 MEPs who today voted against the Andersson report , not because I am against employment , but because these guidelines for European Union , for EU Member States policy , do not specifically state that one of the options for encouraging employment is to allow those workers to retire who want and request to do so .
This policy of mandatorily raising the pension age everywhere therefore merely deprives young people of jobs when they would willingly replace those older workers who want to leave their positions to the young .
Madam President , this report starts from a false assumption : the assumption that the EU knows best when it comes to employment policy .
Many of my constituents would profoundly disagree ; they would rather that the EU were kept well away from anything to do with employment policy .
I believe that my country should withdraw from the EU 's Social Chapter .
It is more than a little ironic that the EU seeks to pass on its wisdom on employment policy to the Member States whilst , at the same time , it is responsible for huge amounts of red tape and regulation that have constricted so many businesses in my region and across Europe and caused an awful lot of the unemployment that it now seeks to cure .
The European social model is outdated , it is destructive , it prevents job creation and it acts against entrepreneurship .
The best thing would be for the EU to keep its nose out of the Member States ' employment policy and produce less red tape and less regulation .
That is the best thing that we could do to create more jobs in the economy .
Madam President , I voted for this proposal because it postpones the folly of an utterly unnecessary waste of even more money on translation services in this House in respect of Irish .
I would have preferred the entire folly of that waste to have been overturned .
However , at least this saves our taxpayers some of the unnecessary waste .
The minimal use of Irish in this Chamber is self-evident , although Miss de Brún , as part of her aggressive Republican agenda , may regale us in that dead tongue , with the only relief being that hardly anyone who tunes into Parliament on line can understand a word she says .
I can assure them they are missing very little .
Her Sinn Féin colleague , Miss McDonald , has not got past uttering a little stammering , stuttering , pidgin Irish , but even then we are wasting money on translation .
Madam President , I thank Ms Kovács for the informative and helpful report on the situation of the Roma .
As you all know , the population of the Roma is ever-expanding and consistently becoming a huge and influential force throughout Europe .
This group of 10-12 million people is amongst the poorest on the continent , yet has immeasurable potential .
As Europeans and Members of the European Parliament , which was founded on the pillar of equality , we must react to this problem as quickly as possible .
The continual oppression of one of Europe 's largest minorities is shameful and inefficient .
With better regulation and a higher degree of cooperation , nations may be able to provide work for this huge block of potential labourers .
With the looming economic crisis , the Roma may be able to help solve some of Europe 's deepest problems .
In addition , the prejudice against and degradation of these people has gone on long enough .
Equal rights and opportunities must be provided to all citizens of Europe , including the Roma .
Just at the beginning of this month in Hungary , two Roma people were shot like animals when they were trying to escape from their burning house .
How is it possible that in a united Europe , there are cases like this ?
( NL ) Madam President , I have voted against the Kovács report , because this whole report is permeated with victim thinking and because I take the view that a minority group such as the Roma gypsies would actually be much better served by a strategy that would encourage them to take more responsibility for their fate .
I too , of course , share everyone 's view that the Roma should be treated correctly , but most of the problems mentioned in this report are attributable to a lifestyle , a way of living , that these people have actively chosen .
We can adopt as many reports and resolutions and give as much money as we like , but this will not change the situation on the ground one bit .
( NL ) Madam President , in this Parliament I have heard a great deal of politically correct nonsense in my time , which was invariably approved by very large majorities , but this report takes the biscuit in my view .
If this Parliament is intent on interfering in the social situation of the Roma and their access to the labour market , would it be asking too much to observe a minimum of objectivity ?
The truth is that the problems of the gypsy people are largely the simple result of their own refusal to adapt to the society in which they live , certainly as far as education and vocational training are concerned .
For decades , we have been pumping millions of euros into all kinds of programmes full of idyllic , but mainly unrealistic , nonsense in the vein of this report .
Without any success .
Is it then not time we stopped mollycoddling them and looked at the real causes of the problems before we come up with solutions ?
Madam President , while the amended version was an improvement , it was still with a heavy heart that I supported this own-initiative report , since it was not consistent with the climate and energy package carried by a huge majority in this House on 17 December 2008 .
Just to remind us , my own EU-ETS report , which was the cornerstone of this package , was carried by 610 votes for , 60 abstentions , and 29 against .
Needless to say , Mr Reul was not among the 610 Members out of 699 who supported my report .
I have reservations about any reference to drilling in the Arctic or exploration for alternative sources of oil , such as tar sands .
Past months have shown that the importance of energy security has never been as acute .
The cooperation that is necessary across the EU , and the need to take advantage of the stimulus packages currently launched by almost all Member States and the Commission , underscore the need for investment in renewables to increase our energy security , to decrease our carbon emissions and to wean us off our high dependence on fossil fuel , albeit over an agreed timeline .
Madam President , I was the shadow rapporteur on the Sacconi report into CO2 emissions from passenger vehicles , and I can see from the work that I did on that that we do need to reduce our dependence on oil .
We need to reduce that dependence because most oil supplies are , of course , in very unstable and unsavoury parts of the world .
For far too long , our thirst for oil has sustained regimes that are deeply inimical to everything that we stand for , to our own interests and to our own values , especially with regard to human rights and good governance .
Particularly , of course , we need to reduce our dependence on Russian oil supplies .
Russia has shown in the past that it will not hesitate to use its control of much of our energy supply to achieve political and economic goals , and we need to do all we can to reduce their ability to do so , and to do that we of course need to reduce our dependence on oil .
Madam President , I abstained on this report because I believe it simply does not go far enough .
We have previously made commitments in this House to reduce emissions .
Transport has a key role to play in the fight against climate change and should be assisted in meeting its responsibility , but this report will do little to help .
This is unfortunate because there are some good proposals .
The noise charges for trains take into account the broader environmental impact of transport and fit well with the proposals currently going through the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy on reducing noise in car tyres .
Much more could have been done for the aviation sector , however .
It is odd that the report mentions rail , sea and inland waterway transport yet neglects this sector , one of the principal contributors of carbon emissions .
It is because it lacks teeth in this area and so many others that I abstained on this report .
( FI ) Madam President , the Lisbon Strategy is worth supporting , but it has to be said in this regard that the idea that Europe might be the world 's leading knowledge-based economy by 2010 is not going to be realised .
We are now in 2009 , and so if we want to achieve something , we should find the right sort of Europe-wide commitment very soon .
Then we might achieve this objective perhaps by 2020 or 2030 .
This mainly means that there has to be Europe-wide commitment to training and research very soon .
At present , we have an economic recession on our hands and , amid this downturn , we have to remember that if we are to have adequate levels of good human resources - a workforce for our employment markets - we will need to invest in particular in training and teacher training .
This is the priority if we really want to achieve the objectives of the Lisbon Strategy .
( NL ) Madam President , I have abstained from the vote on the resolution on the Lisbon Strategy , even though the resolution is , in fact , on the whole , a very even-handed resolution which gives an accurate diagnosis of the situation and also contains many proposals which I fully endorse .
I abstained , though , because the subject of these notorious blue cards for economic immigration has once again been brought up and is receiving emphatic support precisely at a time when more than 20 million people in the European Union face unemployment , which is set to increase even further due to the economic crisis .
Precisely at times like these , we should stop resorting to easier short-term solutions , such as enticing hordes of economic immigrants to the European Union once again Instead , we need to invest in training and retraining people who are currently unemployed , rather than just leaving them to their own devices in favour of an influx of new immigrants .
Madam President , I cannot remember how I voted on the Lisbon Strategy .
I think it is a completely worthless thing , because Europe was meant to be the leading knowledge-based society by 2010 .
Over the 10 years I have sat in this Chamber , I did wonder how we were going to get there when we were passing regulation after regulation that was stifling business and opportunity and , indeed , encouraging business to move away from the continent of Europe .
I am always reticent when it comes to these sorts of reports .
Having sat in the Chamber for a couple of hours today voting about imposing more and more regulation on businesses and on people , I feel we are going in exactly the wrong direction from this Chamber and we need a huge about-face immediately .
Madam President , I agree with many of the comments made by my colleague , Mr Heaton-Harris .
As he correctly said , the Lisbon Strategy commits the EU to becoming , slightly ironically , the most competitive economy in the world by 2010 .
With just one year to go before that self-imposed deadline , I cannot be the only person in this House who wonders , and becomes more than a little sceptical , about whether we will ever get there .
We constantly pass resolutions and the Commission constantly produces strategy documents telling us how we are going to get there .
It is just that we never seem to arrive .
The content of the Lisbon Strategy was always far in excess of the EU 's capacity to deliver it , and was , in many ways , contrary to the whole ethos of the EU over the past 50 years because , as Mr Heaton-Harris reminded us , much of the EU 's employment and economic regulation actually causes more difficulty in achieving the goals of the Lisbon Strategy than anything else .
We are constantly piling on more and more burdens and regulations that force industry out of Europe , and we have no chance whatsoever of meeting any of the goals of the Lisbon Strategy .
It is about time we were honest with ourselves and admitted that .
Madam President , the initial goals of the Lisbon Strategy committed the EU to creating a knowledge economy , an innovative economy , a digital economy , by the year 2010 .
Well , I have news for us all here in this packed Chamber : we are running out of time .
You may not have noticed , but we have made very little progress so far .
Before I became a politician , I used to work with a lot of innovators and help lots of start-up companies .
It was a real contrast , coming to the world of European politics , to see how we dealt with innovation .
When we deal with innovation here , we have committees , we have strategy documents , we have votes , we have everything but innovation , unless you consider more paper creation to be innovation .
When you talk to the innovators out there , the people who are going to create wealth in the European Union and across the globe , what they want is for governments to keep out of the way .
It is time the looters of government stopped draining the life-blood of companies .
Madam President , it is with heavy heart that I stand up to speak once again on Lisbon .
I do not normally speak here just for the sake of being negative .
I believe that the European Union talks the talk when it comes to the Lisbon Strategy . However , today , almost 10 years since the summit , it is a long way from walking the walk .
We hear many warm words about the need for the skilled workforce that will be able to adapt to economic upheavals , such as the one we face today .
However , across Europe we still face a chronic skills crisis .
In my region , the West Midlands , the skilling of the workforce has had a particularly painful and protracted birth .
Regrettably , we have the highest proportion of skill-shortage vacancies of any British region .
I would , therefore , call on the Commission not to lose sight of the structural reforms needed to reinvigorate the Lisbon Strategy during a period which is beset with economic disorder , higher oil and commodity prices and ongoing turbulence on the financial markets .
Madam President , the reason I want to give an explanation of vote on this particular report is because I cannot believe the hypocrisy of this House in talking as it always does about climate change .
Why is this House hypocritical ?
Well , look around you .
We are in our second Chamber .
We have a perfectly good Chamber back in Brussels .
We are here for only three or four days per month .
I admit that we are going to get an extra part-session this particular month , but only to average out for the one in 12 sessions that we need to do .
We have hundreds of people displaced from their normal places of work to come here .
They travel and cause carbon emission while they are getting here .
We are possibly the least green parliament that there is .
When I entered this place , it was meant to be a paperless parliament yet , if you look around , all our desks are covered in paper .
We are the worst hypocrites when it comes to this than any Chamber I know .
Madam President , I entirely agree with the sentiments expressed by the previous speaker .
We should consider the fact that the European Parliament has two Chambers - in Strasbourg and Brussels - and we also have three sites , including the one in Luxembourg , which people do not talk about very often .
Not only are we building a new block in Luxembourg , leading to more carbon emissions that could well contribute to climate change - or not , depending on what one believes on the issue - but also it is simply hypocritical for us to carry on debating climate change while we continue to operate out of three places of work .
Even if we were eventually to operate only out of one - Brussels - when you walk around the streets of Brussels at night and look up from Place du Luxembourg towards the European Parliament building , you see this great lit-up beacon to hypocrisy .
If we are going to tackle climate change , it is about time we put our own house in order .
( NL ) Madam President , this resolution is full of good intentions , but we should ask ourselves if resolutions of this kind actually make any difference at all .
For example , it is beyond me that a resolution on employment policies , insofar as this is a European competence , which I do not believe it is , should choose to ignore very basic questions such as : how many people are currently unemployed in the European Union ? 20 million still , or is it - more likely - nearer 25 million ?
The question is : does the Commission still hold firm to its outrageous notion of importing more than 20 million new immigrants to the European Union ?
The question is : will the Commission finally abandon its recruitment centres in countries such as Mali and Senegal to import even more unemployment ?
These are the kinds of questions we had expected in the resolution , rather than the meaningless catalogue of good intentions which it has unfortunately become .
Madam President , once again we are talking about something that we are doing very little about , and that is employment policy .
Once , a colleague said to me that when the European Parliament talks about employment , it is actually creating far more unemployment than one would expect .
We have got to recognise that , if we are going to create jobs , we have to set the wealth creators free .
We have to enable them to continue their spirit of free enterprise , to create wealth , to create jobs .
But what do we do here ?
By regulation and debate , what we seek to do is to choke off the very spirit of innovation , the very spirit of entrepreneurship , and we have continued to do that today .
Only today Mr Schulz - who is a man I often disagree with , but not today - talked about the social democratisation of the EPP .
Now that that day has come , we know that we are doomed when it comes to creating jobs in Europe .
Madam President , have you noticed that the harmonisation of policy always happens in the same direction ?
More integration invariably means more intervention .
Or let us put that the other way around : pluralism guarantees competitiveness .
If you have competing states with different tax levels , then you can only raise your tax to a certain level before your money starts going abroad .
If you have competing states with different employment policies and different social policies , you can regulate your employment market only to a certain degree before the jobs start crossing your borders .
Now , during the good years , the European Union was able to disregard these verities and was able to construct behind its walls a highly regulated and centralised market .
But those good years have come to an end .
We now risk cutting ourselves off from more dynamic economies and becoming more penurious and more irrelevant and ultimately , like Tolkien 's Eldar , going into the west and fading .

Madam President , I notice that at least some of those who have been denigrating all European legislation , whatever it is , nonetheless voted in favour of the third Maritime Package , a package that I welcome because it increases the health and safety of people on ships ; it will ultimately cut costs because it will save lives downstream and it makes safety systems of different Member States compatible with each other , thus making them more efficient , more effective and less costly while , at the same time , improving health and safety .
I welcome the adoption of this package , which will make a difference to the safety of hundreds of constituents of mine in Yorkshire and Humber .
Madam President , I voted in favour of this report as I was pleasantly surprised that our proposals against tax havens were adopted by the House .
I was also in support of the wide-ranging remit given in this report to address the current crisis .
The one aspect that I really want to focus on is the recovery plan so far .
We need to make certain that we still have secure jobs and sustainable careers for people when the economy begins to perform better and support key sectors such as the car industry .
The automotive sector is a model of how traditional industries should adapt in the years to come .
I recently visited the Jaguar Land Rover plant in my constituency , where I saw how the company has turned itself into a world leader in green automobile technology , and where the new type-approval guidelines we have been adopting in this House have been welcomed wholeheartedly .
Madam President , once again we are indulging the fantasy that you can spend your way out of debt and legislate against recessions .
At best , we are engaging in self-deceit ; at worst , we are deliberately perpetrating a deceit against our electorate .
The truth is that nothing can stop this correction : interest rates were held too low for too long and now that the air has been pumped into the balloon , it is going to come out again .
We could try to rescue some of the victims but , instead , we engage in this pretence that we can stop the thing happening .
The debt will be paid by our children yet unborn and unbegot , and nowhere more than in my country , where every child is now born with a debt of GBP 30 000 because of the incompetence and incontinence of its government .
As our national poet says : ' This land of such dear souls , this dear dear land , ... is now leased out - I die pronouncing it - like to a tenement or pelting farm . '
And now , on top of that national debt , we are expected to contribute to these European recovery programmes .
I close again with the words of our national poet : ' Prevent it , resist it , let it not be so , Lest child , child 's children , cry against you , ' Woe ! "

( FR ) Madam President , one can cite as examples of major international financial crime the Madoff affair , obviously , but also the speculation in agricultural raw materials that took place in 2007 .
This is why a whole host of legal experts , including Carlos Sotelo 's practice in Spain , and networks of large practices , have proposed the creation of an international financial court .
We could , moreover , just extend the International Criminal Court 's remit to cover major financial crime because , in 2007 , millions of children died as a result of the speculation in agricultural products .
There was a financial Darfur .
This international financial court would have the power to investigate speculation and speculators , to inspect tax havens , to regulate and to punish offenders .
This is the test of sincerity for Barack Obama , for President Sarkozy and for the other leaders .
This is the political message to send out to the general public , and this would be the first stage of a global organisation , a global phenomenon and a global cure for a global economic crisis .



Madam President , it is very nice to speak after Mr Corbett in such debates because Mr Corbett is never wrong in this place ; often confused , as he was today , giving the wrong explanation of vote at the wrong time , but obviously never wrong !
I do wonder though whether , in this House , we know what the real economy is .
Is the real economy a bunch of paper-pushers and bureaucrats , with us writing laws that other people have to implement , such as the Civil Service in the UK , where we have been growing the public sector way faster than the private sector has been growing over the last 10 years ?
Or is the real economy actually people doing jobs of work and innovating and starting their own businesses ?
I just wonder if this report is actually heading in the right direction .
Having read it , I am pretty sure that it is not .
Madam President , we in this House know , perhaps better than some outside , the extent to which the European Union has now become a mechanism for the massive redistribution of wealth .
For a long time , that system worked very well because there were only a very small number of people paying into the pot .
The only two net contributors to the budget for most of the European Union 's history were the United Kingdom and , outstandingly , Germany .
However , things have changed now , and the money is running out .
We saw that vividly illustrated at the summit two weeks ago when the Hungarian prime minister demanded a EUR 190 billion bail-out for Central and Eastern Europe , and was told in no uncertain terms by the German Chancellor that the money was not there and would not be forthcoming .
German taxpayers ( and this is rarely acknowledged ) have always propped up the whole system .
Integration rests on their sufferance , and they have now seen through this .
They are not responding any more to the unspoken appeal to historical responsibility .
They are a sensible , level-headed people and can recognise a self-serving argument and spot a racket when they see one .
If you think I am wrong about this , then let them have a referendum ; let everyone have a referendum : put the Treaty of Lisbon to a vote .
Pactio Olisipiensis censenda est !
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted in favour of Mrs Geringer de Oedenberg 's report on the exemption from value added tax on the final importation of certain goods ( codified version ) .
As it is merely a codification of a previously existing legislative text and does not involve any substantial change to the text itself , I believe that we should endorse the Commission 's proposal and the recommendations of the legal services of Parliament , the Council and the Commission itself .
in writing . - ( IT ) I abstained from the vote on Mr Díaz de Mera García Consuegra 's report on adjusting the basic salaries and allowances applicable to Europol staff .
I only partly agree with the rapporteur 's view on this matter , so I do not think it is appropriate for me to take a position on it .
Madam President , I voted in favour .
I believe that the environmental disaster that struck Romania cannot go unheeded .
Romania has emerged from the flooding exhausted , not only economically and environmentally , but also in social terms .
The reports of people 's personal stories have been heart-rending - families have lost their property and possessions , many of which were the fruit of a lifetime of hard work .
Many organisations are already working on the ground , but the time has come for the institutions too , and the Members of this House personally , to make a real contribution to this cause .
I therefore welcome the opinion of the Committee on Budgets and hope that the EUR 11 785 377 from the Solidarity Fund will be made available to Romania as soon as possible , in order to lift the population economically , environmentally and socially .
The principle of solidarity is one which is fundamental and unquestionable in the European Union .
It is precisely this principle , which exists , indeed , not only on paper , that distinguishes the EU from other international organisations .
One practical expression of this principle is undoubtedly the Solidarity Fund , established in 2006 in accordance with an interinstitutional agreement and in order to eliminate the negative consequences of major natural disasters .
It is good that the Fund is in operation , and that last year , five countries benefited from it .
This is proof that , when faced by a tragedy , no Member State will be left alone .
The flood which hit five areas of north-east Romania in July 2008 caused serious material losses ( 0.6 % of GNI ) and disrupted the lives of over two million people in 214 districts .
In this situation , I consider Romania 's application for assistance to be justified , even if it does not meet the quantitative criteria laid down in Article 2 ( 1 ) of Council Regulation ( EC ) No 2012 / 2002 establishing the European Union Solidarity Fund .
I also have no doubt that in this case , it is necessary to apply the criterion of extraordinary disaster , which is also provided for in the aforementioned Regulation and which allows mobilisation of the Fund for Romania .
As a Polish MEP , I represent a region that was also affected by a natural disaster , namely a tornado in the Silesia Province .
Fortunately , that disaster did not have the same destructive power or scale .
Nonetheless , I fully endorse this tangible evidence of European solidarity .
I voted in favour of this report as it will help mobilise the Solidarity Fund much more quickly .
In 2006 , the payment made by the European Union via the Solidarity Fund in aid to Romania after the floods in April and August was delayed by a year .
I am pleased to note that the procedures have been improved and facilitate the EU 's prompt intervention in countries which have been affected by a major natural or extraordinary disaster .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted in favour of Mr Böge 's report on mobilisation of the European Union Solidarity Fund .
I agree that the eligibility criteria governing mobilisation of the Fund were met in the case of the application submitted by Romania following the floods that hit the country in July .
The floods in fact caused serious damage to the landscape and to the people living in the five regions affected .
I therefore feel that it is only right that the Fund should be mobilised , not least because the amount in question falls within the annual limit laid down in the Interinstitutional Agreement of May 2006 .
I voted in favour of the report drafted by Jutta Haug ( Germany ) as it requests the mobilisation of EUR 11.8 million from the EU Solidarity Fund ( EUSF ) to help the victims of the floods which hit Romania in July 2008 .
This gesture is the EU 's response to the request for assistance made by Romania .
The application relates to five counties ( Maramureş , Suceava , Botoşani , Iaşi and Neamţ ) .
241 locations in Romania , with a total population of 1.6 million inhabitants , suffered directly as a result of the disaster , which partially or totally destroyed houses and crops .
I voted thinking about the people who lost their homes , belongings , animals and even family members in the floods .
Gheorghe Flutur , Chairman of Suceava County Council , pleaded their case in Brussels at the European Parliament .
I believe that Romania needs a larger sum to repair the damage caused by flooding , but the EU 's assistance is necessary and welcome .
The first amending budget for 2009 relates to the mobilisation of the EU Solidarity Fund for Romania , following the floods that hit that country in July 2008 .


Faced with direct damage calculated at around EUR 471.4 million , it is ( only now ) planned to mobilise just EUR 11.8 million under this Fund , which once again clearly shows the urgent need for its revision .
The objective of this Fund is to enable the Community to respond in a rapid , efficient and flexible manner to ' emergency situations ' in the various Member States .
That is why , despite all the inadequacies , we support its mobilisation for Romania .
However , the EUR 11.8 million allocated will be deducted from the budget line for the European Regional Development Fund ( Convergence objective ) .
In other words , the ' solidarity ' offered to Romania is being financed from funds intended for the least economically developed countries and regions , including Romania itself !
This is what can be termed as solidarity between the ' poor ' or , in other words , between the so-called ' cohesion countries ' / convergence regions ...
We disagree with ' cohesion ' funds being used - all the more so at a time of worsening socio-economic crisis - when other funds are available , such as those intended for the militarisation of the EU .
I voted in favour of the report on the mobilisation of the European Union Solidarity Fund for Romania as I feel that the financial aid given to our country provides important , necessary support for the locations hit by flash floods in July last year .
The north-eastern part of Romania was severely affected .
214 locations and more than 1.6 million people suffered directly as a result of the disaster .
The European Commission made a financial contribution of EUR 11.8 million to support the investments made in repairing the transport and drainage infrastructure , reinforcing river beds and building dams to prevent natural disasters of this kind in the future .
I think that early detection of the causes which result in natural disasters of this magnitude or even more serious ones is the most important step towards protecting Europe 's citizens .
Bearing in mind the climate change we are facing , I support the introduction of instruments for monitoring the environmental factors in each region separately , along with the allocation of an adequate budget for this .
The zones of convergence are most exposed to the risk of being hit by natural disasters .
This means that particular attention must be focused on these aspects in order to implement a policy of economic , social and territorial cohesion .
The areas susceptible to the effects of climate change are mainly the following : water resources , agriculture , energy , forestry and biodiversity , and last but not least , the population 's health .
The extreme weather phenomena witnessed in Romania in recent years have caused floods and drought and have resulted in the need to tackle the issue of climate change with the utmost seriousness , expertise and responsibility .
As a social democrat , I voted for this report because the EUR 11.8 million allocated through the budget adjustment supports Romania in its effort to adapt to climate change in order to eliminate the effects of the floods by carrying out local protection work ( protecting populated settlements , river basin planning through works for improving streams and increasing forested areas ) and , last but not least , by involving the population and educating them about appropriate behaviour before , during and after the floods .
I voted in favour of the report on draft amending budget No 1 / 2009 of the European Union for the financial year 2009 .
The aim of the report is to mobilise EUR 11.8 million in commitment and payment appropriations from the EU Solidarity Fund relating to the effects of the floods which hit Romania in July 2008 .
I support the European Commission 's initiative whereby the EU is showing solidarity with Suceava , Iaşi , Neamţ , Botoşani and Maramureş counties which suffered as a result of the floods in July 2008 .
By means of today 's vote , the European Parliament plenary session is endorsing the decision of the Committee on Budgets taken on 24 February 2009 .
During the relevant session , Gheorghe Flutur , Chairman of Suceava County Council , presented the situation in his region affected by floods , supporting the request for funds with pictures and the statistics for the damage resulting from the natural disasters which hit the area .
He indicated that warnings were sent and mentioned that , together with the authorities in the Ukrainian region of Chernivtsi , it was agreed to set up a rapid alert system in the event of disasters , along with other cross-border cooperation programmes for dealing with emergency situations due to be implemented as a continuation of this project .
I voted in favour of Mrs Haug 's report on the amending budget for the financial year 2009 , which takes account of the serious damage caused by the floods that hit Romania in July 2008 .
I have already expressed my support for Mr Böge 's report on mobilisation of the European Union Solidarity Fund in this particular case , and I wish to confirm here my support for the measure - provided that it focuses - as stipulated in the Interinstitutional Agreement of 2006 , on the swift and effective restoration of decent living conditions in the regions affected by the natural disaster , and not on the payment of compensation for damages suffered by private individuals .

I voted in favour of the motion for a European Parliament resolution on draft amending budget No 1 / 2009 of the European Union for the financial year 2009 ( 6952 / 2009 - C6 0075 / 2009 - 2009 / 2008 ( BUD ) ) because its purpose is to mobilise EUR 11.8 million in commitment and payment appropriations from the EU Solidarity Fund relating to the effects of the floods which hit Romania in July 2008 .
in writing . - Malta is one of the main EU states with a substantial tonnage on its register books .
On the other hand , it discharges its obligations as a flag state , in accordance with international conventions .
The thee main obligations are to : ( a ) apply the provisions of the Flag State Code ; ( b ) take the necessary measures for an independent auditing of their administration at least once every five years , in accordance with the rules of the IMO ; ( c ) take the necessary measures with regard to the inspection and survey of ships and the issue of statutory certificates and exemption certificates as provided for by the international conventions .
A new requirement is that , prior to allowing the operation of a ship which has been granted the right to fly its flag , the Member State concerned shall take the appropriate measures to ensure that the ship in question complies with the applicable international rules and regulations and , in particular , the safety records of the ship .
in writing . - This legislation will reinforce existing EU safety legislation and transpose major international instruments into Community law .
I support this legislation because it recognises the need to closely supervise classification societies , which perform vital tasks in maintaining safety at sea , because of the major concentration of power they hold .
Eight legislative texts making up a maritime package have just been adopted in the European Parliament .
We welcome this because the package covers not only passenger compensation , but also inspections , State inspection of ports , investigations into transport accidents and the choice of the authority able to decide on the place of refuge for vessels in distress .
The ball is now in the Member States ' court because it is not enough to legislate : this legislation needs to be transposed into their national laws .
The first test will be to monitor the flags of convenience belonging to European countries .
These flags are used to bypass the union , tax , recruitment , safety and environmental regulations of the countries to which the vessels really belong .
Cyprus and Malta are still today among the top five flags of convenience in terms of the number of vessels lost .
It is unfortunately notable that , despite the efforts made since the oil tankers Prestige and Erika sank , the situation has hardly improved .
Substandard vessels sailing under flags of convenience are slashing transport prices .
The so-called rich countries are responding by creating their own ( mark II ) flag to combat the loss of freight .
In reality , if we are truly to get rid of these floating wrecks , the European Union must set about fighting ultra-liberalism .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted in favour of Mr de Grandes Pascual 's report on common rules and standards for ship inspection and survey organisations .
I have already explained the reasons prompting me to support the work carried out by the rapporteur in relation to the third maritime package , and the advantages that the planned measures could bring in terms of maritime transport safety and improvements to the existing regulations .
As such , I confirm my vote in favour .
I voted for adoption of the Report on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on port State control ( recast ) .
I agree with the objectives of the 3rd Maritime Package .
The seven proposals of the package aim to prevent accidents by improving the quality of European flags , reviewing the legislation on port state control and vessel traffic monitoring and by improving the rules relating to classification societies .
They also aim to ensure an effective response in case of an accident by developing a harmonised framework for accident investigation , introducing rules on compensation for passengers in case of an accident and by introducing rules on shipowners ' liability coupled with a mandatory insurance scheme .
I should like to express my support for the agreement which has been reached , and in particular for these points : extension of scope to include also vessels calling at anchorages , increased frequency of inspection of vessels , and permanent banning of vessels under certain conditions .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted in favour of Mrs Vlasto 's report on port State control , which forms part of the third maritime package .
I agree with the part of the agreement reached about extending the scope of the directive to include vessels that call at anchorages and with that part about increasing the inspection rate of vessels in the highest risk category .
On this point , I refer to the need for assessments of such risk to be as accurate and independent as possible .
I also agree that , under certain conditions , vessels should be refused access permanently , in order to guarantee adequate safety levels for operators and passengers .
in writing . - We welcome the shift in emphasis in this resolution , and some of the positive proposals in relation to regulation of the financial sector , innovation , energy efficiency and investment , as well as acknowledgement of the need to protect employment , create jobs , combat poverty and focus on the most vulnerable groups in society .
However , the logic of the Lisbon Strategy is flawed and needs to be fundamentally revised , particularly in light of the new economic situation .
In addition , three are a number of specific proposals contained in the resolution which are short-sighted and counter-productive , such as the insistence on deregulation and on flexible employment practices leading to a weakening of workers rights .
For these reasons , we abstained in the final vote on this report .
I voted in favour of adoption of the Report on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 2002 / 59 / EC establishing a Community vessel traffic monitoring and information system .
I agree with the objectives of the 3rd Maritime Package .
The seven proposals of the package aim to prevent accidents by improving the quality of European flags , reviewing the legislation on port state control and vessel traffic monitoring and by improving the rules relating to classification societies .
They also aim to ensure an effective response in case of an accident by developing a harmonised framework for accident investigation , introducing rules on compensation for passengers in case of an accident and by introducing rules on shipowners ' liability coupled with a mandatory insurance scheme .
As shadow rapporteur for Mr Sterckx 's report , I would like to express my full support for the document put to the vote .
in writing . - ( IT ) I believe that the maritime package should be considered globally and as a whole , in line with the approach Parliament has always taken when dealing with its individual parts .
I therefore voted in favour of Mr Sterckx 's report on establishing a Community vessel traffic monitoring and information system , since this system fits into a wider context aimed at improving the safety of maritime traffic and making it easier to manage , something which I have already endorsed on many occasions .
In the case in point , applying technology for the monitoring of ships would help make it easier to decide who is liable in the event of accidents and to improve the procedures for accommodating ships in ' places of refuge ' .
For this reason , I feel able to endorse the report by voting in favour .
I voted in favour of this report by the Czech Member of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , Jaromír Kohlíček , on the investigation of accidents in the maritime transport sector .
This text emphasises the need to draw up , at European level , clear and binding guidelines to ensure that accidents at sea are monitored properly .
It addresses the concerns that followed the sinking of the Erika oil tanker off the French coast .
It is in order to prevent a repeat of such cases of mismanagement that the European Union has decided to impose a strict framework that deals with all the technical aspects and all the processes to be followed in the event of an accident : methodology of the investigations , a European database for marine casualties , safety recommendations , and so on .
I share the view that it is crucial to make the European maritime area one of the safest and most exemplary maritime areas in the world .
This is what the ' Erika III ' maritime package , of which the report forms part , is working towards .
This is a real breakthrough for the maritime sector , and also for the environment , which is often a secondary victim of disrespectful conduct at sea .
I voted in favour of adoption of the Report on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing the fundamental principles governing the investigation of accidents in the maritime transport sector and amending Directives 1999 / 35 / EC and 2002 / 59 / EC .
I agree with the objectives of the 3rd Maritime Package .
The seven proposals of the package aim at preventing accidents by improving the quality of European flags , reviewing the legislation on port state control and vessel traffic monitoring and by improving the rules relating to classification societies .
They also aim to ensure an effective response in case of an accident by developing a harmonised framework for accident investigation , introducing rules on compensation for passengers in case of an accident and by introducing rules on shipowners ' liability coupled with a mandatory insurance scheme .
I should like to express my support for the agreement which has been reached and , in particular , for these points : the methodology for investigating accidents , a decision on the investigation , fair treatment of seafarers , and protection of witnesses / confidentiality of records .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted in favour of Mr Kohlíček 's report on the investigation of accidents in the maritime transport sector .
All too often , it is difficult to decide who is liable in the event of minor or serious accidents at sea .
I am thinking of the case of the investigations that followed the real natural disaster caused by the accident involving the Prestige oil tanker and of many others that unfortunately continue to occur .
Maritime transport deserves special attention because , aside from being the most economical in relative terms , it is one of the most dangerous in terms of the environmental consequences of an accident .
I believe it is therefore necessary to establish clear and binding guidelines on how to carry out technical investigations into shipping accidents and to provide feedback to prevent accidents in the future .
This is why I voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted in favour of Mr Costa 's report on the liability of carriers of passengers by sea in the event of accidents .
I agree with him that it is highly appropriate for the provisions of the Athens Convention of 1974 relating to the Carriage of Passengers and their Luggage by Sea to be incorporated into European law , since the national differences that still exist do not make it possible to guarantee an adequate level of liability and mandatory insurance in the event of accidents involving passengers .
Although this does not happen for other means of transport , I believe that the legislation should be fit for purpose in the case of maritime transport as well .
in writing . - ( IT ) I intend to vote in favour of Mr Savary 's report on the insurance of shipowners for maritime claims since I agree with the recommendations made by the rapporteur concerning the need to ensure that the obligation to provide insurance is fulfilled by shipowners entering waters under the jurisdiction of any Member State , including by imposing penalties where a ship is found not to be carrying a certificate on board , should such a finding be made .
I agree that the amount of insurance should be set at the ceilings laid down by the LLMC Convention of 1996 , which guarantees that the victims of accidents at sea are properly compensated .
I therefore support the rapporteur 's recommendation to approve the draft recommendation agreed with the Council .
in writing . - ( IT ) I am favour of Mr Fernandes 's report on compliance with flag State requirements .
It demonstrates Parliament 's determination to maintain the integrity of the third maritime package when faced with interruptions in the Council 's work on certain aspects , such as the subject of this recommendation .
For this reason , I support the work done by Mr Fernandes and the members of the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
I believe that the added value of the political agreement reached should be seen as important , above all since it calls on the Member States to introduce a quality management system for their maritime authorities and to comply with international rules in this area , the most important of which being those resulting from the International Maritime Organisation conventions .
Aside from bringing advantages in terms of European flag quality and safety , the proposal will make it possible to improve competition conditions within the Community , and I therefore believe that it should be supported .
The countries of Europe must work together to achieve the environmental aims of the Union .
However , to ensure that the EU 's environmental policy is sustainable , the principles of the EU and the different characteristics and needs of each Member State must be included .
The Eurovignette report contradicts these aims in the case of the peripheral Member States of the European Union .
The Eurovignette recommendations would penalise peripheral countries and the countries at the centre of Europe would benefit greatly .
In my opinion , the Eurovignette recommendations contradict the principles of the Single Market and I think that it is discrimination against certain countries on the basis of geography .
Ireland is an island that is situated at the edge of Europe .
Lorries from other countries will not be coming through Ireland , but our heavy goods vehicles will have to pay a fee in many countries throughout Europe .
There is no way around this : we must carry on business , we must export and import our goods .
Under the Eurovignette proposal , countries that are situated at the centre of Europe will have competitive advantages as they will not have to pay the same fees .
It is not right or fair to carry out discrimination of this kind based on the geographical location of any country .
in writing . - The Eurovignette Directive was created to harmonise levy systems on European roads - including vehicle taxes , tolls and charges relating to the use of road infrastructure and establish fair mechanisms for charging infrastructure costs to hauliers .
The recent revision of the directive from the Commission proposes additional amendments to the Directive ; such as cost assessment for the environmental impact of HGVs ( Heavy Goods Vehicles ) in terms of noise pollution , congestion and air pollution .
Countries with large amounts of transit traffic hold considerably different opinions to more peripheral countries , like my own , which depend on large volumes of traffic for importation and exportation of goods .
While , in principle , these are fair , it should be implemented in a gradual and equitable manner .
These are issues that we cannot afford to ignore .
HGVs are frequently subject to time constraints and external timetables , like those of ferry operators .
The construction of a port tunnel in Dublin city has done much to reduce the need for HGVs to be in the city centre , and has increased the quality of air and reduced noise pollution .
This was a worthwhile investment .
I am not convinced of the need to create a European independent authority to fix toll levels , and would argue that this falls under the domain of subsidiarity .
I voted in favour of the El Khadraoui report on the charging of heavy goods vehicles for the use of certain infrastructures .
It is important to give the Member States the opportunity to apply ' smarter ' payments for the road haulage sector to cover the external costs and thus encourage more sustainable behaviour .
Whilst air and noise pollution must be taken into account , the same is not true of congestion , which is caused not only by road haulage .
Such a charge would be discriminatory , since private cars are also responsible for congestion .
Furthermore , this sector is paying the consequences of the economic crisis through the price of oil and the costs of delivering goods .
SMEs in the road transport sector will not be able to bear these additional costs in the midst of this economic crisis .
More should be done to adapt road infrastructure to the increase in traffic but , above all , a commitment should be made to sustainable transport , with priority given to low carbon-emitting modes of transport .
As an elected representative of the Rhône-Alpes region , I can testify to the failure of many road sectors in the Rhône Valley to adapt .
During today 's vote , the European Parliament adopted a draft directive concerning Eurovignettes , which makes it possible for Member States to impose charges for the use of road infrastructure by heavy good vehicles .
In the final vote , I voted against adoption of the directive .
I think that introduction of the provisions of this directive will increase costs incurred by enterprises which provide transport services .
These costs might be particularly detrimental to small and medium-sized enterprises , which do not have sufficient financial means available to allow them to replace their fleets .
Furthermore , such provisions may also cause difficulties for firms during the present financial crisis , when many firms are facing increased difficulty in obtaining credit .
We should certainly seek ways to enable the use of more environmentally-friendly vehicles on our roads . We should not , however , use methods which are , in fact , another way of taxing enterprises .
in writing . - On behalf of my Fine Gael colleagues in the Parliament I would like to clarify that we did not vote in support of the El Khadraoui report on the charging of HGVs , due to concerns over the legal basis for the proposal , concerns regarding the compulsory use of electronic tolling and the provision for earmarking of revenue .
We fully support the principles behind the proposal , but believe the report 's application of the principle is flawed .
in writing . - Not only did I vote against this report , but I also consider it dangerous to the European common market .
This is mainly because of its unfair character and the fact it acts like a concealed tax .
Moreover , it will not contribute to environmental protection .
During this time of financial crisis , it is kind of absurd .
This type of regulation shows that the EU is turning its back on its citizens .
I am voting in favour of the reasonable compromise on the new Eurovignette .
Together with the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , I have been fighting for years - in the face of huge opposition from parts of the conservative Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats - to have the external costs ( noise , congestion , pollution ) included in the calculation of tolls , in order to transfer the financial burden from the taxpayer to the polluter , in other words , the heavy goods traffic .
I am opposed to the probable result of the compromise on the congestion costs because , as a result of the majority situation , it was only possible to ensure that they were recognised as external costs on condition that this applied not only to heavy goods traffic but to all causes of congestion , including cars .
It is likely that CO2 will also not be included in the calculation because of the incomprehensible opposition of the PPE-DE .
The amendment which I submitted to the committee , in which I asked for minimum tolls on all parts of the Trans-European Transport Network , did not receive a majority of the votes .
I will introduce this proposal again during further discussions on this subject .
One particularly positive feature for Austria is the fact that the external costs and the so-called Alpine surcharge ( a higher toll in Alpine regions ) will probably not be offset .
This means that Austria can charge a higher toll in sensitive Alpine regions and can still charge for the external costs as well .
As a result , a higher Brenner toll will be possible .
in writing . - I support this report which should encourage the shift of freight from the road onto rail .
The report is part of a package of initiatives aimed at making transport more sustainable , and ensuring that users will only have to pay the transport costs directly related to their use of that particular mode of transport .
Tolls will be charged for local noise pollution , local air pollution as well as infrastructure damage / costs .
This will create a fairer system of the ' polluter pays ' principle , with safeguards built in to ensure market transparency and avoid discrimination .
in writing . - ( DE ) Heavy goods traffic in Europe has increased since the EU expansion to the East and this is particularly noticeable in many Member States , including Austria .
Now we have the problem that some factors cause high external costs which the public has to pay .
Heavy goods transport throughout Europe is one of these factors and another is nuclear power stations .
If a toll is imposed on heavy goods vehicles without , at the same time , developing the railways and removing cross-border obstacles to rail transport , then we will have simply voted for more expensive goods and there will be no improvement in people 's health and no reduction in pollution .
I believe it is counterproductive to penalise someone who is stuck in congestion .
This will probably result in traffic moving back to the small villages and towns , which is something that we do not want .
In the long term , the only option is to develop the infrastructure and this means that we need to make local public transport more attractive .
The Eurovignette under consideration today seems to represent a reasonable compromise which is why I have voted in favour of it .
Madam President , environmental protection and road safety , the aims behind the draft directive in question , represent two goals that the European Union should pursue with determination to achieve a transport policy more mindful of the expectations and rights of its citizens .
A number of amendments to the 1999 EC directive providing for taxation of the heavy goods vehicles that use certain roads are therefore welcome .
These kinds of steps forward must be reasonable and gradual in order to prevent the collapse of an important sector of the economy in the current serious economic crisis , a sector almost exclusively based on small and medium-sized enterprises .
Moreover , Europe has not yet created a complete and effective intermodal system that would ensure a significant transition of freight transport towards less polluting sectors .
Under these circumstances and because of its characteristics and efficiency , road transport is the most widely used system in the world of manufacturing .
With my vote today , I therefore wished to emphasise the importance of taking gradual but significant , not merely symbolic , steps towards safer and greener road transport , without illogical and counterproductive penalties for the industry .
I support the work done by Mr El Khadraoui on the charging of heavy goods vehicles for the use of certain infrastructures , and I have therefore voted in favour of his report .
While I do not agree on some points such as including or not including certain external costs in the charge , I do agree with the ' polluter pays ' principle .
Mr El Khadraoui 's excellent work highlights the need to allocate the revenue generated from the charge to the transport sector in its entirety .
Lastly , I believe that the revenue generated by charging external costs must not end up being another form of taxation .
The proposal on which we are voting today is a revision and extension of the previous Eurovignette Directive and stipulates the tolling rules for roads .
According to the proposals adopted , Member States can , from now on , pass on the cost of air pollution , noise and traffic jams to lorries .
This is good news for the taxpayer .
At the moment , we are all still paying for the damage caused by air pollution .
Soon , it will be the polluter who pays .
Moreover , in this way , we encourage transport companies to invest in cleaner lorries .
I have therefore voted in favour of this proposal , not least because the congestion charge was included as an additional external cost for mountainous regions .
Traffic jams are a major contributor to air pollution , noise pollution and fuel waste .
If we could use the proceeds from this levy to invest in transport by rail or water , we would address both the traffic jam problem and climate change .
In addition , delays as a result of traffic jams cause major economic damage in the transport sector .
Unfortunately , climate costs as a result of the high volume of freight traffic were not included , even though the transport sector is a major culprit in emissions .
Madam President , I voted for the report .
Transparency is not just a symbol but a principle on which all institutional procedures should be based .
Citizens and elective bodies must be assured the greatest possible access to documents held by the European institutions in order to enable them to participate effectively in the political process and to hold the public authorities to account for their actions .
For this reason I argued strongly in the past for the publication of parliamentary attendance .
Despite the progress made by the European institutions on openness and transparency , the situation cannot exactly be described as perfect and this recasting of Regulation ( EEC ) No 1049 / 2001 regarding public access to documents held by the European institutions should be seen as another step towards achieving an administrative environment where the availability of , and ease of access to , information are the rule rather than the exception .
To conclude I would like to point out the great achievement recently accomplished : the European Parliament now uses no fewer than 23 official languages and European Community documents are available in all of these .
This represents a guarantee of democracy .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Conservatives have today voted in favour of Mr Cashman 's report on the revision of the Public Access Regulation No 1049 / 2001 so as to work towards increased transparency within the European institutions .
As regards Amendments 61 and 103 relating to Article 5 , we believe that conciliation documents from the third reading should be made accessible immediately after the final conciliation meeting has ended , in contrast to the documents that are examined in the negotiations themselves .
Documents from trilogues in the first and second readings should be fully accessible throughout the whole processes .
in writing . - I very much regret that into procedures intended to develop the principle that the public has a right to see EU documents , the Parliament has inserted emphasis that such rules shall not apply to MEPs .
It is argued that this just restates rules already enshrined in the Members ' Statute , but to many people this will just look like another case of ' one rule for them and another for us ' , and I am glad that the Liberal Democrat group did not support the amendments tabled by Mr Nassauer .
It is particularly important that details of all payments of expenses made to MEPs by Parliament be made publicly available .
Our own auditors have revealed that some of the Parliament 's Members are very definitely not ' honourable ' , in fact , some of them are cheats and rogues .
The principle of full transparency is one that needs to be established at the earliest possible date if Europe 's citizens are to have confidence in this institution .
I voted in favour of Mr Cashman 's report regarding access to European Parliament , Council and Commission documents .
I support his commendable initiative , which is designed to bridge the gap between the common rules on ' classified information ' ( the so-called sensitive documents cited in the current Regulation No 1049 / 2001 ) , by maintaining at regulation level some good principles taken from the internal security rules of the Council and Commission as far as these principles can also be applicable to a parliamentary body .
Lastly , I support Mr Cashman 's general aim , which is to amend this regulation in order to increase transparency without making this instrument too specific and difficult to implement .
There is no doubt that the 2001 regulation brought about greater transparency for citizens by granting the public access to documents of the European institutions .
It is good to revisit this regulation after seven years of practical experience .
What can we see ?
Back in 2006 , the European Parliament made many proposals to change the regulation with a view to improving transparency even more , but the Commission failed to give this any serious consideration .
What is more , the Commission proposal to review the 2001 regulation that is now before us contains stricter rules , which means less transparency .
Accordingly , documents on trade negotiations are deemed confidential .
Ultimately , this is a choice between the devil and the deep-blue sea .
I therefore support the Cashman report , because , even though it is incomplete , it is , all in all , an improvement on the present Commission proposal .
A more radical approach , however , with a total rejection of the Commission proposals would have been preferable because then , the Commission would have been forced to come up with a new and better proposal , which would only benefit transparency of the European institutions and really would bridge the notorious chasm between the EU institutions and the citizen .
Madam President , as we know , the current economic and financial crisis is affecting Europe .
I am very concerned for my country , Italy .
The crisis means redundancies , and families , who have less and less money , are spending less and less .
Therefore we need strong intervention .
This crisis appears to be particularly serious , but how deep it goes and how long it lasts will depend on what we do .
We must join forces : a coordinated European approach is crucial .
Now , more than ever , we can see the pressing need to implement reforms rigorously in order to create quality jobs and welfare for European citizens .
We must reverse the trend towards radical restructuring , prevent job losses and stave off further pressure to cut salaries and social security payments .
We must rise to the challenges associated with the rise in unemployment and social exclusion .
Furthermore , we need to improve the coordination of efforts , both on the part of the EU and the Member States , but it is equally important that the measures adopted within the framework of the economic recovery plan to address the crisis in the short term are consistent with the Community 's long-term goals set out in the Lisbon Strategy .
That is why I voted in favour of the report .
It is remarkable that this report should admit several failures by the European Union on social issues .
There is firstly the admission that the Lisbon Strategy objectives will not be achieved in 2010 .
Then , there are some interesting figures on the growing rate of unemployment , which rose from 7 % in 2008 to 8.7 % in 2009 and , more specifically , from 7.5 % to 9.2 % in the eurozone .
In other words , there is a forecast loss of 3.5 million jobs .
This painful observation should make the pro-Europeans think about the radical reforms needed at Member State level to limit as much as possible the disastrous consequences of the economic and financial crisis , a crisis which originated in the ultra-liberalism and globalisation that are so dear to Brussels .
To this end , it is not credible to pursue a policy such as this aimed at maintaining guidelines for the Member States ' employment policies .
On the contrary , we need to call into question this authoritarian logic and give the States back control of their economic and financial resources , whilst introducing national and Community preference and protection , which would enable the recovery of the internal market and a return to growth .
The full impact of the financial crisis which started in the US is now being felt in the real economy .
The experts do not agree on the best response to this crisis and the best way of stimulating the economy in order to keep the unemployment figures in check .
However , even before the financial crisis , the situation on the labour market did not look at all bright .
More and more people were being forced into part-time and short-time work and state-supported jobs were being constantly cut back .
For some time , increasing numbers of people have been living below the poverty line , despite being in work .
In light of the gloomy forecasts about the economy , it is likely that the number of people in full-time employment will continue to fall and , at some point , that part-time workers will also lose their jobs .
We must do everything we can to avoid mass unemployment .
It is by no means certain that the measures presented in this report are suitable or satisfactory in this respect .
For this reason , I have voted against the report .
I voted against Mr Andersson 's report .
Although , in fact , on the one hand , I believe that we must join forces to reverse the trend towards radical restructuring , to prevent job losses and to stop further cuts in wages and social security benefits , on the other hand , I feel that the measures laid down by the Commission are , for the most part , not enough to guarantee sufficient cover and protection for the European Union 's social and employment structure .
The current economic crisis has , and will have in the near future too , repercussions on the employment market .
I voted in favour of the draft European Parliament legislative resolution on guidelines for the employment policies of the Member States because I join the rapporteur in supporting the Commission 's position , which proposed ( as set out in the Annex to Council Decision 2008 / 618 / EC of 15 July 2008 ) that employment policies are maintained for 2009 .
According to the Commission , this approach will create a sound framework capable of tackling the economic and financial crisis as well as continuing structural reform .
The current crisis is more than just an economic and financial crisis .
It is , above all , a crisis of confidence .
Its most dramatic sign is the high level of unemployment .
However , unemployment does not only mean a loss of income , but also a loss of confidence in ourselves and in others .
To restore this confidence , we need to set out a very clear medium-term strategy .
In this respect , the role of political leaders is decisive , due to the signals and messages that they convey .
Prudence , security , speaking the truth , and resisting easy propaganda on impracticable targets and self-praise are some of the good practices that could help restore confidence .
On the other hand , we need to create jobs and , to do this , the conditions must exist for investment by companies .
We must act quickly because , if nothing is done in this respect , the financing problems being faced by those countries with the largest deficits in the eurozone will lead to the deepening of the recession , a continual rise in unemployment and the loss of income for companies and families .
That is why I supported Mr Andersson 's report , which proposes maintaining guidelines for employment policies in 2009 .
A further extension or , to put it another way , a further postponement of the enshrined right of all Members to speak in Parliament in their own language and for all documents to be drawn up in the official languages is neither comprehensible nor acceptable .
A number of years have already passed since the accession of certain countries for which the limitation on the use of their language remains , in particular , Ireland and the Czech Republic , without the required linguists having been found .
The justification put forward is vague and inconsistent , but financial priority has not been given to their training , which leads us to distrust the intentions .
We cannot accept any threat to the inalienable right to cultural and linguistic diversity in the EU , which would also affect Portuguese .
We cannot accept this discrimination .
Once again , we state our determination to protect the cultural identity of each Member State and of all national languages as working languages .
In this respect , our vote can only be against this decision .
Ultimately , this marks the transposition to the cultural and linguistic level of the EU 's budgetary policies , which give priority to investment in arms instead of valuing culture and protecting employment .
I voted in favour of the Bureau 's proposal for a decision extending the applicability of Rule 139 of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure until the end of the seventh parliamentary term .
Madam President , I voted for the report .
I am very concerned about the recent events in Italy .
There is a ' witch hunt ' atmosphere developing with regard to Romanian citizens and the Roma , with many punitive expeditions .
The Italian Government is engaged in an obsessive security campaign .
Adopting extreme measures with regard to Roma communities could however exacerbate the already terrible situation for these minorities and undermine opportunities for integration and social inclusion .
We must not forget that , under the rule of law , criminal liability is individual and cannot be attributed to collective groups .
To deviate from this principle would set a dangerous precedent that would lead to the criminalisation of entire ethnic groups or particular nationalities of migrants .
Certainly , immigration is a matter requiring European coordination in order to strengthen the judicial and police tools able to tackle organised crime .
This is not enough , however .
It is important to adopt clear employment policies for disadvantaged groups , including the Roma labour force , establishing support measures aimed at facilitating their progressive integration into the labour market and paying greater attention to education policies for young people .
in writing . - ( SV ) The EU is a union of values and therefore responsible for maintaining respect for human rights within its borders .
It also therefore has a part to play , via its Member States , in recognising the vulnerable situation of the Roma and in facilitating their integration into society .
We have therefore voted in favour of this report .
in writing . - ( SV ) We have today voted in favour of the own-initiative report by Mrs Kósáné Kovács on the social situation of the Roma and their improved access to the labour market in the EU .
The report addresses a very serious problem and clearly indicates the need for action to get to grips with the widespread exclusion that affects many Roma today .
We welcome cooperation between Member States in dealing with these huge problems .
However , we would like to point out that we do not see various different separate solutions as the way forward in reducing this exclusion .
Special tax levels for employers who employ Roma women and other similar measures are more likely to have the effect of reinforcing the exclusion and counteracting integration into the rest of society .
The report from the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs is welcome as it highlights a new aspect to the Roma inclusion strategy , devised , starting in 2005 , over a series of European Parliament resolutions .
The Roma 's current situation shows that sufficient progress has not been made in integrating the Roma since the Commission launched its first appeal to this effect in 2005 .
The report proposes important directives for action regarding the policy for promoting education among the Roma and encouraging positive discrimination on the labour market .
Support for Roma integration into the labour market through funding measures for training and retraining , measures to promote independent activities among Roma , offering concessionary credits and public grants , as well as devising innovative forms of agricultural work , are all objectives which the EU has a duty to coordinate .
Creating an EU-level expert group , including representatives of the Roma , could also help coordinate Member States ' Roma strategy and the use of the Structural and Cohesion Funds .
I expect these suggestions to motivate the European Commission sufficiently to come up with legislative proposals aimed at achieving tangible results in this area .
in writing . - Roma people represent the biggest minority in the European Union and their integration into European society is one of the biggest challenges the EU will face in the coming decade .
The Roma , comprising approximately 10-12 million people , have no chance of escaping from poverty and exclusion .
Such a degree of social disadvantage hampers the attainment of a basic level of human dignity and equal opportunities for the Roma .
I welcome this report which highlights the need to improve conditions for all Europeans , regardless of race .
Guaranteeing equal opportunities to the Roma minority in the EU is the right approach in order to avoid social exclusion and respect this community 's rights .
This is why I voted in favour of Mrs Kovács 's report which I regard as being very helpful .
However , I would like to make a couple of clarifications about my position on this matter .
Given that this minority is inherently transnational , an effective approach on Roma 's rights can only be handled at European level .
For this reason , I have suggested the creation of a European agency for Roma , with the role of coordinating at European level policies targeted at this minority .
Secondly , support for the Roma minority 's integration cannot be given through redistributive fiscal measures as they cannot resolve the structural problems affecting Roma communities .
The ideal way of supporting this minority must be geared towards education programmes , whose role is to help these communities acquire the skills required to access the labour market .
On the other hand , a European policy for the Roma minority must be aimed at promoting tolerance and acceptance of cultural differences , with the focus on peaceful coexistence within the limits stipulated by the laws of the relevant state and EU regulations .
I voted against Mrs Kósáné Kovács 's report on the social situation of the Roma and their improved access to the labour market in the EU .
I firmly believe that this approach creates another form of fundamental discrimination in relation to the Roma .
The Roma must , in fact , be treated like all other citizens , without their enjoying excessive benefits and concessions that are to the detriment of other European citizens , who have the same rights ( and , above all , duties ) as that population .
The Roma community is Europe 's largest and most disadvantaged minority group .
Anyone who follows the situation closely knows that a coordinated approach is needed to improve their working and living conditions .
I am delighted that the present report calls for appropriate training courses that can enhance the chances of the Roma within the labour market .
In addition , the human and social capital must be reinforced by focusing from the outset on their integration in European society .
It is to be welcomed that a European group of experts , with representatives from the Roma community , is being set up .
Equally , the proposals to set up partnerships , deploy sufficient financial means and follow all this via a database are excellent .
I support this report because it suggests ways in which we can improve the situation of the Roma community .
Since the alternative resolution proposed by the Socialist Group in the European Parliament is , unfortunately , too weak , I shall not be endorsing it .
Oil demand management must not be limited to the EU alone .
In percentage terms , the amount of global oil consumed by the EU will gradually decrease in the coming years .
The huge growth in demand beyond the EU 's borders alone will determine this .
Therefore , from the point of view of the security of energy supply in the EU , it will be very important to reduce the growth in demand at global level as well , but without endangering the development goals of third countries or the EU itself .
The promotion of market economy price setting mechanisms in third countries is also very important - for example , after eliminating state fuel subsidies .
All of these measures require investment .
Investment is only possible when there is sufficient capital and there is a hope of some profit .
Therefore , it is essential to overcome the current financial crisis , which may turn into an economic crisis , as quickly as possible .
In the last decade , there has been an increase in the number of difficulties surrounding the future security of oil supply in the EU .
However , if we succeed in encouraging political will and international coordination , cooperation and the creation of innovations , they may be overcome , purposefully having an impact on both supply and demand .
in writing . - On balance , I can support this own initiative report from my colleague , MEP Reul .
As the past months have shown , the importance of energy security has never been as acute .
The cooperation that is necessary from all Member States and the need to take advantage of the stimulus packages currently launched by almost all Member States and the Commission underscore the need for investment in renewable technology to increase our energy security and decrease our CO2 emissions .
Our years of dependence on fossil fuels have left us with two stark conclusions :
1 .
We need to be independent from global geopolitical forces , as the Russian / Ukraine impasse this winter showed and the ravages of OPEC 's pricing policy .
2 .
Our need to meet ever pressing CO2 reduction deadlines continues and should be maintained as a matter of utmost priority .
We cannot shy away from the challenges , both economic and environmental , with which we are currently faced .
I voted against Mr Reul 's report on challenges in relation to the oil supply .
I disagree with the rapporteur , in fact , when he states that , according to various estimates , it will be possible to extract sufficient quantities of oil to meet future demand also , but only by charging consumers more and by improving investment conditions .
Although I support the Commission 's initiatives to prevent oil prices from soaring over the next few years , I do not believe that the situation as a whole has been analysed correctly .
in writing . - The report that MEP Jarzembowski has presented makes the ' greening ' of transport a priority and is an important first step towards a more comprehensive approach making transport more environmentally friendly .
An essential part of the response to climate change is an alteration in our means and methods of transportation , be it in the adoption of advanced hybrid vehicles , in increased green public transportation , or the increased efficiency of other methods of transportation .
The rapporteur has advanced the options of charging Heavy Goods Vehicles ( HGVs ) for the pollution they cause and including noise pollution caused by rail transport under the provisions of the report .
It is important that we consider the needs of peripheral European countries who encounter several geographic barriers that depend on a strong transport network to supply their countries , and for their economic growth .
We must ensure that these measures are applied in an equitable manner .
With these reservations , I am pleased to support the report .
I voted in favour of Mr Jarzembowski 's report on the greening of transport and the internalisation of external costs .
My opinion , which coincides with that of the rapporteur - who has written an excellent report - emphasises the great benefits mobility brings with regard to Europeans ' quality of life , growth and employment within the European Union , socio-economic and territorial cohesion , and trade with non-EU countries , as well as its benefits for the firms and employees involved directly or indirectly in the transport and logistics sector .
From this perspective , I welcome the fact that the Commission , in its communication , has compiled an ' inventory ' of EU measures to date to promote a sustainable transport policy .
This is a small step towards a major objective .
The Commission has published a package of communications about ' making transport greener ' , a ' strategy for internalising external costs ' and ' noise-reducing measures for goods and equipment ' .
It is very positive , to my mind - and is also something that I encourage - that green measures are being worked out in the area of transport .
The Jarzembowski report , however , would weaken the Commission proposals .
This is why the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance have tabled positive amendments , including the request for more co-financing between the EU and the Member States , a kerosene tax for air transport and the uncoupling of an increase in transport from economic growth .
Our amendments were not accepted , however , as a result of which this report has no added value for the Commission proposals .
As such , I have voted against this report .
in writing . - I support measures towards a greening of transport .
This will help us in our fight against climate change .
However , specific measures need to be strengthened and I had to abstain .
in writing . - I fully concur that among the impacts of the economic crisis , the rise of poverty in the EU is the greatest concern .
It is essential to halt the current rise in unemployment in the EU .
I believe that the most efficient way of reducing and preventing poverty is through a strategy based on the goals of full employment , high quality jobs , social inclusion , measures to encourage entrepreneurship and activities to boost the role of SMEs and investments .
In a nutshell , this is the most important part of the preamble to the resolution .
If we fail to stem the rise of poverty in the EU as a result of the existing exceptional circumstances , then the EU will have failed to address the most important issue stemming from this economic and financial calamity .
In the European Union , we have been seeing an increase in levels of poverty , precarious work and inequalities , a situation which may become worse in the current economic and financial crisis , given that the predictions point to a recessionary trend and to an increase in the number of unemployed .
The policies enshrined in the Lisbon Strategy and in the European Employment Strategy have contributed to this situation as they promote financial deregulation , market liberalisation and insecurity in labour relations .
As a result , what was needed was a break with these policies .
However , faced with worsening social and economic conditions , the response ( or lack of response ) from the EU reflects its class choices , insisting on continuing with policies which promote the accumulation of huge profits by the large economic and financial groups , to the detriment of the living conditions of workers and the general population .
What is needed is a reversal in the current macroeconomic policies and the defence of jobs and workers ' rights .
We need an alternative policy that guarantees a fair distribution of income , stimulates economic activity , creates jobs , reinforces the state 's role in the economy , boosts demand , encourages the growth of micro , small and medium-sized enterprises and revives investment , bearing in mind the needs and specific aspects of each Member State .
in writing . - I voted for this report despite my disappointment at Amendment 10 by the Greens calling for the introduction of an EU-wide financial transaction tax .
As President of the Globalisation Intergroup in this Parliament , I strongly support the introduction of a Tobin-type tax to both control financial speculation and raise billions of euros to help alleviate deep poverty in the world amongst the billion plus living on less than a euro a day .
Who can be against such a simple and effective measure ?
The Lisbon Strategy was thought up in a context and for an economic context which is clearly different from the one in which we currently find ourselves .
However , this fact does not mean that all its underlying concepts need to be revised .
A distinction must be made between the exceptional nature of the current circumstances and the policies that should be pursued in order to promote European development and competitiveness in the long term .
However , it is important not to conclude from this distinction that the crisis situation requires measures contrary to good policies .
Quite the contrary .
The response to the current situation , although demanding exceptional measures , must be guided by the ideas of good policies and by opting for investment in innovation and in the competitive capacity of Europe , otherwise we will fail both to respond to the crisis and to prepare the Member States of the European Union for the next phase of the global economy .
After carefully studying the motion for a resolution on the Lisbon Strategy , I decided in the end to abstain and thus not to vote either in favour or against the motion .
in writing . - The financial and resultant economic crisis have dwelt a huge blow to European growth and the stability of the job market .
In these difficult times , our primary aim must be , as this joint resolution says , to protect EU citizens , whether workers , entrepreneurs , householders , from the effects of the crisis .
While the current crisis is undoubtedly devastating , it also offers opportunity : opportunity to change our way of thinking ; opportunity to build a strengthening framework for sustainable growth that can withstand potential shocks ; and opportunity to build a sound economic and social base for the future .
Among the elements of this resolution that particularly appeal are the recognition of the crucial role of small and medium-sized enterprises and the support that needs to be given to them .
Not only do SMEs provide valuable employment , accounting for 80 % of new jobs in the EU in recent years , but they also play a key social role in stimulating local economies , diversifying employment and encouraging entrepreneurship .
Similarly , the emphasis on innovation - especially in the environmental sector - is very welcome and an illustration that the twin goals of energy efficiency and economic stability need by no means be mutually exclusive .
in writing . - The EPLP believes that the Lisbon Strategy remains an important platform for growth and job creation across the EU .
This is still an objective which is achievable , even if the current economic climate damages the true potential .
However , the EPLP does not agree that an EU-wide transaction tax is a necessary vehicle to achieve some of the Lisbon Strategy objectives and did not support this measure .
However , the EPLP could support the main thrust of the approved text and therefore voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - According to the Allianz Group report which was published on Monday , the recession is slowing the EU this year in reaching its goal of becoming the world 's leading knowledge-based economic area .
In order for us to reach the Lisbon targets , we must do all we can , even in these tough times , to meet these goals .
By meeting these goals , we will be able to see our way through the recession , making the EU stronger placed in the future .
We must also keep to the Barcelona targets on childcare .
The resolutions by the political forces of capital conceal the causes and character of the capitalist crisis .
They shift the burden of the crisis on to the workers , who paid for the excessive profits of capital and are now being called upon to pay for the crisis and to save and increase capitalist profit .
The motions call on the European Union to deepen the anti-labour Lisbon Strategy , to apply the Stability Pact and the Economic Recovery Plan and to proceed with the full liberalisation of the internal market .
They propose measures to support monopoly groups by granting an abundant flow of money from the workers ' pockets , reducing the taxes on capital and increasing lending to large monopoly companies .
They are promoting faster capitalist restructurings predicated on the ' flexicurity ' strategy and the Directive on the organisation of working time , in other words on increasing working times by up to 13 hours a day and 78 hours a week and dividing working time into active time and unpaid inactive time .
The development of the ' green economy ' and the liberalisation of research and of energy and innovation are paving the way for profitable investments by capital to the detriment of the workers and grassroots classes .
The informal summit on 1 March confirmed the escalation in imperialist infighting and the united front of the monopolies against the people .
in writing . - I agree that the EU maintains a leading role in international climate policy .
However , unless it speaks with one voice , this will result in loss of credibility .
The EU as a whole appears to be on track regarding targets for climate change , but all countries including Malta have to be careful not to lag behind , as this will affect the credibility of the Union .
Limiting global average temperature increases is necessary not only in the developed world , but also in developing countries .
Needless to say , such actions will strain financial resources .
The EU has to provide a plan which will address relevant areas and sources of financing .
I voted in favour of the European Parliament resolution on combating climate change .
The European Union must maintain its leading role in international climate policy and make every effort to reach an agreement in Copenhagen allowing a reduction in carbon dioxide emissions into the atmosphere and the limitation of the global temperature increase to less than 2 ° C above pre-industrial levels .
Given the current financial and economic crisis , reaching a new agreement in Copenhagen on combating climate change is fundamental .
The economic crisis and the climate crisis can be combined to offer major economic opportunities to develop new technologies and create jobs .
This resolution contains positive aspects , which we value .
We would highlight the call for the European Union to actively pursue an agreement in Copenhagen which takes into account the most recent scientific reports on climate change , which commits to stabilisation levels and temperature targets that provide strong probability of avoiding dangerous climate change , and which allows for regular reviews to ensure that targets are in line with the latest science .
Likewise , we regard as positive the attention drawn to the need to significantly increase financial resources , in order to allow the necessary mitigation action in developing countries .
However , we disagree with the insistence , albeit only in the recitals , on the EU emission trading scheme , particularly as it is stated that this could work as a template for the development of emission trading in other developed countries and regions .
We therefore disagree with the economics-based approach , which clearly influences various points of the resolution .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this resolution by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
Despite the depth and breadth of the current financial crisis , a product of deregulation , cowardly regulators and greedy bankers , we cannot take our eyes off the need to continue to act to halt climate change .
We need to see the current crisis as an opportunity to spend resources to achieve a step change in our lifestyles and promote a green new deal across the continent and the world .
We cannot achieve our goals unless we work in partnership with the US and Japan , China and India .
I agree with some points of the resolution on combating climate change .
On the other hand , I cannot support several paragraphs of the report .
I have therefore decided to abstain and not to vote on this matter .
in writing . - We must use the green economy to create jobs throughout the EU .
This must be a priority during the financial crisis .
in writing . - ( SV ) This resolution contains many deserving exhortations .
However , most of what is dealt with in the resolution lies within the political responsibility of the national parliaments .
The proposals in the resolution will also result in a requirement for greater resources for the EU 's Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
This will entail an increase in the Member States ' fees to the EU .
This comes at a time when Member States need to retain their reduced economic resources for their own social and employment policies .
We do not believe that the EU 's Globalisation Fund is the most effective way to support workers who have lost their jobs .
The Member States are better placed to pursue an effective policy in this area .
Moreover , the Member States are all spending sums of money on stimulus packages of the same magnitude as their total contributions to the EU 's budget .
We have voted against this resolution , primarily because of the wording relating to the EU 's Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
I voted against the motion for a resolution on employment policy guidelines .
In fact , given that the global financial and economic crisis calls for a determined and coordinated response from the EU to prevent job losses , to maintain a satisfactory income level for Europeans , to prevent a recession and to turn the current economic and employment challenges into opportunities , I believe that the measures taken under the governance of the Eurocrats are definitely not enough to bear the weight of the crisis that we are going through , not least in a sensitive sector such as employment .
in writing . - The initiative to launch the Recovery Plan is a reaction to the serious ongoing economic downturn .
The top priority of the Recovery Plan must be to stimulate the economy and competitiveness of the EU , and to avoid increased unemployment .
Members insist that all financial aid must be timely , targeted and temporary .
The present exceptional circumstances have to be seen within the wider context of a firm commitment to bringing normal budgetary discipline back on track as soon as the economy recovers .
In addition , the Recovery Plan must also serve the purpose of delivering a fair international agreement to give poorer countries the opportunity to escape poverty without fuelling global warming , by helping to finance massive investment .
Finally , coordinated action between Member States must be directed at reducing uncertainty in the credit markets and facilitating the functioning of those markets .
Despite certain positive and timely proposals having been adopted , which we supported , particularly the one on tax havens , regrettably most of our group 's proposals were rejected , and the main tack of the report is to continue with the neoliberal policies , with a few rose-coloured touches for voters to see in the run-up to the electoral campaign .
Among our rejected proposals were those calling for a significant increase in financial resources and quicker application of the funds intended to support employment , and also a redirection of support programmes towards the most vulnerable groups , including programmes guaranteeing decent living conditions and universal access to high-quality public services .
I also regret the rejection of proposals such as those which regarded the amount of the Recovery Plan ( 1.5 % of EU GDP ) to be insufficient to successfully tackle the current crisis , noting that the EU will lag far behind countries such as the United States and China .
Furthermore , I regret the rejection of our criticism of the Commission for linking the Recovery Plan to the expansion of neoliberal ' structural reforms ' and to strict compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact , when what was needed was to dispense with these and change tack .
in writing . - I can only congratulate my colleague Elisa Ferreira on her report on the European Economic Recovery Plan .
I would endorse the sentiments of Poul Rasmussen that we have not yet done enough .
The bail out of the banks was a necessary but not sufficient step .
We must also take steps to deal with the problems of the labour market .
Work-sharing must be encouraged and when short time is demanded , we should encourage maintaining hours at the workplace by utilising the time for training to improve skills .
The real crisis is not in the subprime mortgage market but rather in the ten times larger casino economy of the increasingly esoteric and fantasy world of the derivatives market , which needs to be brought under control .
I therefore welcome moves to control tax havens and to introduce an EU-wide financial transaction tax to overcome the worst consequences of the crisis , mitigate speculation and raise finance to help us stay on track to achieve the Millennium Development Goals .
The report on a European Economic Recovery Plan , adopted today , supports measures proposed by the European Commission which are intended to stimulate the European economy .
Data from the last few weeks do not engender optimism .
It is estimated that economic growth in Europe in 2009 will remain at a level below zero .
Throughout the EU , unemployment is also growing .
This is the most serious recession to have affected the European Community and the first since the introduction of the common currency .
Determined action is therefore needed , leading to the creation of jobs and a real improvement in the economic situation .
A key question is , of course , the so-called healing of the financial system , so that enterprises and citizens can have access to credit .
This is particularly relevant to small and medium-sized enterprises , which are , surely , the foundation of the European economy .
This is why the effective and rapid restoration of the award of credit must be ensured urgently .
Aid designated for combating the crisis must not only be directed at rescuing selected sectors .
Such aid is unavoidable , but it should also include an ongoing approach to the competitiveness of European industry .
In addition , the crisis must not be used as an opportunity to introduce new , excessively burdensome regulations .
I hope that the European Economic Recovery Plan will soon produce results in the form of the first signs of economic stimulation .
in writing . - ( FR ) Exceptional situations call for exceptional resources .
The economic situation has deteriorated so much that it justifies concerted action by the Member States to try to relaunch economic activity .
Several observations are called for , however .
The exceptional situation we are experiencing does not call into question the basic rules of economics .
Borrowing today means debts tomorrow , debts that the Member States will be obliged to repay at a future date .
Deficits may be necessary , but there will be a heavy price to pay .
We have to be aware of this .
There is already talk of increased taxes in the near future to keep public finances afloat .
Secondly , all the spending commitments in the recovery plans are far from being of equal merit .
Investment spending on the modernisation of production equipment or on research has a very different value to money spent on operating costs .
It would therefore be a good idea for the Member States to provide themselves with the appropriate tools for making the best choices .
Finally , since words do have meaning , let us be clear that the recovery plan is not , in truth , a European plan , but rather a coordination of national measures taken by the various Member States .
Do we need to do more ?
The question is worth asking , but the setting up of a common European Union recovery plan would presuppose fundamental reviews of European policies and resources .
The European Economic Recovery Plan is especially important because of its two key elements : firstly , short-term fiscal stimulus measures aimed at boosting demand , protecting jobs and restoring consumer confidence and secondly , smart investments to boost economic growth .
The European Union 's number one priority is to protect its citizens from the adverse effects of the financial crisis .
In the case of the Romanian economy , these measures will show their effectiveness , especially for SMEs , by simplifying and speeding up procedures and providing Structural and Cohesion Funds , as well as rural development funds , in advance .
The positive vote given to this report also means that the European Social Fund will have to finance measures promoting employment , especially in favour of the most vulnerable population groups .
Framework conditions will also have to be created to alleviate the impact on the business sector as this sector has a key role to play in the economic recovery , making a crucial contribution also to creating jobs and therefore generating demand in the internal market .
I voted in favour of Mrs Ferreira 's report in the firm belief that it will help overcome the difficult economic period which Europe is going through , following the neo-liberal policies of the last 10 years .
The rich European states must show solidarity with Eastern Europe , and the aid fund granted to countries in this area must be increased .
In our view , as European socialists , we must act to eliminate the differences between the more developed countries and developing countries , all the more so as the latter countries ' economies are closely linked to the banking institutions in the West .
This is why we need a plan to coordinate the economies of all Member States .
We support the introduction of measures against offshore financial activities which allow very high-earners to switch their businesses to these tax havens , without paying any tax , while the majority of EU citizens are paying taxes and losing their jobs .
The figures are alarming : by the end of 2009 , the number of unemployed is expected to reach 25 million for the whole of Europe ( 500 000 in Romania ) .
Abolishing tax havens will get rid of unemployment .
We need to promote and support European solidarity between old and new Member States , which makes the vote on the amendment relating to this issue a test for the EP .
in writing . - The economic situation in Europe and further afield is as grave as any of us can remember , and it is absolutely right that the European Union and the Member States do everything that they can to ensure that a recession does not turn into a slump and that where government action really can kick-start economic activity , it should be allowed to do so .
This report is not perfect and we cannot agree with everything in it , but it reiterates the key points that the downturn is not an excuse for protectionism , excessive debt or the removal of competition rules .
We have resisted efforts from the left , whose amendments have aimed to turn a reasonable report into an unaffordable shopping list or an attack on capitalism and the financial system in general .
It is now important for all of us to roll up our sleeves and get our economies working again .
This report recognises that the free market and the individuals and businesses of Europe are vital to the reconstruction process , and it is on that basis that the British Conservatives support it .
Despite containing positive elements , Elisa Ferreira 's report on the European Economic Recovery Plan suffers from the same problems as the plan itself : it depicts the situation without having properly set out a real understanding of the causes of the current crisis ; it lists the initiatives required to restore the confidence of economic operators without , however , having identified to date any evidence of this effect ; and it offers little in terms of European mobilisation .
For that matter , on this point it should be added that , if this report solves little in concrete terms , that is because the European Parliament has little ability to do so .
The same can be said for the European Commission .
Out of this plan 's budget , only 15 % will be funds managed at Community level .
The answer will therefore indeed have to be found at European level , but primarily through the political willingness of the Member States to coordinate their responses to the current economic situation .
The impetus must come from the Member States , if it comes at all , given that the current signs of a lack of European political will are worrying .
You only have to look , for example , at the contradictory positions adopted by the German or Austrian Social Democrats in the EP or when they are representing the governments of their countries .
I agree with some points of Mrs Ferreira 's report on a European Economic Recovery Plan , but I do not subscribe to it in its entirety .
For this reason , I have decided to abstain and not to vote for my fellow Member 's report .
The main problem created by this crisis is the rise in unemployment , a situation which can only be reversed by increasing investment .
In order to increase investment , we need credit to be accessible and cheap , but everything is pointing to the fact that , for the time being , this will be scarce and much more expensive for the most vulnerable countries , such as Portugal .
These countries are facing increased financing difficulties , which is why I clearly support the possibility of having , in the eurozone , a single central issuer of European public debt .
For that matter , this is the scenario which is most compatible with the long-term sustainability of the euro .
In the current circumstances , it is vital to reinvigorate the European credit market by granting responsible loans to viable businesses and to families .
The financial assistance given to banks and businesses must also be well-directed , temporary , transparent , guaranteed in cost-benefit terms and strictly controlled .
The solidity and solidarity of the European project may be at stake and we must therefore act in a coordinated manner and respect the rules of the internal market , without allowing any protectionism .
I support the report on the European Economic Recovery Plan presented by my fellow Member , Elisa Ferreira , as I agree with the general lines of its approach .
in writing . - This report accompanies the recovery plan of the European Commission , which attempts to reinvigorate the EU economy .
The EPLP can support the main thrust of the rapporteur 's ideas and believes that many of the issues outlined are critical for a real recovery .
The Commission response during the economic crisis has been muted and Parliament believes that more effective tools are required to produce recovery .
In fact , an environmental approach could lead to greater innovation and spark renewed productivity whilst also having a positive effect on our environment .
However , care has to be taken not to injure specific industrial sectors or reduce our overall economic possibilities , and therefore consideration of a targeted approach is very necessary .
Similarly , a new approach to financial supervision denoted by the de Larosière wise men 's report is also vital to ensuring against systemic risks .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance takes the view that what we are experiencing now is a culmination of three crises that are interrelated : an economic crisis , an environmental one and a social one .
This is why the Verts / ALE Group is opposed to promoting a ' European recovery plan ' in the light of the imminent European Spring Summit , whose only mission is to stimulate the old laissez-faire model back into life .
Pumping enormous sums into this model carries the serious risk of deepening the environmental and social crises .
It is counterproductive simply to increase demand in order to bring production back on song .
This is exactly what the Ferreira report proposes , which is why I voted against it .
The economic recovery plan must make new financing instruments possible and , at the same time , by means of regulations , inject stability and reliability into the system .
The incentive to go for short-term profit by means of a selection of bonuses must be removed and replaced by rules for so-called lever funds and private equity funds .
Transparency , open bookkeeping and supervision must render tax havens impossible .
By means of a precise description of tasks , banks can once again become servants of the real economy , where the European Central Bank can act as a guard dog .
in writing . - The financial crisis is the first test of globalisation .
A crisis fuelled by greed and now consumed by fear should make us question our fundamental values and what kind of society we would like to live within .
This is not a time for narrow nationalism , but a time where a strong Europe has never been so important .
The need for a coordinated approach , not just across the EU , but across the world , makes the G20 in London so important .
I voted in favour of the Ferreira report , which calls on the European Commission to come up with strong , clear guidelines aimed at better coordination among all Member States in terms of management of this powerful economic crisis with a view to protecting as many jobs as possible .
I urge the Commission to initiate the relevant procedures as soon as possible .
Through this report , the European Union is inviting the European Spring Council to give a strong political impetus and draw up a roadmap for all the legal initiatives in order to guarantee , along with Parliament , that they will be adopted in good time .
The report highlights the extremely adverse economic and social consequences of the crisis in many of the new Member States , which poses a considerable risk of destabilisation and increasing poverty .
Spill-over effects are expected to affect the euro and the economies of the eurozone .
We urge a coordinated approach at Community level , bearing in mind Community solidarity and the adoption of collective responsibility in this regard .
We also invite the Commission to review and consolidate all the instruments aimed at stabilising the Member States affected , which includes stabilising exchange rates , so that security provisions and rapid , effective response packages can be implemented .
I have listened very carefully to the speeches of the rapporteurs and the group chairmen , including the swipe which the group chairman of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament took at the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats with regard to their voting behaviour in respect of Amendment 92 .
Indeed , we do not agree with the implications of this amendment , and together with my group colleagues , I voted emphatically against it .
Surely it cannot be the intention to take short-term measures that undermine long-term objectives ?
For this reason , it is not reasonable to force Member States into making a budgetary effort , irrespective of their level of blame , which is an important factor in establishing to what extent deficit spending can be justified .
My group was right to hold firm to its opinion which it shares with the Commission , namely that we should also have future generations in mind .
This is why it is justified to vary the budgetary incentives according to the level of blame of the Member States .
For this reason , demanding a uniform effort of 1.5 % of GDP is not viable or justified .
The European Economic Recovery Plan shifts the burden of the capitalist crisis on to the workers ' shoulders , promotes the more general aims of the EU and protects the profits and collective interests of the plutocracy .
The purpose of the all-out attack on insurance and labour rights and on the incomes of grassroots families and their standard of living is so that the EU can assure the euro-unifying monopolies that they will be ' in an advantageous position when the economy recovers ' compared with the international competition .
The EU and the governments are trying to obtain grassroots consent , using the carrot and stick method , in order to impose with the least resistance the capitalist restructurings set out in the Lisbon Strategy : revolving employment and unemployment , an increase in the retirement age and drastic cuts in wages , pensions and social benefits .
Moreover , the decisions taken at the summits and the financing of measures solely by the Member States highlight the escalation in imperialist infighting , which leads to a policy of ' every man for himself ' .
There is only one choice for the workers : resistance , disobedience and counterattack with the Greek Communist Party , condemnation of the policy of the European one-way street and of the forces that support it , the reorganisation of the grassroots movement and the fight for grassroots power and the grassroots economy .
Madam President , I voted for the report .
Transparency is not just a symbol but a principle on which all institutional procedures should be based .
Citizens and elective bodies must be assured the greatest possible access to documents held by the European institutions in order to enable them to participate effectively in the political process and to hold the public authorities to account for their actions .
For this reason I argued strongly in the past for the publication of parliamentary attendance .
Despite the progress made by the European institutions on openness and transparency , the situation cannot exactly be described as perfect and this recasting of Regulation ( EEC ) No 1049 / 2001 regarding public access to documents held by the European institutions should be seen as another step towards achieving an administrative environment where the availability of , and ease of access to , information are the rule rather than the exception .
To conclude I would like to point out the great achievement recently accomplished : the European Parliament now uses no fewer than 23 official languages and European Community documents are available in all of these .
This represents a guarantee of democracy .
This own-initiative report should be viewed from the perspective of the legislative debate under way aimed at amending the regulations relating to the Structural Funds and , in particular , the ERDF regulation ( Angelakas report ) and the ESF regulation ( Jöns report ) .
In an effort to reach an agreement at first reading and give a rapid response to this crisis , which directly affects the people of Europe , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe has chosen not to amend the legislative proposals .
For the sake of consistency , this same approach has been applied for this vote .
My colleagues from the MoDem party and I share the same concerns regarding the fight against climate change .
The latter will have to be confirmed as a priority of cohesion policy after 2013 .
Do not count on us to praise the hollow European Economic Recovery Plan , which , for the most part , will be self-financed by each of the Member States ( ' European solidarity ' at its best ... ) and which does not call into question the neoliberal policies that are at the root of the worsening working and living conditions of the overwhelming majority of the population .
As a result , not surprisingly , the majority of Parliament rejected our proposals , which :
condemned the fact that , at a time when the socio-economic crisis in the EU is worsening , the Community budget for 2009 is ' the lowest ever ' ;
insisted on increasing the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund ;
underlined that ' additional advanced payments ' under these Funds would result in a reduction in Community financing over the next few years ;
criticised the under-implementation of these Funds , particularly in the context of worsening socio-economic conditions in the EU ;
demanded that these Funds be regarded as a spending target and proposed increasing the rate of Community cofinancing and abolishing the N + 2 and N + 3 rules with regard to these Funds ;
insisted on these Funds being effectively used to promote real convergence , thus abandoning their constant subordination to the neoliberal objectives of the ' Lisbon Strategy ' ;
insisted on fighting company relocations .
in writing . - I support this report which recommends faster , more flexible payments for structural funding .
This report will ensure wide use of structural funds to secure jobs , and to create more jobs .
I welcome this report which calls for funding to be provided to projects earlier and reduce the need for bank loans .
I voted against Mr Kirilov 's report on Cohesion Policy : Investing in the real economy .
It is , in fact , crucial to understand that the EU 's cohesion policy makes an important contribution to the European Economic Recovery Plan and is the Community 's largest source of investment in the real economy , providing targeted assistance for addressing priority needs and areas with growth potential , both in the public and in the private sector .
However , this ought to make us think about the mistakes made in the past that have led to this serious economic situation .
Strict legislation is required in this sector , too , otherwise the same mistakes are liable to be repeated in cycles .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Statement by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like first of all to ask for your understanding and to apologise for the fact that the session is starting so late , but I was only told two minutes ago that I will be asked to make a statement on a very sad event .
I would like to make this statement now with your consent .
It is with great sadness and outrage that we have heard today about events in the town of Winnenden in Baden-Württemberg in Germany , where fifteen people were tragically killed at the Albertville secondary school .
The perpetrator , a seventeen-year-old former student at the school , later committed suicide .
During a shootout at a supermarket in the town , two policemen who were in pursuit of the perpetrator were injured .
On behalf of the European Parliament I would like to express my deepest condolences and my solidarity with the families and all the relatives of the victims , who are innocent young students and three teachers from the school .
This tragedy takes place only six months after a similar terrible gun rampage at a school in Kauhajoki in Finland .
As responsible politicians in the European Union and in all the Member States , it is our task to do everything we possibly can to ensure that acts like this are anticipated at an early stage and prevented from occurring , if this is something that we can influence .
We are also shocked by another tragic event in the state of Alabama in the United States , where a gunman on the rampage shot at least ten people before turning his gun on himself .
I would like once again to express on behalf of everyone here our deepest sympathy and our solidarity with the victims and their families .
I would be grateful if you would take time to remember those who have been killed .
( The House rose and observed a minute 's silence )
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Composition of Parliament : see Minutes
State of play of SIS II ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
the oral question to the Council on the state of play of SIS II , by Mr Coelho , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , Mrs Roure , on behalf of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , and Mr Lax , on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe - B6-0010 / 2009 ) , and
the oral question to the Commission on the state of play of SIS II , by Mr Coelho , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , Mrs Roure , on behalf of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , and Mr Lax , on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe - B6-0011 / 2009 ) .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , in the European Parliament we clearly support the rapid entry into operation of the SIS II ( Schengen Information System ) , which should have occurred in 2007 .
The second generation of the SIS represents a Community approach to the need to step up security at the external borders and share important innovations such as biometric data and the interlinking of alerts .
We accept that this system can only enter into operation once it is robust and can operate fully 24 hours a day .
In my opinion , the time has come to find out who is responsible for this delay , make an in-depth assessment of the situation and find solutions that will make this project technically viable and restore its already weakened credibility .
We know that various tests were carried out last year , the end result of which was negative , particularly for the operational system test .
The Council and the Commission decided to set a period of four months in order to try and solve the persisting problems , albeit without any great success , as can be seen from the results achieved in December 2008 when the tests were repeated .
Despite some improvements having been made , as far as we know , there are still major issues in terms of the performance and robustness of the system , loss of messages , data quality and the process of synchronising the national copies with the central system .
The SIS II clearly cannot start operating until these issues have been solved .
I should like to express my doubts about the ability of the contracted company to solve , in such a short period of time , all these issues which have not been solved previously during a much longer period of time .
I hope that an independent audit of the project can be launched in order to find out who is responsible .
I have no objections to the alternative technical scenario of the evolution of the ' SIS I for All ' system to SIS II , provided that the legal framework approved for the SIS II is fully respected .
At the end of March , a report assessing and comparing the two scenarios shall be presented .
Parliament wants to have access to this study and to be informed about the new direction to be given to the project , in terms of both the level of confidence in the technical side and the legal implications , the new timetable and the budgetary impact .
I should like to remind the Council and the Commission , particularly at this time , that greater transparency in this whole process is particularly advisable .
Mr President , SIS II , as we know , is a very important tool for ensuring the security of the Schengen area , especially following the enlargement to include the 10 new countries .
Since the adoption of the legal bases in 2007 , not once have we had the opportunity to see a detailed report on the developments or on the technical or political problems that are said to be hindering the start-up of the system .
It was through the press that we learnt that all the tests required to launch the central system in complete safety had failed in December 2008 .
We know that the Commission has tried to draw up a remedial plan to resolve the main problems , and we know that several Member States , within the Council , are already thinking of an alternative that would consist of a simple upgrade to the SIS system currently in operation .
The problem is therefore not technical , but political .
This Parliament has been asked to define by codecision the architecture of SIS II which , of itself , would have ensured the security necessary for our area of freedom , security and justice .
We have worked on it without losing sight of security and the protection of the fundamental rights of our citizens .
In this instance , it is the political responsibility of the European institutions , and of the Council and the Commission , in particular , that is at stake , for we believe that Parliament has acquitted itself well in relation to the citizens .
We await , now and in the future , the political reasons for this radical change of direction .
This could , of course , have very serious consequences for the budget earmarked thus far for this project , beginning with the putting aside , where necessary , of the available resources , until such time as the future of the project and its legal basis have been duly defined .
author . - ( SV ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , we in the European Parliament need to know whether the Council and the Commission still believe that SIS II will ever be up and running .
Will the Commission persevere in trying to find a technical solution to the current problems ?
What is the way forward ?
As expressed in the two previous speeches , we in the European Parliament wish to be kept up to date on the problems , and this has not happened up to now .
If SIS II cannot get off the ground in its present form , is there a plan B and will such a plan B be presented ?
As Mrs Roure mentioned , the question of SIS II is ultimately a question of the Union 's credibility when it comes to guaranteeing internal security within the EU .
However , we must also remember that the same infrastructure is to be used for the visa information system , VIS .
In the long term , therefore , the credibility of the Union 's visa policy is also on the line , that is to say , its ability to manage relations with the surrounding world in a dignified way .
Finally , I would like to ask the Commission if it still has the full support of the Member States for this project .
Are they willing to bear the costs of a project that seems as if it will never get off the ground ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , before I address the subject of our debate today , let me start by expressing my deep condolences to relatives of the victims in the tragic incident in Baden-Württemberg today .
Now let me turn to the subject of our debate today .
Firstly , we are grateful for the opportunity to have this debate .
This is an important issue , as you all know well .
A number of operational difficulties have led to specific problems in getting SIS II up and running .
The Presidency wishes , as you request , to be completely transparent with you about the history of and the background on this issue .
Because of the negative results of the original tests on the system , further tests were conducted in November and December 2008 .
The final results of these operational system tests were only known in the second half of January 2009 .
At their informal meeting of 15 January 2009 in Prague , Justice and Home Affairs Ministers were informed by the Commission that the outcome of these tests had been less than satisfactory .
The ministers agreed immediately on the need to implement a new global SIS II management approach , involving Member States working together with the Commission .
The new management approach will provide for closer monitoring of the project , thereby allowing for early warning of any potential difficulties .
It was also agreed that measures would be taken at a subsequent JHA Council , which took place on 26 and 27 February 2009 .
At that meeting , the Council agreed in its conclusion to invite the Commission to keep Parliament and the Presidency of the Council fully informed about problems related to SIS II and the way forward .
This Parliament has asked whether the problems identified to date will require the system to be rebuilt .
According to the information received by the Council on the status of the SIS II project , a number of problems persist .
However , we understand that the view of the Commission is that all outstanding issues can be resolved without a major redesign of the SIS II application .
At its February meeting , the Council endorsed the implementation of the SIS II analysis and repair plan , which will allow for the identification of all issues and their immediate solution , as well as the evaluation of the technical architecture so as to ensure a stable and flawless SIS II system .
Nevertheless , the Council also agreed that the contingency plan should be followed in case serious problems emerge which could not be resolved .
As far as an alternative to SIS II is concerned , the JHA Council in February welcomed the completion of the feasibility study serving as a basis for creating a workable , alternative technical scenario for developing SIS II based on SIS I + evolution as a part of the contingency plan .
The Council also requested that as soon as possible , and by May 2009 at the latest , a report containing an in-depth assessment and comparison of both scenarios should be submitted to the Council by the Presidency and the Commission .
The Council will assess , on the basis of this report , the progress made on SIS II development and , as far as the alternative scenario is concerned , will examine the prospect of achieving the objective of SIS II as set out in the legal framework governing the establishment , operation and use of SIS II , on the technical basis of SIS I + evolution .
This examination will be carried out as soon as possible and at the latest by the Council meeting on 4 and 5 June 2009 .
As to the details requested by Parliament on the resolution of the outstanding problems and , in particular , the financial aspects , the Council invited the Commission not only to inform the European Parliament about the problems related to SIS II , but also to inform both Parliament and the Council fully and on a regular basis about the expenditure figures related to the central SIS II project and to measures taken to ensure complete financial transparency .
On the basis of the report requested from the Presidency and Commission , the Council will , at the latest by its meeting in June 2009 , discuss the calendar for entry into operation of SIS II .
This will take into account the provisions on time schedules set out in Parliament 's resolution of 24 September 2008 on the draft Council regulation on immigration from the Schengen Information System - SIS I + - to the second-generation Schengen Information System - SIS II .
This was incorporated into Article 19 of the Council Regulation of 24 October .
I am sure that the Commission will be able to provide some additional information in response to the questions raised .
I would simply like to assure you , the Members of this Parliament , that the Presidency will follow this issue closely and ensure that the way forward agreed last month by JHA ministers is strictly respected .

Mr President , I wish to confirm what Mr Vondra has said .
I must also add that , together with Mr Langer , the chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Interior , we have made an absolute priority of this SIS II issue .
I am going to try , in turn , to give you some clarifications .
The Commission 's main contractor for developing SIS II has performed a series of operational tests on the central system running interactively with some national systems .
Between November and December 2008 , the results of these tests led us to conclude that the central system had not achieved the level stipulated in the contract .
In mid-November , the Commission initiated a detailed analysis of the SIS II solution , which is currently being developed by Hewlett-Packard / Steria , in cooperation with experts from the Member States , and with the help and assistance of two well-known IT consultancies .
Following the failure of the operational tests , we then implemented an analysis and repair plan that will take an estimated four months to complete .
The objective of this plan is to bring the implementation of SIS II up to a satisfactory level of stability and performance .
The aim of the plan is , firstly , to fix the known bugs linked to the central system - some of the bugs have already been fixed - and , secondly , to verify that the implementation of SIS II is not suffering from insurmountable structural weaknesses .
Targeted tests are being performed in a number of priority areas to remove the uncertainties surrounding the architecture of the current solution .
This activity is running in parallel with the finalisation of the technical analysis of the underlying problems .
The Commission has also introduced a global approach to the management of the project so that the central and national components of SIS II can be better integrated , in accordance with the competences legally established by the Commission and the Member States .
In concrete terms , the Commission is coordinating a joint management structure for the project .
This joint management structure brings together the national project managers , the central project managers and the Commission 's contractors .
This structure will accompany the project throughout the analysis and repair phase , then during the qualification tests , then during the migration phase , until SIS II is commissioned .
At the end of the analysis and repair phase , we will have a precise idea of the resources that still need to be implemented before SIS II can be started up and of the corresponding schedule , as Mr Vondra just said .
Obviously , there is no doubt that the objective of bringing SIS II into service in September 2009 will be subject to delay .
The current difficulties facing SIS II were discussed at the informal meeting of the ministers on 15 January and at the Justice and Home Affairs Council of 26 and 27 February .
The broad outlines of the approach recommended by the Commission for the continuation of SIS II were accepted .
Firstly , the need to continue with the feasibility study into an alternative technical solution based on the current SIS I + received support from the Council .
We are therefore able to continue this feasibility study into an alternative solution .
However , any alternative technical solution will obviously have to comply with the legal framework created for SIS II , as adopted by Parliament and by the Council .
Obviously , great care will need to be taken with regard to the maximum re-use of the investments , as well as to the situation of the Member States and associated countries that intend to become a part of the Schengen area in the years to come .
The ministers decided to re-convene , as has just been said , in June at the latest - at the start of June - in order to assess the progress made and to define , where necessary , new directions and any changeover to an alternative option .
In the light of this , the Council has asked the Presidency and the Commission , in close cooperation with the SIS II Task Force and in consultation with the appropriate bodies , to present the Council with a report containing a detailed assessment and comparison of the two scenarios .
This report is to be produced as soon as possible , and by no later than May 2009 .
To this end , common comparison criteria have been agreed on for the purposes of assessing the respective advantages and disadvantages of each solution .
For clarity 's sake , this means that we will have a Council decision at the start of June .
The latter will be taken in light of the tests that will have been completed and this , we believe , will make it possible either to carry on with SIS II or to move towards an alternative solution , but one that will , of course , still fulfil the objectives that you have set .
I am , of course , very aware of what Mr Coelho and Mrs Roure said about the need for a high level of transparency .
I would like to say that we send , and will continue to send , the minutes of the SIS II committee on a very regular basis .
I must also say that I have written to Mr Deprez , the chairman of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , to provide him with detailed information on the situation with SIS II .
A copy of this correspondence has also been sent to Mr Coelho .
I also wish to say to Mr Lax that the problems with SIS II do not affect VIS .
The problems with SIS II do not involve the infrastructure that it shares with VIS .
It can be said that VIS is going very much according to the plan agreed with the Member States .
What I wish to say to you is that we have in fact organised , both with the Task Force and within the Commission , extremely regular meetings with the co-contractor and the two co-contractors , especially Steria .
We can truly hope , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , that this issue will be concluded in the coming months , with this decision on a final date , set as the start of June , when the Council will , in fact , have to make its decision .
I undertake here and now to keep Parliament abreast of all of these developments .
The operational problem with the Schengen Information System II was discussed recently as part of the Council meeting in February 2009 .
It was highlighted once again that an immediate solution needs to be found to the impasse which SIS II is currently at .
However , I get the impression that instead of answers , there are even more questions raised after the discussions about SIS II .
The Council supports the implementation of an analysis and repairs plan to help identify the problems with SIS II 's technical architecture , with the aim of making it stable and reliable .
On the other hand , the Council does not exclude the possibility of deciding to adopt an alternative technical solution which can achieve the objectives proposed by SIS II .
Whichever of the options is applied , it must not have repercussions on the schedule for the inclusion of the countries which are still excluded from the Schengen area .
I would like to know what measures the Commission will adopt to avoid any possible delay and how the additional costs incurred by these changes will be covered .
The example of Romania speaks for itself .
Romania 's external border is 2 000 km long .
Its integration into the Schengen area scheduled for March 2011 is a major priority .
All this indecision may have consequences in terms of meeting this deadline .
I would like to mention one other thing .
At a time when the Commission is preparing to draft a new legislative proposal on the next stages in border management , I would ask the Commission to evaluate first of all the effectiveness of the current systems used to manage borders in order to achieve the best synergy between these systems , and then assess the opportunity for investments in border logistics .
In order to achieve the EU 's strategic objectives , the Commission should not start developing new tools from scratch until the existing ones , such as SIS II or VIS , are fully operational and reliable .
Mr President , the situation we are discussing is an eloquent example which shows that it is sometimes easier to achieve a consensus and gain political agreement on the opening of borders than it is to overcome technical problems .
The entry of new Member States to Schengen on 23 December 2007 was a great event for the citizens of those states .
I know this , because I am from Poland .
My country availed itself of this blessing and very much values the opening of the borders , because it meant the disappearance of the last discriminating circumstance which divided us from the Member States of the old European Union .
Also , it is in my country that the Frontex agency is based .
I know that Mr Barrot has been to Poland , where he held talks in Frontex and also visited the part of the EU 's external border for which Poland is responsible .
I know that in practice , there are no serious problems with guarding this border , and that it is secure .
However , we do have problems with technical matters , the solution of which is growing into a political problem , as my colleague Mrs Roure said .
I fully agree with her .
If , however , there are technical problems , if there are difficulties , then I suppose every EU institution has a responsibility to address the body which took so long to implement SIS II .
It is a pity this has not been done and that transparency in this material has been a little forced .
I think that wherever the resolution of problems which are important for citizens is concerned , the European Parliament cannot agree that any actions should be taken independently of it , or that it should be ignored , especially in the case of a matter of security .
I should like to close with a very small remark .
If there were problems , if Hewlett-Packard did not manage to surmount the technical problems , it should be remembered that we have splendid specialists in Poland , young people who are wonderful IT engineers , and who are renowned the world over .
I think they could be useful , and could produce the desired result significantly cheaper , faster and better .
( DE ) Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , Schengen is , and always has been , synonymous with the link between security on the one hand and freedom and liberality on the other .
For the citizens of Europe and for all of us , this has been part of the added value offered by the European Union .
It has always worked very well and has been applied effectively in the interim on a ' one for all ' basis .
What is happening now is annoying .
However , it is also annoying that Parliament , which has always been very cooperative , has not been given the necessary information .
We have always kept the citizens of Europe informed .
The Schengen Information System II will be functioning perfectly and on schedule and now we find out that problems have arisen and that there does not seem to be an end in sight to the dilemma .
I would be interested to know whether the figures circulating in the media , which indicate that around EUR 100 million has so far been spent on developing the Schengen Information System II , are correct .
Will the company suffer the consequences ?
Why has the Commission , the Council or another body not introduced a system of checks in good time ?
( SL ) Actually , it is strange that issues concerning the system 's operability should crop up time and again whenever we tackle these kinds of major and weighty technical questions .
We have , by now , already dealt with the technical issues connected with data processing .
This is why the public is justifiably asking why it is that we have no professional institutions at an EU level which are sufficiently competent to address any technical problems that might arise from the operation of exceptionally large and comprehensive databases .
I have participated in these debates from the very beginning .
I have also worked together with the rapporteur , Mr Coelho , and am aware of certain technical difficulties and deficiencies that still remain , including those involving the level of expertise available .
Therefore , my feeling here is that we need to carry out a genuine technical and financial review of the system and take to task those who have been managing this project .
In fact , this is not just my feeling ; it is the feeling of the public at large .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I hold you personally in high esteem , but what is happening here really is an intolerable mess , involving an unacceptable degree of waste and incompetence .
For this reason , I call not only on the Commission but also on the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs and the Committee on Budgetary Control to look in detail at this question .
I am pleased that the Czech Republic holds the Council Presidency because Bavaria and the Czech Republic have exactly the same security interests .
We know that , despite all the fears relating to the opening of the borders , the security situation has been considerably and fundamentally improved since the borders were opened , as a result of excellent police cooperation .
This could be a model for other parts of Europe and I would like to thank the Czech Republic for this on behalf of Bavaria .
We expect that the Schengen Information System will eventually cover all areas and that it will not be restricted to individual , exemplary , bilateral arrangements .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , I would like to thank you for this debate .
I think it shows that there is a problem which needs to be fixed .
The Council , under our leadership , did what it could in January .
It took seriously this initiative to build the contingency or alternative plan and to push for a solution by setting the deadlines .
That is what we can do .
As regards the financial issues , I shall leave the floor to the Commission to respond .
We now have excellent cooperation between Minister Langer and Commissioner Barrot , so we believe that we will be able to deal with that .
Concerning the question of whether this is a political or a technical problem , we believe that this is just a technical problem .
It is not a smokescreen , as has been suggested , to cover some political problems .
No - the system must be operational as soon as possible .
Regarding the comments by Mrs Grabowska : yes , we remember what it means to be in the waiting room .
We were discussing this a year ago .
All the countries that are interested in seeing some progress here are suddenly sharing experiences similar to ours .
We are committed to setting out a technical solution which will allow participation by industries of additional countries , in accordance with the particular calendar .
I shall limit myself to these few concluding remarks .
I said a lot at the beginning .
Now we will move on .

Mr President , Mr Vondra , thank you for the Czech Presidency 's commitment to this issue .
Your support has been much appreciated .
I should first of all like to reply to Mr Marinescu by saying that there is no particular problem , given that the Member States that are not yet members of Schengen will be able to join in the SIS II system too .
We shall have several ' slots ' , or times , when new Member States that are not Schengen members will be able to join in SIS II , and so , all being well , there should not be any particular problems .
Mrs Grabowska , I must thank you also for all that the Republic of Poland is doing to guard the external borders .
I have had the opportunity to observe , in fact , the quality of the work carried out by Frontex with the Polish teams on the Ukrainian border .
I should simply like to say , in response to Mrs Roure and Mrs Grabowska , that the problem is basically a technical one .
It is not , as Mr Vondra said , a political problem .
The truth is , quite simply , that the Member States , or some Member States , have made greater and greater demands .
Therefore , it has to be said , SIS II has had to meet increasingly sophisticated objectives .
Consequently , the system has become more complex and , despite all the tributes you have paid to information technology , the implementation has turned out to be more difficult than expected .
Nonetheless , it is true that the problem remains essentially a technical one and that it should therefore be able to be resolved .
I should like to say to Mr Pirker that Parliament will be kept well informed , and I hereby undertake to do this .
I have personally taken this on during the course of this project , and I think I can say that I truly consider it to be an absolute priority .
I wish also to reassure Mr Brejc that we have clearly identified those in charge .
Working with the Commission , we have set up this Task Force , in which the Member States are closely involved .
I think that we now have a definite steering group , but our co-contractor also has to be able to meet the requirements we have set .
I should also like to reply to the financial question posed by Mr Pirker and Mr Posselt just now .
The Commission 's total budget commitment for the SIS II project amounts to about EUR 68 million .

The corresponding contracts include feasibility studies , development of the actual central system , support and quality control , the s-Testa network , preparation for operational management in Strasbourg , security , preparations in relation to biometric matters , and communication .
That , then , is the commitment : EUR 68 million .


As far as payments are concerned , EUR 27 million have actually been spent to date on technical development : EUR 20 million on developing the system ; EUR 7 million on providing a network that is at the forefront of technical progress ; and EUR 4 500 000 on quality assurance .
It has to be said that if , after gaining a clear idea of the reliability or lack of reliability of SIS II , the Council decided to move over to the SIS I + R formula , we could at that point consider reusing the communication network put in place for SIS II , meaning that the corresponding investments could , for the most part , be preserved .
Our real problem , ladies and gentlemen , is equipping Schengen , the Schengen area of free movement , with a genuinely effective tool .
It is true that , if we succeed with Schengen II , it will be the most effective system in the world , given the results it will enable us to achieve .
The information technology , however , has to be in place .
Anyway , what I should like to say to you , after the Czech Presidency - and once again I am grateful to Mr Vondra for the Czech Presidency 's commitment to this difficult issue - is that I truly believe that , together with the current Presidency , we have made every effort to avoid any further delay and to genuinely enable our co-contractor to meet our expectations .
In any case , we shall have a definite date fixed to enable the Council to take the necessary decisions .
Once again , I do , of course , undertake to keep Parliament informed .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
I believe that this project aimed at improving the mechanism for managing the European Union 's external borders should not be regarded as an attempt to halt migration as a process .
The real purpose of the measures for making EU borders more secure is nothing at all to do with stemming the influx of immigrants , but is about tightly controlling them .
Proper migration management is beneficial to the European Union Member States ' societies and economies .
I must emphasise that the European Union should focus more attention on the management of its peripheral borders where there are conflict zones .
For instance , the activities carried out until now by the European Union Border Assistance Mission to Moldova and Ukraine ( EUBAM ) are worthy of particular recognition .
These include establishing a single customs procedure at the border , setting up barriers against smuggling and reducing the activities of criminal groups .
On the other hand , the failure to resolve so far the Transnistria conflict makes it fairly difficult for the Moldovan authorities to manage this section of the border , where there continues to be a large flow of illegal migration .
I would like to express my firm belief that the European Union has sufficient political , economic and security leverage to stop the illegal actions mentioned above , which also means getting more actively involved in settling the unresolved conflicts at its eastern external borders .
Croatia : progress report 2008 - Turkey : progress report 2008 - Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia : progress report 2008 ( debate )
The next item is the Council and the Commission statements on :
Croatia : progress report 2008 ,
Turkey : progress report 2008 , and
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia : progress report 2008 .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , let me introduce the debate on the progress reports on the three countries Croatia , Turkey and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
Let me begin with Croatia .
Your report rightly states that Croatia made good progress over the past year .
Since the start of the negotiations , 22 chapters - out of 35 - have been opened , of which seven have been provisionally closed .
The Presidency will continue to take forward the negotiations .
Two accession conferences in particular are planned : at deputy level in the coming weeks , and at ministerial level in June .
Your report rightly highlights the importance of reaching a settlement to the outstanding border dispute with Slovenia .
I would like to assure this Parliament that the Presidency will continue to make every effort to help resolve this issue and , in this context , we fully support the ongoing efforts of the Commissioner , Olli Rehn , to find a solution to allow us to continue with the accession negotiations .
We had a lunch just before the sitting to discuss this in depth .
Concerning the last development , we welcome Croatia 's decision announced on Monday that it accepts the mediation proposed by the group of experts proposed by Olli Rehn .
We are encouraging both Slovenia and Croatia to work constructively in order to find a permanent and mutually acceptable solution as a matter of urgency , because it should not be just a prescription for more delays .
Apart from this important issue , further progress in the wider negotiations depends , above all , on Croatia itself .
The necessary political , economic , legislative and administrative reforms have to be completed , and it has to meet its obligations under the Stabilisation and Association Agreement .
The implementation of the revised Accession Partnership is also important in preparing for further integration within the European Union .
The Council considers that the indicative and conditional road map drawn up by the Commission in its 2008 Progress Report is a useful tool .
It will assist Croatia in taking the necessary steps to reach the final stage of the negotiations .
That said , despite good progress , much remains to be done .
Let me pick out some of the key areas where further progress is needed , beginning with judicial reform .
The EU has made it very clear that the establishment of an independent , impartial , reliable , transparent and efficient judicial system is essential .
It is a condition for strengthening the rule of law and the proper implementation of the acquis .
A professional , accountable , transparent and independent public administration is also key .
Significant legislative reforms have been achieved in these two areas , but we need to see how they will work in practice .
The same is true of the fight against corruption and organised crime , as outlined in your report .
The powers and resources of the Office for the Prevention of Corruption and Organised Crime have been strengthened .
This is also the case with the criminal courts investigating cases in this area .
The main issue now is to make sure that the expected results are delivered .
The full implementation of the anti-corruption programme and action plan is key to addressing this serious problem .
The Union has also underlined that full cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ( ICTY ) , including access to documents , is essential .
We are following very closely developments in this area and we invite the Croatian authorities to ensure that full cooperation with ICTY is maintained .
We welcome the recent agreement concerning the missing documents and urge Croatia to deliver on it .
On refugee return , we note that the implementation of the convalidation decision for validating pension rights has begun and information on the changes to the rules has been made available to the returnee community .
On housing care , the 2007 cases have been resolved , but the 2008 benchmark has not yet been met .
Work on ensuring the sustainability of refugee return must continue .
This also goes for legislation to improve the rights of minorities .
You have rightly highlighted the issue of regional cooperation in your report .
Efforts to improve good neighbourly relations must continue .
Let me now turn to the issue of Turkey .
Negotiations with Turkey continued during 2008 , and a total of four chapters - as is almost a tradition - were opened during the course of the year .
Despite the EU 's encouragement to Turkey to step up its reform efforts , 2008 did not deliver the expected level of reform .
Further work on the political criteria remains key .
Significant efforts will be needed in a number of areas , as highlighted by the Council in its conclusions of 8 December 2008 and in the Commission 's 2008 progress report .
This is an issue to which you have also drawn attention in your report .
At the same time , the Presidency welcomes the recent positive steps undertaken by Turkey , including the recently adopted national programme for the adoption of the acquis and the appointment of the new chief negotiator .
It is important that these commitments are now translated into real and tangible actions .
We would like to take this opportunity to stress the strategic importance of Turkey .
The Presidency shares the opinion of Parliament that Turkey needs to be commended for the progress achieved in the field of energy .
We continue to assess ways forward in this crucial area , particularly in terms of full support to the Nabucco pipeline project .
As far as Turkey 's progress to accession is concerned , we would like to highlight that progress in the area of freedom of expression is essential for overall progress in the negotiations .
Besides the welcome amendments to Article 301 of the Criminal Code , which have had a positive effect , there are still a number of legal provisions that remain in place which could lead to restrictions in this area .
Website bans , often disproportionate in scope and duration , remain a cause for concern .
Adequate legal solutions are also required to ensure that religious pluralism is brought in line with European standards .
A comprehensive anti-corruption strategy needs to be developed .
We are concerned also at the increased number of reported cases of torture and ill-treatment , in particular , outside official places of detention .
The law on the duties and legal powers of the police , amended in 2007 , must be monitored closely in order to prevent violations of human rights .
The ratification of the Protocol to the Convention against Torture is vital .
As far as the south-east is concerned , we welcome the announcement of the guidelines and general content of the South-East Anatolia Project .
We now await concrete steps leading to the economic , social and cultural development of the region .
This must include addressing longstanding issues such as the return of internally displaced persons or the question of village guards .
As far as EU-Turkey relations are concerned , it is clear that Turkey needs to fulfil its obligation of full , non-discriminatory implementation of the Additional Protocol .
This is an important issue , as highlighted in your report , and should be addressed as soon as possible , as it clearly affects the pace of the accession negotiations .
Issues covered by the declaration of 21 September 2005 will continue to be followed up , and progress is urgently awaited .
Furthermore , Turkey also needs to commit itself unequivocally to good neighbourly relations and to the peaceful settlement of disputes .
Despite all these difficulties , progress continues in a range of areas .
Work is currently under way on Chapter 16 on taxation and Chapter 19 on social policy and employment .
Despite the fact that negotiations are becoming more complex as they advance , the Czech Presidency is committed to making progress on those chapters where progress is really possible .
Moreover , the Presidency puts emphasis on achieving progress in Chapter 15 on energy , in compliance with energy issues , because it is one of our priorities .
Finally , let me turn to the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
It is a dynamic country with considerable potential .
At the same time , it faces a number of significant challenges .
Both these points are brought out admirably in your report .
There is indeed much in the report with which the Council is in agreement .
Your report places considerable emphasis on the question of a date for the opening of accession negotiations .
You also rightly highlight the wish of all sides to find an early and mutually acceptable solution to the issue of the name .
As far as recent developments are concerned , the early elections in June 2008 were held in several stages following significant problems both during the run-up , and on the original election day on 1 June .
The OSCE / ODIHR / Council of Europe noted that there was a ' failure to prevent violent acts ' in the run-up to the elections , and that the elections did not live up to a number of key international standards .
As a result , we underlined to the government and all political players the importance of addressing these core points in the run-up to the presidential and local elections due in a few days time .
It is our impression that this message has been heard and that significant efforts are being taken to prevent any disruption .
We shall see whether these efforts bear fruit .
The Commission 's 2008 Progress Report is helpful .
We have taken note of the blueprint drawn up by the Government of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
It is a detailed text which represents a serious effort to take on board the Commission 's recommendations .
Against the background of the region as a whole , the document and the work that has gone into it should be viewed positively .
The internal cohesion of this multiethnic state is , of course , key to its future development .
I would , therefore , like to endorse the importance which this Parliament attaches to the Ohrid Framework Agreement This has been pivotal in drawing the country back from conflict and in assisting in its path towards greater European integration .
On visa liberalisation , we are currently at an evaluation stage , and I would not wish to prejudge the outcome .
On a personal basis , I would simply say that I have much sympathy for the hopes and aspirations of ordinary citizens of the former Yugoslavia who would like to be able to travel freely again .
But the essential precondition remains the preparedness of the country to fulfil the specific criteria set out in the visa liberalisation road map .
Personally , I hope that positive developments can be achieved soon .
This brings me to one of the key points in your report and resolution .
The Czech Presidency is fully committed to the European perspective for the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
Further progress in this direction is achievable .
But the key objectives of the Association Partnership have to be fulfilled and we need evidence of well-conducted elections , in contrast to what happened in 2008 .
These points will be evaluated by the Commission in its next progress report .
We look forward to this report , and to further developments in Skopje .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , today 's debate provides a very good opportunity to review the accession process in the three candidate countries .
Let me start with Croatia .
Mr Swoboda 's draft resolution addresses the main challenges which face Croatia today .
I fully agree with Deputy Prime Minster Vondra that the accession negotiations with Croatia have generally been going well since they started in October 2005 , and that is why , in November 2008 , the Commission proposed an indicative road map for reaching the final stage of accession negotiations by the end of 2009 , provided Croatia fulfils the necessary conditions .
On this too , I share the analysis of your rapporteur and Mr Vondra as regards the future challenges such as judicial reform , the fight against organised crime and corruption , and reform of the ship-building sector and bringing it into line with our state aid regime and competition policy .
Unfortunately , the accession negotiations with Croatia are currently stalled because of the border issue .
We have worked with the Czech Presidency on this matter , and I very much appreciate the support of the Presidency in our efforts to find a viable way forward .
Although this is a bilateral issue , it has become a European problem , and the Commission therefore took the initiative to offer European facilitation to solve the border issue and allow Croatia 's accession negotiations to continue , assuming that both sides found such facilitation useful .
That was the message I took to both Ljubljana and Zagreb in January .
I have since then been discussing the terms of such facilitation with both foreign ministers - most recently in a trilateral meeting yesterday evening - following the decisions of both governments on our initiative .
I welcome the endorsement in principle from both countries on such European facilitation , which would be provided by a senior expert group chaired by President Martti Ahtisaari .
During our talks yesterday , we explored the possibilities for agreeing on the specific terms of facilitation .
We agreed to continue the talks in the near future .
Hence , this is still work in progress .
Let me point out that , in its efforts , the Commission has relied on the negotiating framework , which is the very foundation of the EU accession process for Croatia , agreed by Croatia and all the EU Member States , including Slovenia .
By adopting and agreeing the negotiating framework , both Croatia and Slovenia agreed to resolve any border dispute in line with the principle of peaceful settlement of disputes in accordance with the United Nations Charter .
The UN Charter states , and I quote , because this is of particular importance : ' The parties to any dispute [ ... ] shall [ ... ] seek a solution by negotiation , enquiry , mediation , conciliation , arbitration , judicial settlement , resort to regional agencies or arrangements , or other peaceful means of their own choice ' .
There are two equally important conclusions to this statement in the UN Charter .
First , the parties can choose any one of the methods outlined in the UN Charter .
The Commission 's initiative is , without doubt , among these methods .
Second , whatever method in the UN Charter they agree to choose , they have to agree between the two of them .
I sincerely hope that this will happen sooner , rather than later .
The Commission 's initiative provides a very solid basis for this , and a viable way forward .
To sum up , the Commission 's objective is indeed to solve the border issue and , in parallel , to unblock the EU accession negotiations of Croatia so that Croatia is able to meet its target timeline of concluding the technical negotiations by the end of 2009 .
I welcome Ms Oomen-Ruijten 's carefully balanced resolution on Turkey , and support the Presidency 's efforts to open chapters which are technically ready to be opened .
We have unfortunately witnessed a certain slow-down of political reforms in Turkey in recent years .
However - and I agree with your rapporteur on this - since the end of last year and the beginning of this year , there have been certain positive developments , such as the launch of a new television channel broadcasting in Kurdish and the establishment of a parliamentary committee on gender equality .
Moreover , the new ' National Programme for the Adoption of the Acquis ' and the appointment of a new full-time chief negotiator are also steps forward .
I am also encouraged by the fact that Prime Minister Erdogan and the leader of the main opposition party , Deniz Baykal , signalled their commitment to Turkey 's EU accession process during their recent visits to Brussels .
I hope these developments will result in a strong political and societal consensus to pursue EU reforms with renewed vigour and energy .
This is connected with freedom of expression , which is a core European value .
An open and transparent relation between the press and public authorities is indeed elementary to the quality of the democratic debate in any country .
This is particularly true for a country like Turkey which is going through a difficult process of transformation and reform .
The Commission is therefore very closely following the ensured existence of press freedom in Turkey .
It should be genuinely respected , as it is the very foundation of any open society , and thus of the continued democratic transformation of Turkey .
I shall say a few words on Cyprus .
There is a unique chance this year to reunite the island and bring to an end this long-standing conflict on European soil .
It is essential that Turkey proactively support the ongoing settlement talks between the leaders of the two communities in Cyprus .
Concerning the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , I thank Mr Meijer and the shadow rapporteurs for a well-balanced resolution .
I share their regret that , three years after the country achieved candidate status , accession negotiations have not yet started .
The key outstanding condition is the ability to meet international standards for the conduct of free and fair elections .
This is a core requirement for compliance with the Copenhagen political criteria , and the presidential and municipal elections in March and April will therefore be a moment of truth .
I share the positive assessment in your draft resolution on the progress made by Skopje in implementing the road map towards visa liberalisation .
The Commission remains committed to making a proposal to the Council on visa-free travel in 2009 , once the conditions have been met by each country in the region .
I know how important this is for the ordinary citizens of the Western Balkans .
I shall summarise by saying that , for the sake of stability and peace , liberty and democracy , we shall continue our work for a gradual , managed accession of the three candidate countries , despite the very challenging economic times .
I trust that Parliament will also continue to support this very valuable common goal .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I would like to speak first and mainly about Croatia .
Croatia has made progress in a number of areas .
I am very grateful for the efforts which have been made in Croatia itself , in particular , with regard to judicial reform .
A number of steps were needed and , as a result of the appointment of two new ministers , some things have been put in motion .
I know that ministers cannot do everything , but significant progress has been made on combating corruption and cross-border crime .
Secondly , as far as the question of cooperation with the International Criminal Court is concerned , I would like to state clearly that I expect Croatia to take all the necessary steps in this respect .
There have been disputes about different chains of command and the corresponding documents .
I hope that these issues will be resolved in the near future so that they do not cause interruptions or delays in the negotiations .
Thirdly , Croatia has also made some moves towards economic reform .
I am very pleased about the plans in this area , particularly relating to the shipping industry .
It has not been easy , but the important foundations have been laid .
I am also happy that agreements could be reached with workers in the shipping industry .
These reforms will be painful , but they are necessary and they can be made in a sensible form .
I come now to the main question , which is always controversial , concerning border disputes .
Commissioner , unfortunately I must tell you that I am rather disappointed that you have addressed this issue without making contact with Parliament .
I have sent you the documents and you have failed to respond .
We would probably have made more progress if you had handled these issues with more sensitivity .
In order to ensure that no misunderstandings arise , I fully support your proposal for mediation .
However , we could have moved further forward if a clear statement had been made in advance on the question of the importance of international law rather than afterwards .
We are in a difficult situation .
It is clear that movement is needed on both sides .
The wording of your original proposal was not ideal .
I would have preferred you to be in closer contact with Parliament and with the rapporteur .
This would perhaps have allowed us to achieve more by working together .
Unfortunately that was not the case , but that is not what lies at the heart of this debate .
The key issue of the debate is how we can make progress .
We will make progress .
This is likely to be the wording which I will propose to Parliament tomorrow .
We will say that the mediation that you have proposed - that is how it is and I fully support it - should be based on international law , including the principles of equity .
The two sides must agree to move in this direction .
Both Croatia and Slovenia must recognise that international law is necessary but , of course , also that the principles of equity , fairness and a just solution - a political solution , if you want to describe it in that way - are essential .
Both sides must acknowledge this and it is actually rather sad that we are in a situation where we cannot progress .
Given the other problems which there are in the world and , in particular , in Europe , it should be possible to solve these problems by mutual agreement .
Despite all the criticism , I do , of course , wish you every success in your efforts to convince both sides .
Unfortunately , yesterday 's discussion was not as positive as it should have been , but I hope that will soon change .
I would like to make one more general remark which also applies to Macedonia .
There are bilateral problems , but they should not be allowed to block the negotiations on enlargement .
As regards our amendment , which is often misunderstood , it is , of course , the case that bilateral problems should not form part of the negotiation framework .
They must remain outside the framework .
This is all about the negotiations between the European Union and the individual countries .
The bilateral problems must be resolved in parallel , if both sides - in this case Macedonia and Greece - are prepared to consider the issues .
This Parliament must give a clear signal that both sides in all these disputes must be prepared to move .
It is not possible for one side to compromise and the other to remain in the same position .
We must make it clear in all these cases that the bilateral problems must not be allowed to block the accession negotiations .
They can be resolved in parallel with the negotiations and this Parliament will help to ensure that both sides make a move in the two disputes which we are discussing here .
I hope that we will then achieve positive results .
Mr President , I should like to start by conveying my heartfelt thanks to everyone who has contributed to this report .
I have submitted a critical , yet fair , assessment of the progress which Turkey made in 2008 .
It is a report that contains many points , holds up a mirror for Turkey and only sends out one clear message , namely that for the third year running , too little has been done in the way of political reform .
Political reform and meeting the Copenhagen criteria are absolute priorities .
This is not about opening chapters .
This is about what unites European citizens , the rule of law , independent and impartial justice , the freedom of speech , a well-functioning press and an individual civil right for each citizen .
Mr President , more must be done in those areas .
Only then can political chapters be opened .
Mr President , Turkey should not prescribe these political criteria on our behalf .
The Turkish Government told its own citizens when it took office that it is necessary to modernise Turkey .
For this purpose , the political criteria need to be reformed , because in order to create a socially-oriented market economy , people must be given the opportunity to experience their creativity and all citizens must enjoy the same rights .
This is why the political criteria are now central in our report .
When I , along with the Committee on Foreign Affairs , the Joint Parliamentary Committee ( JPC ) , and everyone else , visited Turkey , I got the feeling that something was shifting and could see a little light at the end of the tunnel , as Commissioner Rehn commented before .
Ten years ago , I could not have imagined that there would be television programmes in Kurdish .
This , too , has been included in the report .
Moreover , I very much appreciate Turkey 's positive role in the Caucasus .
I have expressed my appreciation for the first steps in the direction of opening up the borders with the Armenians , because they too need to be released from the isolation they are currently facing .
Mr President , a national programme has been approved to carry out those reforms .
These are all positive elements , and I sincerely hope that Turkey will now apply itself to addressing these reforms with the new negotiator .
A modern and prosperous Turkey is of the utmost importance to the Turkish people , but - and I say this in every Member State - certainly also of major importance to us all in the European Union .
I should like to make a few more points , Mr President .
We frequently receive reports that the freedom of the media and press leave something to be desired and that the press , when it exercises it freedoms , is subsequently faced with fiscal assessments or other measures .
This needs to change .
Finally , on the subject of the amendments that have been tabled , I should like to counsel the Socialist Group in the European Parliament against them , to accept the report as it is before us .
We acknowledge that improvements need to be made , but we should not make additional requests , as these are unnecessary and will only lead to polarisation in this House .
Mr President , EU enlargement is , at the moment , far less of a priority than in the years leading up to the major enlargement waves of 2004 and 2007 .
Public opinion in the existing Member States is far less positive about this now .
This is , to a large extent , attributable to the differences in prosperity and to the level of salaries , differences that can lead to more labour migration from poorer to richer Member States .
Similarly , the problem of visa requirements reviled in the countries of former Yugoslavia is very much related to this fear .
As a result , many residents of those countries who gained easy access to the present EU Member States until 1992 are now finding it difficult to visit our countries .
This needs to change .
When candidate countries try their best to become fully-fledged members of the European Union as quickly as possible , they can make mistakes in the process .
For this exact purpose , Macedonia passed new legislation in 2008 at break-neck speed , that now turns out to be inconsistent with our prevailing views on careful democratic decision making .
The opposition , along with various non-governmental organisations and individual citizens , have complained about careless governance in different cases .
In their view , the largest governing party takes more liberties than what befits a pluriform society , in which democracy is about more than just holding elections .
Criticism has been levelled at the police for failing to register complaints lodged by the public .
There is indignation about the demonstrative arrest of the mayor of the City of Strumitsa and of other politicians .
I suggest we do not sweep these points of criticism under the carpet when we adopt the resolution tomorrow .
There is every reason to speak out openly that not all is well yet , not by a long shot .
Nevertheless , we have to recognise that Macedonia is no worse off than other states during their accession negotiations and even sometimes after their accession .
If the accession negotiations with Macedonia get underway now , it will not be until 2017 at least when that country can join .
A year ago , Parliament endorsed my proposal to start these negotiations as quickly as possible .
Subsequently , the disruption of the parliamentary elections became an argument to wait for the presidential and local council elections that are to be held soon .
A further delay in the process brings with it two major drawbacks : the broad support within Macedonia for EU membership will crumble away , and the status of the candidate country will thus lose all meaning in future .
Everyone knows that using the name Macedonia without any prefixes will meet with insuperable objections from Greece .
For Greece , this neighbouring state is North Macedonia , High Macedonia , Vardar Macedonia or Skopje Macedonia .
This is a considerably more positive attitude than that prior to 2006 , in which Greece wanted to avoid any use of the name Macedonia for its neighbours to the north .
It is precisely in Greece 's interest , much more so than the other Member States , for this northern neighbour to join the European Union as quickly as possible .
For this reason , a solution must be agreed by both states at the earliest opportunity .
The alternative is that both states continue to wait until the other state makes the first major concession , but this other state cannot be the only party to run diametrically counter to public opinion at home .
We must steer clear from a situation in which referendums will decide that compromises cannot be struck with the neighbour .
As long as no compromise has been reached , my successors will be reporting each year for decades to come that progress is not possible .
Finally , the other bilateral difference of opinion between Slovenia and Croatia should also be resolved promptly .
In 2011 , Croatia must be able to be a fully-fledged Member State .
State support for the shipbuilding sector should not prove a hindrance if other Member States are allowed to give state support to their banks or their automotive industries .
It should be possible to maintain the level of employment in Pula , Rijeka and Split .
Mr President , in this enlargement debate , we must correct three important mistakes .
Firstly , Turkey is not a European country , but forms part of Asia Minor .
As the President-in-Office of the Council has rightly said , Turkey is a strategically important partner and therefore we need a strategic partnership and not accession to the EU .
Secondly , the problems relating to Macedonia have nothing to do with the fact that the democratic system there is allegedly not working , Commissioner .
I was present at the elections and they were exemplary .
There were difficulties with a tiny minority within the minority .
In fact , the problems concern the dreadful name issue , which is being misused for the purposes of blackmail by both sides .
Thirdly , Croatia has been ready to join the European Union for a long time .
We could have completed the negotiations this year quite easily , as the European Parliament has demanded on several occasions and will probably demand again tomorrow .
The fact that we have not yet reached this point is entirely due to a blockade by Slovenia in the Council .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council and Commissioner , I call on you to find a reasonable solution which will finally bring this blockade to an end .
The border problem is exactly the same as when Slovenia joined .
We cannot allow one country to join despite an unresolved issue and not the other .
Therefore , we need to support the Slovenes and Croats in their search for a sensible solution to the border problem but , at the same time , to open all the chapters in the negotiations .
The two issues have nothing to do with one another and opening the chapters in the negotiations is a requirement for achieving a positive result this year with an excellent and exemplary accession candidate .
As far as the solution to the bilateral question is concerned , where we are offering our help , I would ask you , Commissioner , to work towards an objective arbitration process .
On Monday , your spokeswoman said that this could take place on the basis of international law and jurisprudence .
I would like to ask you whether you feel this wording to be suitable for a compromise to be reached between the two sides .
I would in any case like this wording to ....
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , I should like to make a few points with regard to the excellent report by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten on Turkey .
My group subscribes to the main conclusion in the report , namely that too little progress has been made recently .
Admittedly , 2008 was a turbulent year for Turkish politics , and this turbulence will have stopped a few reforms from being carried out , to the extent that part of the process has ground to a halt .
Now that these problems in Turkey have been resolved to some extent , we hope that the government , based on plans it has tabled , will make haste to do what is necessary to keep the negotiation process with the European Union credible .
I would refer to the national programme for reforms that has been set up by the present government .
Needless to say , our group will continue to support the negotiations with Turkey , and these negotiations are , as far as we are concerned , about EU membership , even though we should not labour under any illusions as to the process and the possible duration of these .
It is unacceptable , though , for the impulse to come from Turkey alone .
We at the EU , too , should remain reliable partners in that process .
Turkey is of strategic importance to the European Union , not least on account of our energy supply and everything that is related to this , and the Socialist Group in the European Parliament is in favour of opening the energy chapter in the negotiation process .
Eventually , though , Turkey will need to do most of the groundwork , and the Oomen-Ruijten report contains many points which we have looked at in a critical light and should continue to do so .
I should like to mention a few points from this excellent report .
Freedom of speech must be guaranteed .
We are still not happy with what is happening over there .
Recently , there was an Internet campaign concerning Armenia and the genocide .
Surely the way in which the authorities are responding to this undermines this freedom .
Something that is of paramount importance , that we also want to keep repeating and about which the European Parliament should not leave anyone in any doubt , is that we will never accept the Islamisation of Turkey , and that ultimately we will be able to admit that country only on the basis of its secular character as is now enshrined in the Constitution .
I should like to finish off with one last remark .
Commissioner Rehn has spoken in somewhat optimistic terms about the negotiations in Cyprus .
In my view , we should not do anything , but neither should we neglect doing anything , to secure the success of these talks , and we will also need to appeal to Turkey to do nothing that could thwart these talks , because it is important for the parties to negotiate in freedom about how they would like to shape their joint future .
I can only say that I hope that the optimism displayed by Commissioner Rehn is justified .
At the end of last year , there were two important developments in Croatia 's accession process .
On the one hand , the Croatian Government took significant steps towards judicial reform , making decisive moves against organised crime and showing results in the fight against corruption .
At the same time , the accession negotiations came to a halt because of the bilateral border dispute .
This affects not just Croatia , ladies and gentlemen , but , more fundamentally , the credibility of the enlargement process .
Such behaviour threatens that credibility , and therefore it is very important for the obstacles to be removed as soon as possible .
Blocking these talks sends the very dangerous message that accession does not depend on fulfilling the conditions but on settling bilateral disputes , in which one side , in a position of strength , seeks to force its will upon the other .
We welcome Commissioner Olli Rehn 's recommendation of mediation , and it is very heartening that Slovenia and Croatia responded positively .
We hope that henceforth there will no longer be any reason for obstructing the subsequent accession talks .
We continue to believe that it will be possible to conclude the negotiations by the end of the year , in accordance with the original timetable .
For this to happen , however , further efforts are necessary .
We expect Croatia to dispel all concerns about their cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal at The Hague , and to turn over all the documents which the tribunal requests .
This is very important .
We likewise consider it important to assist in refugee return , to integrate the Roma minority and to complete the desegregation programme as well as to use EU funds effectively , since we have seen significant deficiencies in this regard .
It is still possible that we can keep to the original timetable .
This is our joint responsibility .
We expect constructive actions on the part of Croatia as well as of the European Union , for this is not just a matter of our joint effort but of the credibility of the entire enlargement process .
Mr President , firstly I would like to congratulate Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , Mr Swoboda and Mr Meijer on their very solidly prepared resolutions .
As far as Turkey is concerned , the picture of our relations outlined in this document is not optimistic , but it certainly is true .
I am glad that in the resolution , our expectations in the area of freedom of religion for Christian communities in Turkey have been upheld , including the right to teach , the right to train clergy , and also protection of the property of these communities .
As with other matters , we are experiencing continuous and increasingly irritating delays from the Turkish side in relation to these issues .
Irrespective of the accession process , Turkey is a very promising and important partner for Europe in the areas of security and energy .
The efforts of the government of Prime Minister Erdogan and President Gul at improving relations with Turkey 's neighbours have been the most important aspect of Turkish politics recently .
It is a pity that these efforts were undermined by rash measures in relation to Israel .
The attempts to link development of strategic cooperation between the EU and Turkey , which is a matter of immediate importance , with the negotiation process , the dynamics of which are slowing for objective reasons , are also disturbing .
That is how I understand the Turkish statement on Nabucco .
We need a more pragmatic approach here .
The temptation of blackmail is a bad counsellor .
As for Croatia , we should do everything we can to maintain the tempo of the accession process , which foresees accession of Croatia to the EU in 2009 .
The stability of this region is still fragile .
Neither border disputes nor disputes over ownership can become additional conditions for expansion in the Balkans .
In the name of stabilisation in the region we should , as quickly as possible , include Croatia in the integration process , and then Serbia , Macedonia and Montenegro , and perhaps Kosovo and Albania .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I can be brief about the Oomen-Ruijten report .
It is , all in all , a fine report that gives an accurate account of the remaining problems and where there is progress , it says so .
In that respect , all credit to the rapporteur .
I would , in fact , like to seize this opportunity to take stock of five years of EU / Turkey relations in this parliamentary term .
Looking back to five years ago , 2004 turned out to be the golden year of reforms that brought Turkey really closer to the EU .
It is strange , and also a little sad if truth be told , that since 2004 , the rate of reforms has been too slow , that , in actual fact , the EU is now less willing to give Turkey a fair chance and that in Turkey , enthusiasm for membership has waned .
All parliamentary reports published in all those years clearly state Parliament 's priorities where crucial reforms are concerned .
First of all , with regard to freedom of speech and opinion , even though the notorious Article 301 has been changed , the situation is still unsatisfactory .
It is very unfortunate that websites , including YouTube , are still not available in Turkey , and there is unacceptable pressure from the government on parts of the media .
Secondly , concerning the Kurdish issue , there was considerable hope in 2007 that , following the accession of the Kurdish-nationalist party DTP , a solution would be found between the DTP and the AKP .
This was not the case , unfortunately .
Thirdly , with regard to religious minorities , although there is a law on organisations , which offers a solution to some of the minorities , nevertheless for a large Muslim minority , the Alevites , still no solution has been found .
Despite all this sluggish progress , there is still a majority in this Parliament who are in favour of accession .
In my view , the message of this debate and of the debates over the past five years to the Turkish Government should be that this support , despite inadequate reforms , will only persist if new reform proposals are made without delay in all three areas .
In this respect , I share to some extent the Commissioner 's optimism about Kurdish television , about the openings that have been created between Turkey and Armenia .
The will to reform from 2004 will need to return .
If this happens , I am convinced that our debates and those in Turkey will once again be filled with optimism .
Mr President , Commissioner , the progress report on Turkey and its evaluation in December concern whether or not this country has complied with the Copenhagen criteria and its obligations under the Association Agreement and the Additional Protocol to the Ankara agreement .
The objective of full integration , which is important both to Turkey and the European Union , is still the driving force behind a series of reforms and changes in Turkey 's policies in order to secure the rights of all minorities , find a political solution to the Kurdish question , recognise the Armenian genocide and open the border with Armenia .
Turkey needs to comply with all its contractual obligations towards the European Union , as all previous candidate countries have done .
Instead , Turkey has failed to comply with the contractual obligations undertaken towards the European Union with regard to the Republic of Cyprus as a Member State .
It refuses to open its ports and airports to ships and aircraft from the Republic and lift the veto on the participation of Cyprus in international organisations and , while seeking a role as a regulatory factor in the area , continues to infringe international law by occupying Cyprus .
Today we are in the middle of negotiations to resolve the Cyprus question on the basis of a two-zone , twin-community federation with political equality , as formulated in the UN resolutions under international and European law .
The European Union must therefore abide by its initial positions and step up the pressure , so that Turkey allows substantial progress to be made with the negotiations , stops the occupation and takes the action needed to clarify the fate of the missing persons .
We have re-tabled this issue with amendments , even though there is another resolution on the missing persons , following the recent statements by the Turkish soldier Olgkats about the execution in 1974 of 10 Greek-Cypriot prisoners who are still missing .
This is a purely humanitarian issue and does not diminish in value however many times we repeat it .
As regards the energy chapter , it cannot be opened unless Turkey stops preventing the Republic of Cyprus from exercising its sovereign rights in its exclusive economic zone .
I see in your own report , Commissioner , that the Commission is concerned about the harassment of vessels conducting research for hydrocarbons in Cyprus 's exclusive territorial zone by Turkish warships , and that in its conclusions of 8 December 2008 , the Council urges the avoidance of any kind of threat , source of friction or action which could damage good neighbourly relations and the peaceful settlement of disputes .
It would be a good thing , Commissioner , for you to push Turkey in the right direction , precisely as set out in your statements .
We have tabled an amendment on this point , the content of which is fully in keeping with your statements , Commissioner , which are therefore the statements of the European Commission .
Mr President , in Paragraph 17 , rapporteur Mrs Oomen-Ruijten calls upon the whole of Turkish society to practise freedom of religion on a large scale .
I fully endorse this appeal , because it touches on one of Turkey 's and the EU 's basic accession criteria .
In the meantime , however , Turkish education and the Turkish media are competing in the dissemination of the stereotypical caricature of indigenous Christians , Turkish Christians , as enemies of their nation , as accomplices of western powers , who wish to re-colonise the homeland and share it out between them .
Commissioner , will you call the passive Turkish Government , who are also responsible for this , to account for this accession obstacle ?
Also , Commissioner , all Turkish identity documents reveal the religion of its citizens , the very cause of many forms of social discrimination against Turkish Christians .
This is ample reason , Commissioner , to insist on the immediate scrapping of this section in official documents with your Turkish interlocutor .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , although Croatia appears to have made satisfactory progress on adopting legislation to combat discrimination , I would suggest that before we praise the statements made in the resolution , we should check to see how the laws are applied .
For example , with regard to access to real estate , especially as far as opportunities for Italian investment are concerned , there appears to me to have been very little progress made in practice .
I do not support the resolution because , despite the obvious deficiency of the progress made and the discrepancies with the acquis communautaire , it looks forward to accession that may take place , in my opinion , too soon .
Let them give back what they have stolen from our Istrian and Dalmatian refugees since 1947 .
Then , and only then , can we talk about their accession .
( SV ) Mr President , the resolution on the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is , in my opinion , a well-balanced text and I would like to thank Mr Meijer for concentrating his work both on the reforms and objectives that have been achieved and on the issues that still require further efforts .
I am particularly pleased about the fact that the resolution sends the clear message that the current situation after three years of waiting to start negotiations is very worrying and unacceptable .
It is absolutely clear that the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is a European state whose place is within the European Union .
When we discuss this issue in Parliament , I usually avoid mentioning the name dispute between Greece and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
I believe that there are many other issues that should be discussed more thoroughly that we never discuss because the name dispute takes a disproportionate amount of time .
Today , however , having read a number of the amendments , I feel the need to emphasise very strongly that it is unacceptable to exploit whatever bilateral conflicts there may be to make it more difficult for a country to move faster towards European integration or to prevent a country 's participation in international institutions .
Many countries have had , and still have , bilateral conflicts , and we all want these conflicts resolved as quickly as possible in a way that is acceptable to both sides , but in the meantime , they should not , in my opinion , block the European integration process for each other , particularly when the countries in question are in a sensitive position , both geographically and politically .
( PL ) Mr President , for the third year in a row , I am acting as rapporteur for the Socialist Group in the European Parliament regarding the progress report for the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
I must say that the situation regarding Macedonia is reminiscent of a scene from an ancient Greek tragedy .
Whilst it is true that the good will of all parties is universally declared , nothing further than this is forthcoming .
Three years ago , I was sure that at the end of the present Parliamentary term , we would be able to talk about success in negotiations with Macedonia concerning accession to the European Union .
This has not happened .
The main problem is the matter of the name .
Irrespective of the fact that this is a bilateral question unrelated to the Copenhagen criteria , it is affecting the political situation during negotiations with Macedonia concerning accession .
Greece is willing , Macedonia itself is willing , but , for several years now , it has not been possible to come to an understanding in this matter .
As rapporteur for this report for the Socialist Group , I can only express the hope that this question will be resolved with the interest of the European Union , Macedonia and Greece in view .
There is a problem with the stabilisation of political institutions in Macedonia .
We see this very clearly .
We also see very clearly the political will of society , the authorities and political groups in a country which is moving towards ties with the European Union .
The Council should decide to commence accession negotiations before the end of 2009 , but this should be dependent on full realisation of the most important priorities of prior understandings .
In this respect , the forthcoming Presidential and local elections in Macedonia are very important .
We in the European Parliament are going to monitor these elections closely .
Mr President , thank you for clarifying that .
Greece joined the European Union in 1981 and membership has brought many benefits to that country , of which I am extremely fond .
Almost 30 years later , however , Macedonia naturally wants to join the European Union and share those same benefits .
It is therefore only right that Greece , as a neighbouring Balkan state , expresses its firm solidarity and works to help a small country like Macedonia to achieve its aspirations .
But because of its own province named Macedonia , Greece objects to the use of the name ' Republic of Macedonia ' on its own , insisting instead on ' former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ' , or FYROM .
For the sake of consistency , why does Greece not therefore also insist on calling Estonia the ' Former Soviet Republic of Estonia ' as a formal title ?
I therefore regret that Greece is now considering applying its veto to Macedonia 's membership over this issue .
I fear that Greece risks bringing itself into ridicule and I urge the Government in Athens to soften its line .
I am known in this House and in my constituency as a strong philhellene and a friend of Greek and Cypriot MEPs alike , but I am also a member of the newly formed EP Friends of Macedonia .
Let us resolve this outstanding issue promptly and sensibly .
Also , I call on Parliament to send a delegation of MEPs to observe Macedonia 's forthcoming presidential election and help legitimise the outcome .
As regards Croatia 's imminent EU accession , it is regrettable that border disputes with Slovenia remain outstanding .
As in the case of Greece and Macedonia , these difficulties must be solved bilaterally rather than being dragged into the EU accession process .
Slovenia joined the European Union while it still had outstanding issues with Italy , which did not stand in its way and try and block its accession , so I see no reason why Croatia should be held back in turn .
In a similar vein and in future , I would never countenance Croatia vetoing Serbia 's admission because of territorial disputes .
Of more immediate concern to my electors who are suffering from enlargement fatigue is the scale of organised crime and corruption in Croatia , which the Government must truly make it a national priority to eradicate .
( DE ) Madam President , first may I clarify that I am speaking on the subject of Turkey on behalf of my group and not in my own name .
Developments in Turkey are a matter for concern to liberals and democrats .
In three years , there has not only been too little progress in the pace of reform , there have also been some setbacks .
As Commissioner Rehn rightly stated here , freedom of the press is a core value in the European Union .
In a country which wants to accede to the EU , there must be respect for the freedom of the press beyond all doubt .
However , what we see is something else .
Critical journalists have difficulty obtaining credentials .
The new owner of ATV still has a great many questions to answer , there are calls from the highest offices for a boycott on certain media and the Dohan group has been hit with an arbitrary tax penalty of EUR 400 million .
This is an arbitrary measure which brings us to the question of the rule of law , which is as important to liberals as freedom of the press .
The rule of law must also be guaranteed .
Reports on increasing cases of torture and maltreatment in police custody are deeply worrying to us , especially where they take place outside official prisons or police stations , but of course , if they take place there , that of course also worries us .
Symbolic or purely pragmatic measures such as the acceptance of a new programme or the appointment of a new chief negotiator are welcome , if you look at it from a purely practical point of view .
However , they alone are not enough to give renewed impetus to the pace of reform .
In the opinion of the liberals and democrats , Turkey must reform its economy and society , politics and constitution irrespective of its accession prospects , in its own interest , in the interests of its people .
I should like if I may to say something else about this debate .
This debate reminds me of a fairground carousel , on which sometimes a Turkish , sometimes a Croatian and sometimes a Macedonian horse rides by .
I think we should restructure this debate , and soon .
Moreover , I would be grateful if we held it in Brussels and not in Strasbourg .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , on the question of Croatia , well , those who speak on behalf of and were elected by the Italian public have a duty to point out their rightful claim .
Over 60 years have gone by since the historic theft of our property in Istria and Dalmatia .
Croatia has a moral duty to perform and President Barroso has a dossier on this delicate and injurious issue , which must be brought to people 's attention .
It is primarily a moral issue rather than a political one , a matter of returning property to its rightful owners : 1 411 estates originally belonged to Italians .
As for Turkey , how can we think of calmly granting membership to a country that is at present imposing an Islamic veto , within NATO , on the nomination of a Secretary General merely because he represents a country , namely Denmark , in which the cartoon affair took place .
Turkey , an Islamic country , has called an Islamic halt to the nomination of a Prime Minister to the post of Secretary General of the Atlantic Alliance , for the sole reason that he is Prime Minister of a country in which Islamic cartoons were published - a liberal country in which obviously , by contrast with Turkey , it is possible to publish ironic cartoons about Mohammed .
In Turkey there is a law - and the Commissioner should be aware of this - that prohibits the construction of any non-Islamic place of worship on a street on which there is a mosque .
In other words , if there is a mosque on that street , then no other religious building is allowed .
Our rapporteur , who is I think wearing a lovely pair of trousers , would not today be allowed to walk into the Turkish parliament in her trouser suit .
That shows how far behind we are .
Turkey is Asia , not Europe .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first may I welcome the Deputy Prime Minister of Macedonia here today on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance .
Secondly , my thanks to the Czech President-in-Office of the Council and for the statement by Prime Minister Topolánek , who firstly pointed out yesterday that the dispute between Macedonia and Greece over names is a bilateral affair and should have no repercussions , and who secondly argued in favour of Macedonia 's accession to NATO as quickly as possible , and hence for Greece to withdraw its veto - two very important points .
We are perhaps sometimes somewhat arrogant when we debate candidate countries , which is why I should like to raise the issue of personal responsibility , because we discuss the prospects and shortcomings of candidate countries here but , on the other hand , we have very fundamental political forces , such as the conservatives in Germany , who want to push for Croatia to be accepted and for no other states to follow .
If this were to become the majority opinion in the European Union in the next parliamentary term , it would destroy the heavily-financed peace plan set up after the Balkan wars .
We would lose credibility and the credibility of Europe would be set back .
I ask everyone to resist that .
With Croatia and Slovenia we assume that , without double standards and without any veto , things are going well and that the border disputes can be set aside and we hope that negotiations will be started with Macedonia as quickly as possible .
Madam President , if Turkey joins the European Union , it will be the poorest and most economically backward Member State , with a population of over 72 million people .
Hundreds of thousands , if not millions , of people will migrate to countries like Britain .
The European Union will border countries such as Syria , Iraq and Iran , with enormous potential for future conflict and confrontation .
However , the people who should really be worried about Turkish entry are Greek Cypriots : if Turkey joins the EU , the Turks will have the right to go anywhere in the EU .
Thousands of Turks will be able to legally go to Southern Cyprus and effectively occupy it , quite legitimately , if they so wish .
In the European elections on 4 June , voters of Greek origin in London should remember that the Conservative , Labour , Liberal Democrat and Green Parties all enthusiastically support Turkish entry .
The only British party in the European Parliament that opposes Turkish entry is the UK Independence Party .
( NL ) Madam President , if nothing else , the negotiations with Turkey have helped the Commission and Council perfect the art of euphemisms .
The way in which the problems in Turkey are being minimised is starting to become impressive .
This has even become the subject of occasional ridicule in Turkey .
The catalogue of problems is so extensive that it is puzzling that the negotiations are still carrying on .
Indeed , the Commission had promised that the negotiation process would keep pace with the reform process in Turkey .
This promise has well and truly been broken now , because new chapters are being opened constantly .
The balance sheet of more than three years of negotiations is positively lamentable .
Let us therefore pull the plug .
Turkey is not a European country and does not , therefore , belong to the European Union , but let us instead work out a relationship of privileged partnership .
( DE ) Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , Croatia is the first country for whose accession to the European Union , following experience from the last two enlargements with Romania and Bulgaria , the bar has rightly been set very high , which is why the benchmarks and progress made by Croatia are especially praiseworthy .
The remaining reforms in the judiciary referred to are being tackled .
Full cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal in The Hague , the call for which was reiterated , is on the right path .
With Slovenia , there is the question of bilateral border disputes .
Commissioner , you suddenly referred to ' European border disputes ' .
Before 2004 , they were not European border disputes ; they were border disputes which were not acknowledged .
Nor , at that time , did anyone apply to the UN in order to settle this dispute ; now they have done so .
So , if Slovenia stopped obstructing the opening of the necessary negotiation chapter on the grounds of these bilateral border disputes , which were not an obstacle to its accession to the European Union , accession negotiations between Croatia and the EU could be concluded by the end of this year .
The candidate country Macedonia has also made huge progress .
If the elections to be held at the end of March meet international standards , the EU would finally have to set a date for the opening of accession negotiations .
The purely bilateral dispute over names between Macedonia and Greece should not encourage Greece to enter a veto .
All that remains is to hope that the two EU Member States of Greece and Slovenia remember their own situation before their accession to the EU and conclude that they should act fairly and in a European manner towards their neighbouring states .
If , with the help of their neighbours , Croatia and Macedonia achieve the objectives I have described this year , that would send out a positive signal to the rest of the Western Balkan states that the EU is serious about the promise given in Thessaloniki about the accession of all the Western Balkan states , by which the CDU also stands Mrs Beer .
( CS ) I would like to make a few comments .
Firstly , it is good that this debate on EU expansion is taking place because it is important that even in a period of great economic crisis , Europe does not lose sight of one of its successful priorities , namely further expansion .
We must maintain our focus on this priority .
Secondly , as far as Croatia is concerned , I firmly believe that the accession talks can be completed this year .
I would therefore like to call on the Council to act now and set up the technical working group that will be tasked with drafting the accession treaty .
As far as the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is concerned , it is unfortunate and demoralising for Macedonia that accession talks have not yet started in Skopje , despite the fact that it is three years since Macedonia obtained candidate country status .
I would therefore like to call on the Council to speed up this process .
And as far as Turkey is concerned , I agree that political reforms must be accelerated before the so-called political chapters can be opened .
However , I cannot understand why it is not possible to negotiate with Turkey over the ' Energy ' chapter , for example , which is vitally important , both for the EU and Turkey .
( SL ) We in the ALDE Group support Mr Meier 's report .
The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ( FYROM ) deserves an opportunity and a better future .
What it also needs , however , is a modicum of international respect , including the right to its own identity and recognition of its own language and culture .
The issue of the country 's name has been dragging on for too long and the atmosphere in the country has been worsening for some time .
There has been more and more populism and nationalism , there is too much political entrenchment , and verbal attacks are being levelled at neighbouring countries .
Naming infrastructural installations after characters from the periods of Greek history which predated the arrival of the Slavs in those regions is not conducive to good neighbourly relations .
Erecting more 10 m tall monuments is unnecessary .
If we wish to prevent instability , we need to help the state , politicians and people of FYROM to break out of the blockade .
Abolishing visas does not go far enough .
What this country needs is a date for the beginning of negotiations .
They deserve the opportunity to show their merit during the accession process .
We need to help them now and show that we have confidence in them .
This will help us contribute stability to the region and facilitate development in a positive direction .
FYROM needs a positive response now , because time is very much of the essence .
In fact , you could say that time is money .
Allow me also to say a few words about Croatia .
Commissioner , two former prime ministers of Slovenia and Croatia , respectively , namely Drnovšek and Račan , attained a major achievement when they concluded an agreement concerning the border .
Unfortunately , they are no longer with us , but they had the courage to press ahead , invest in the future and attain an achievement of some kind .
I think it is right for you to urge both governments to follow in their footsteps and to reach an agreement concerning the border again , and in the near future , too .
That would be a good thing for Slovenia , Croatia , the European Union and the Western Balkans .
( PL ) Madam President , negotiations with Turkey about accession to the EU are still in progress , although they should have been completed long ago .
The Turkish Government has not presented a cohesive and comprehensive programme of political reforms .
Turkey has not recommenced work on a new secular constitution , an important element of which was supposed to be protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms which the Turkish government was going to guarantee .
Discrimination against ethnic and religious minorities continues .
Turkey has not taken steps either to strengthen the impartiality of judicial institutions .
Freedom of speech and of the press is still not protected in Turkey , indeed , it is openly violated .
Domestic violence and forced marriages continue to be common .
Turkey 's opposition to strategic cooperation between the EU and NATO manifestly acts against the interests of the Community .
Furthermore , Turkey does not recognise the independence of one of the Member States of the European Union , namely Cyprus .
This is a scandal .
Turkey is a country which is antidemocratic , it violates human rights , and is guided by a value system which is foreign to us .
It will be much better for Europe if Turkey does not become a member of the EU .
( DE ) Thank you , Madam President .
In this very comprehensive debate here today , I just want to highlight one problem and that is the issue of multilingualism in Macedonia .
Conflict broke out recently in schools in Struga between Albanian- and Macedonian-speaking parents .
Under pressure from these nationalistic-minded parents , those in charge reacted by separating teaching by ethnic groups , which is a step in the wrong direction .
The learning of languages is not fostered by keeping linguistic groups apart ; it is fostered by informally bringing people who speak different languages together at school , at work and at play .
The teaching of English , which is now already compulsory across the board from year one , is of course to be welcomed , but it should not be used as an excuse by Macedonians not to learn Albanian or for Albanians not to learn Macedonian .
Schools in multilingual regions have a very particular task : they must teach the children their mother tongue and the language of their neighbours .
United in diversity is the motto of the EU and should also apply to Macedonians .
( DA ) Madam President , I believe that Turkey should be a member of the EU .
The criticism of Turkey is justified in many cases , but the excuses and the sitting on the fence must stop and a serious plan for Turkey joining the EU should be drawn up .
It will take time , but the country must join and this is something we should say in a clear and binding way .
Instead of a pseudo-debate on democracy in Turkey , we need a real and open discussion on the place that religion can and should play in the social debate .
We need to create a form of European cooperation that is capable of meeting the challenge presented by a Europe made up of different religions .
That is , we need to do this without losing sight of the central values and the inviolability of the person springing from the European values created in the melting pot of Jewish , Christian and Hellenistic culture in the centuries before and after the birth of Christ .
( FR ) Madam President , I have one minute to say to you that , despite the determination and the blindness of the European institutions , one thing should be obvious to everyone : the time has come to put an end to Turkey 's accession process .
Negotiations have become bogged down , there is a mutual lack of understanding and a permanent state of ambiguity .
This situation is detrimental to all - to the European Union as well as to Turkey .
We have to stop the hypocrisy and the pretence .
We must remember one obvious fact . Turkey is a country in Asia Minor .
Turkey is not a European country , either geographically or culturally .
Turkey is militarily occupying a part of a Member State of the European Union since , to this day , we have only ten negotiating chapters out of 35 and only one has been closed .
It is time for everyone to regain their freedom , independence and sovereignty , starting with Cyprus .
The people of Europe do not want Turkey in Europe .
Let us respect our people and show respect for Europe !
( HU ) As chairman of the EU-Croatia Joint Parliamentary Committee , I would like to draw your attention to a highly significant development .
On Monday , the Croatian Prime Minister - and not only the Prime Minister but the President as well , and each of the parliament 's opposition parties - agreed that the EU should mediate in resolving the border dispute between Croatia and Slovenia based on international law .
I consider it unprecedented in the history of the EU that one Member State should paralyse the enlargement of the Union and currently prevent 12 negotiation chapters from being opened , while back in 2001 , at the time of its own accession talks , it declared that it had no border disputes with its neighbours .
Since the start of accession negotiations in 2005 , numerous results have been achieved regarding the transformation of the judicial system and public administration , anti-corruption measures , minority rights , refugee return and regional cooperation .
In the case of Croatia , this involved for the first time the attainment of a set of benchmarks .
Around 100 of these were successfully achieved .
Through these extraordinary efforts , the Croatian people now look forward at last to positive messages from the European Union .
The sensitive and self-conscious population was disappointed when a neighbouring , friendly country single-handedly blocked the continuation of the accession negotiations .
The long-term , reassuring stabilisation of the Balkans is possible only by way of European integration .
The Union is mistaken if it allows Slovenia to obstruct Croatian talks because of its bilateral dispute , even though Croatia has done everything possible in the interests of defending fundamental European values and adopting the acquis .
I would note , Madam President , that it is unfortunate - perhaps for those who are listening to us as well - that we are dealing with the fate of three important , historic countries at the same time , as if they were one and the same .
It might have been better to discuss the three countries each in its turn .
( NL ) Madam President , I should like to take up a point which Mrs Oomen-Ruijten also made , namely that of political criteria .
In the negotiation process with Turkey , civil rights were very clearly placed on the agenda .
This is also reflected in this report .
A number of things have clearly improved : Kurdish television , but also the installation of a women 's committee in the Turkish Parliament , for which I , as rapporteur on women 's rights in Turkey , worked extremely hard in recent years .
These are major reforms .
Another obvious improvement is the increase in the number of shelters for abused women .
What happens , though , to those women when they leave the shelters ?
How are they and their children looked after ?
Turkey should address this issue .
With the local council elections to be held at the end of this month , more women should sit on the local councils .
I should also like to draw your attention to the fight against fraud .
Turkey should cooperate with the European Union more effectively in the fight against fraud and in the fight against female trafficking , because far too many people become the victim of fraud involving the green funds or fraud involving charity organisations .
Madam President , I have never supported the admission of non-European Turkey into the EU , but the current economic downturn makes me more convinced than ever of that view .
As a huge net contributor , the United Kingdom carries a disproportionate burden in funding the EU so , when it comes to the massive additional cost of enlargement to include Turkey , we would be burdened beyond what we could bear .
With a reduced tax base , falling income and increased welfare outlay , and a crippling debt legacy in the future decades arising from the mismanagement of the Labour Government , we cannot go on taking out our diminishing cheque book to pay for Turkish enlargement .
Call that narrow , mercenary national interest if you will , but to me it is inescapable common and fiscal sense .
( EL ) Madam President , as the oldest member in the region of both the European Union and NATO , Greece was and continues to be at the vanguard of efforts to integrate all the Balkan countries into the Euro-Atlantic structures , because it firmly believes that the development of countries in the area will benefit everyone .
Greece has invested over a billion dollars in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and has created 20 000 jobs , which is unprecedented for foreign investment in a local economy .
As far as Greece is concerned , the question of the name is not simply a problem with historic , psychological or sentimental dimensions .
It is an ongoing material political issue which concerns all Greek citizens and the European values of good neighbourly and regional cooperation .
I would remind the House that Greece consented to the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia being granted candidate status for accession to the European Union in document , with an express commitment to negotiating a mutually acceptable solution on the question of the name under the aegis of the UN which would contribute to regional cooperation and good neighbourly relations , because without a solution , there can be no friendship and without friendship , there can be no alliances or partnerships .
Our representation is not opposed to all the expressions in the report which strongly support a solution to the issue under the aegis of the UN .
Unfortunately , however , over and beyond this clear position , there are additional phrases in paragraphs 12 and 13 which undermine efforts to resolve the problem and encourage intransigence , which is why they are absolutely unacceptable , while Amendments 1 and 2 restore the correct wording to paragraphs 12 and 13 .
For the rest , the report contains many elements which will help the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to continue its efforts on the road towards Europe .
( EL ) Madam President , the policy of enlargement is the most successful expression of the European Union 's foreign policy .
In the case of Turkey , the message must be clear : the objective is integration , but it comes through fulfilling its obligations , consolidating democracy , respecting human rights and maintaining good neighbourly relations .
Turkey is at a crucial stage , both internally and in redefining its geostrategic role .
Within this framework , it is vital that it continues its reforms and moves steadily towards Europe .
However , I would point out that the climate of tension which Turkey recently cultivated in the Aegean has caused new problems .
In the case of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , the Commission clearly emphasised that the country does not meet the basic requirements for the opening of negotiations , given that it has significant democratic deficits .
As far as the dispute over the name is concerned , despite the fact that Greece has demonstrated a spirit of cooperation and realism , the government in Skopje has failed to respond .
Unfortunately , however , in the report by the European Parliament which we are examining today , my country is presented as the only country responsible for the delay in opening negotiations .
That is unfair on Greece and does not facilitate the resolution of a problem which has plagued both countries for over 15 years .
( SL ) So far , I have endorsed all of the European Parliament 's reports charting Croatia 's progress on its way to fully-fledged membership of the European Union .
I salute Croatia 's many new achievements on this occasion , too .
I will be happy to endorse this important report , which has been painstakingly prepared by my fellow member Mr Swoboda , as well , provided that the compromise amendments reflect a balanced and realistic approach .
That is the only kind of approach that can eliminate the causes of the obstacles and speed up the process of Croatia 's accession .
I fully agree with the President-in-Office , Mr Vondra , when he says that we need a constructive and dynamic approach .
In this context , it seems important to me that , following a string of unsuccessful bilateral attempts , the European Commission has now , with its mediation initiative , offered an opportunity for a new and credible attempt to be made to reach a final resolution of the problem of the border between Slovenia and Croatia and , by the same token , to make rapid progress in accession negotiations with Croatia .
I am pleased to note that both countries have been receptive to the initiative and that talks have commenced at a high level .
I hope that the initiative will bring us much closer to a threefold victory : a victory for Croatia , Slovenia and the European Union .
We cannot allow only one party to be the winner or only one viewpoint to prevail : we can only win if we work on the basis of common objectives and common will .
Likewise , I agree with the rapporteur , Mr Swoboda , when he says that we need to observe the principle of equity , which is part of international law .
I also fully agree with the Commissioner , Mr Rehn , that a suitable point of departure for the settlement of the border dispute is the United Nations Charter and that the Commission 's initiative reflects the spirit of the Charter .
It is time for the negotiating table to take centre stage , without any rhetoric or pressures which might injure either party 's dignity or Croatia 's accession status .
We need a positive atmosphere .
I firmly believe that we have only one positive solution in prospect , one that Slovenia and Croatia will agree on under the mediation of a third party , i.e. the European Commission .
I would like to see this happen as soon as possible .
( EL ) Madam President , I agree and recognise Turkey 's European prospects , but if these prospects are to have an auspicious outcome , Turkey needs to :
Firstly , really respect the rights of minorities and avoid policies such as those which it applies , for example , in Imvros and Tenedos .
Secondly , improve its relations with Greece , a Member State that supports its European prospects , for example , by removing the casus belli and putting a stop to its infringements in the Aegean once and for all .
Thirdly , make progress on the Cyprus question .
This progress will be marked , on the one hand , by the removal of Turkish occupying troops and , on the other hand , by taking a constructive stand on all aspects in order to resolve the question .
I would remind the House that I belong to the generation which grew up with the slogan ' our borders are in Kyrenia ' .
( PT ) The process leading to Turkey 's accession to the European Union is advancing at a slow pace .
At this moment in time , it is not the moderate pace with which reforms are being carried out in Turkey that is holding up the process , but the slowness of the Council and the European Commission .
The economic , social and political impact of this future accession was discussed in depth last December in the Polish city of Sopot , at a conference at which I had the pleasure and honour of speaking .
As regards the priorities of the Turkish Government , it is appropriate to mention the breakfast meeting that was held with Prime Minister Erdogan last January in Brussels .
That meeting resulted in a timely clarification , which was complemented by contacts made by some of us with the Republican side and by a varied group of people and organisations from the Turkish Republic , in addition to the constant work that we have done in the EU-Turkey Joint Parliamentary Committee .
To end , I would say , Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , that this process is decisive for a truly enlarged Europe , which is strong and open to the world , secular and democratic , and in which the democratically unified Republic of Cyprus has the place that it deserves .
( BG ) Thank you , Madam President .
Turkey plays a key role in Europe 's geo-strategic and energy security and will continue to be a stabilising factor during the crisis too .
It is true that events such as the proceedings to close down the AK Party , the ' Ergenekon ' case and the local elections slowed down the reforms in the country , but the appointment of a new chief negotiator will create a fine opportunity for the Turkish Government to accelerate the process of harmonising its legislation with European standards and to make progress in the political criteria in the negotiation chapters .
I believe that Turkey should achieve three priorities if it wants to make serious progress on its way to membership .
Firstly , it must continue to work constructively for a successful outcome to the discussions on the question of Cyprus , but this commitment must be shared by all countries in the process and must not be used as a pretext for blocking the negotiations .
Secondly , it must respect freedom of speech and thought .
Thirdly , it must guarantee protection for minority communities , especially with regards to their cultural and educational rights .
As Turkey continues all the time to modernise , it must win back its pro-European supporters . Thank you .
( NL ) Madam President , I was one of the MEPs who voted in favour of Turkey prior to the opening of the negotiations , and to my mind , these negotiations are , in reality , an exercise in conflict prevention .
I am convinced that the negotiations will impact greatly on many areas of policy .
They are set to create a better social climate in Turkey , better environmental and health legislation and better labour law for Turkish people .
In time , the negotiations will also bring about better living conditions for many population groups : women , religious minority groups , Kurds and Alevites .
Progress is too slow , though .
There has been a standstill for four years now , and there are many painful areas that deserve to be addressed .
The discrimination against parties such as the Kurdish Democratic Society Party ( DTP ) is unacceptable .
There is a lack of civil and political supervision of the army , and this is simply unacceptable .
The freedom of opinion and the freedom of the press are essential , and torture and abuse in prisons cannot be tolerated .
The Kurdish problem also requires a political solution as a matter of absolute necessity .
I take the view that under these circumstances , we should definitely continue the negotiations .
Madam President , I would like to congratulate Commissioner Rehn on his position on the Oomen-Ruijten report , which was that it is essential for Turkey to proactively support the ongoing talks between the leaders of the two communities in Cyprus .
That is why we are in full agreement with the rapporteur when , in paragraph 40 of her report , she calls on Turkey ' to facilitate a suitable climate for negotiations by withdrawing Turkish forces and allowing the two leaders to negotiate freely their country 's future ' .
I would suggest that , at this moment of direct talks , it might not be advisable for the European Parliament to include in its report any proposal for derogations from the acquis .
To complement the rapporteur 's position , we also call on Turkey to comply with its obligations regarding investigations into the fate of missing persons and to stop interfering in the Republic of Cyprus ' exclusive economic zone .
In so doing , Turkey will itself facilitate its way towards accession .
( FR ) Madam President , yesterday I submitted an oral question to the Commission and received a note from Parliament 's Secretariat informing me that the Commissioner was going to answer my question this afternoon .
I declare that my name is Panayotopoulos and that I submitted a question about paragraph 6 of the framework for negotiations with Turkey .
Mrs Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou , I think that the Commissioner has heard you .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Madam President , we have had a very long but important debate here today .
This is a crucial year in the accession process for Croatia and for the whole of the Western Balkan region and we certainly attach importance to and welcome Parliament 's continued support in bringing Croatia , the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and the Western Balkans closer to the EU .
Much has been said about the lack of progress in Turkey regarding its reform effort .
We therefore welcome the reaffirmed commitment of Turkey towards its EU path , as Mr Erdogan said , and invite her to take the opportunity in 2009 to prove this commitment and make further progress in its path towards the EU .
Turkey has to deliver on long-awaited reforms .
The continuing support of the European Parliament throughout the process is significant , in particular , given the challenges ahead .
I will have the opportunity of meeting the Turkish negotiator tomorrow in Prague .
At the same time , we should not take lightly the strategic importance of Turkey , in particular , in the current turbulent times , nor should we forget our previous commitments .
As far as I know , President Obama , during his visit to Europe , may visit Turkey as a kind of model Muslim country .
I think that this is not the time for Europeans to give up in our engagement with Turkey .
I think that Joost Lagendijk , rightly , said this .
Concerning the border dispute between Croatia and Slovenia , I was listening carefully to what Hannes Swoboda , István Szent-Iványi and many others said , so let me just repeat that we as the Presidency welcome the fact that both Slovenia and Croatia have now agreed to pursue their work on Commissioner Rehn 's initiative concerning this dispute .
We fully support this initiative and we are concerned that it has not generated any fruitful outcome yet regarding the specific terms of facilitation .
We note that time is running out , and the Presidency is keen to ensure concrete progress in the negotiations based on the work already done .
We are therefore considering the possibilities for enhancing our support for the Commissioner 's initiative in the near future .
We were just discussing this over lunch .
Concerning the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , Bernd Posselt , among others , said that we should support the effort of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , and I think he is right .
I shall just mention that the Czech Prime Minister Topolánek visited Skopje yesterday and reaffirmed our commitment to the European aspiration of this country .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I want to thank Members for a very constructive , substantive and responsible debate , and I would like to make just a few points concerning your speeches .
First , it is clear that all policy making in Europe and in the world is overshadowed by the very challenging context of today , because of the financial crisis and the economic recession that our citizens are feeling and , of course , this is dominating the minds of our leaders in the European Union .
Still , it is absolutely essential that we as the European Union maintain our commitment to the EU perspective on south-eastern Europe , and this has been the expressed political will here today in the European Parliament , which I welcome and appreciate .
Secondly , concerning Cyprus , my friend , Mr Wiersma , said that I must be an optimist .
I think something was lost in translation , even though I thought I was speaking English - maybe with a somewhat ethnic accent from eastern Finland !
However , I do not consider myself either an optimist or a pessimist , but rather I am usually a realist as regards the analysis of things and determined as regards those issues that I can really influence .
Here , I think that it is absolutely essential that we support the talks of the two leaders and of the two communities that are going on at the moment , so that we can seize the opportunity in 2009 to achieve a comprehensive settlement and , of course , we expect Turkey will contribute to a favourable political climate to achieve such a settlement .
From the point of view of the European Union , it is important to ensure that any solution is in line with the Union 's founding principles of liberty , democracy , respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms and the rule of law .
In other words , the EU can support any such solution that creates a united Cyprus respecting the principles on which the EU was founded and able to carry the obligations of EU membership .
This clearly implies a bi-zonal , bi-communal federation with political equality , as defined by the relevant resolutions of the UN Security Council .
Finally , concerning Croatia , I thank the speakers for their support for the Commission 's initiative on mediation - an initiative that is based on international law , and here I refer to both the UN Charter and the negotiating framework between the EU and Croatia .
I can only underline that , whatever method is chosen , it will need to be a bilateral agreement between the two countries , Slovenia and Croatia .
We are working on that in order to facilitate such an agreement .
I sincerely wish that you can support the Commission 's initiative in your resolution so as not to create a situation where we would have to return to square one , because this is the only realistic and viable way forward .
Let me conclude by saying that I sincerely believe that it is still possible for Croatia to reach the ambitious target of concluding the accession negotiations by the end of 2009 , provided that the negotiations can proceed soon .
That is why I encourage both countries to agree rapidly so as to solve the border issue and , without delay , unblock Croatia 's EU accession negotiations .
I should like to thank you for your support for this initiative .
I have received three motions for resolutions tabled in accordance with Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , 12 March 2009 .
Madam President , I have a specific question for the Commissioner , namely whether he agrees or proposes that the phrase ' principle of equity ' in the Commission statement be replaced by the phrase ' international law and jurisprudence ' .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr Posselt , the debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
I congratulate Mrs Oomen-Ruijten for this excellently drafted report .
I would like to highlight two ideas :
1 ) First of all , I believe that the EU must continue to encourage the development in Turkey of pro-European , modern , secular elites , as well as spread European values and good quality information about European integration .
To this end , the EU must support more actively educational reform in Turkey , the guarantee of universities ' autonomy , the development of European integration studies and the Erasmus Programme .
Students , researchers and teachers who want to study EU institutions and policies in depth must be encouraged and supported in this .
2 ) Secondly , at the same time as supporting the rights of those belonging to national minorities , the EU must resolutely condemn actions by ethnic separatists .
I am referring to Kurdish separatism in Turkey and Turkish separatism in Cyprus , but there are also other examples .
The EU must support the strict application of the principles of territorial integrity and good neighbourliness with regard to Turkey , Iraq , Cyprus and the other countries in the region .
in writing . - I am encouraged that the Foreign Affairs Committee and the Commission are confident that negotiations for Croatia 's accession to the EU can be concluded this year .
Croatia has made good progress in adopting the Community acquis , the anti-corruption body USKOK has intensified its work and legislation has been introduced to reform the Croatian judiciary .
However , this is tempered by the knowledge that cases remain where the ICTY has been unable to access certain documents relating to alleged war crimes , and further attention must be given to minority rights such as the status of the Krajina Serbs and refugee return .
Enlargement is one of the great successes of the modern European Union .
Having integrated many European nations ravaged by the Cold War , we must now do the same for the Western Balkans .
Croatian accession is the first crucial step .
The Turkish question has always been surrounded by misgivings and mistrust .
There were always problems that went far beyond the need for fulfilling the strict criteria for accession .
In that respect , it is enough to look at what kind of neighbourly relations Turkey maintains with other EU Member States such as Greece , Cyprus or with a country outside the EU like Armenia .
Furthermore , if we take into account that Turkey is the only state that considers the European Union to consist of only 26 Member States , it is strange that Turkey itself would wish to join and belong to this community in the future .
My position is that as long as the country does not substantially change its behaviour on fundamental issues , the process of its accession to the EU will vanish into the future .
When the EU decided to start accession negotiations , it was done in the hope and expectation that Turkey does indeed have a place in the European family .
Let me ask this question : is it certain that Turkey today thinks along these lines ?
If and when Turkey engages unambiguously in establishing good relations with its neighbours , settling outstanding problems peacefully in conformity with the UN Charter and other European documents , then there is hope .
If Turkey fulfils these criteria without reservation , then chances are that it will gain the support of each of us , and may also regain the sympathy of European citizens .
Over the last year , we have seen significant progress and the intensive efforts of Croatia in accession negotiations .
Negotiations over EU membership are on the right road , although the country must concentrate on further reforms in such areas as administration , the justice system , the economy , the battle against corruption and organised crime , respect for and protection of minorities , and the investigation of war crimes .
Continued efforts are essential for full transposition of the acquis and its effective implementation .
Furthermore , it is extremely important to bring about an improvement in the relations of Croatia with its neighbours and , in particular , with Slovenia , and to find a definitive solution to the question of the borders with other neighbouring countries .
Croatia should also include in its policy for development the objectives which the European Union currently sets for itself in the area of the climate package and renewable sources of energy .
The further progress of Croatia in accession negotiations depends , in particular , on the completion of essential political , economic , legislative and administrative reforms .
In this context it should be recalled that the Commission 's road map is a very useful and helpful tool which supports Croatia in finalising individual chapters of the negotiations .
I hope that it will be possible to reach the closing phase of the negotiations , perhaps even this year .
, in writing . - ( HU ) Energy cooperation has emerged as one of the major questions in EU-Turkey relations .
The main reason for this is that Turkey , as a transit country , can significantly contribute to reducing the EU 's dependency on energy sources and to diversifying its energy supply .
Enhanced cooperation with Turkey can , at the same time , be an important step towards expanding the internal energy market .
I am convinced that the fundamental goals of Turkey and the European Union point in the same direction .
We would like to meet the growing demand for energy consumption from as many sources as possible .
Promoting diversification is most urgent in the area of gas supply .
To this end , the construction of the Nabucco pipeline is of key importance .
The gas crisis in January has demonstrated more powerfully than ever the need for the aforementioned infrastructure .
Therefore , it is a welcome development that the European economic stimulus plan should set aside resources for the construction of the gas pipeline .
With regard to Nabucco , before the first shovel of soil can be turned , we need bilateral governmental agreements involving Turkey as soon as possible .
I consider regrettable the comments that link Ankara 's attitude to Nabucco directly with the country 's accession to the EU .
I am convinced that cooperation on energy policy matters cannot be turned into a foreign policy weapon .
For this reason , more intensive energy dialogue is needed between the European Union and Turkey .
One possible stage in this could be the opening of the chapter on energy .
The Commission 's annual report on the progress made by Turkey in 2008 as a candidate state is balanced .
Although the reform process should be given a boost and eight negotiating chapters are still blocked , the Commission has welcomed in particular Turkey 's recent diplomatic activity and its role in promoting stability in the region .
The events of summer 2008 highlighted Turkey 's strategic role , including in the energy sector .
In the area of regional cooperation , the constructive role which Turkey played in its relations with neighbouring countries and in the Middle East through active diplomacy was noted .
The developments in the Caucasus highlighted Turkey 's strategic importance for the EU 's energy security , especially through the diversification of transport routes .
The document emphasises the importance of close cooperation in the energy sector between the EU and Turkey , with the Nabucco project being a key element in this respect .
Following the initiation of negotiations between Greek and Turkish Cypriot leaders on reaching an understanding on the Cypriot question , it is vital for Ankara to continue to support finding a solution , along with the efforts which the UN is making to this end .
The expansion of the EU and the continuing integration of Western Balkan states into the EU are priority dossiers for Romania .
Romania supports the substantial progress made in the negotiations with Turkey , a process which is dynamic enough to encourage internal reforms .
in writing . - During the past five years , the New Member states have witnessed numerous positive effects of the membership of the European Union .
That experience is not to be monopolised , and I therefore support fiercely the EU 's continued enlargement .
However , as much as I would like to see Turkey joining the EU in the near future , the progress report unfortunately indicates something quite the opposite .
I have addressed this issue several times in this Chamber , pointing to the Armenian genocide , concerns over the Kurds and the occupation of Cyprus .
In addition to that , when examining the progress that Turkey has made towards the completion of negotiations on 35 acquis communautaire chapters since October 2005 , one can see that only twelve chapters have been opened and , until now , just one - the chapter on science and research - has been closed .
I would like to ask the Council and the Commission how they propose to accelerate the course of the negotiations and solve the dispute on Cyprus .
in writing . - ( HU ) The Member States of the European Union should show greater solidarity and tolerance towards the accession countries .
My country , Romania , was not prepared for accession , and there are still deficiencies in the area of minority rights .
Nevertheless , Hungary did not prevent Romania from joining , because it considered European solidarity and tolerance more important .
The accession countries naturally must take greater strides towards guaranteeing human and minority rights , but current EU Member States must set a good example .
I therefore consider it important for us to address the EU Member States first of all :
to sign and ratify the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages ,
to rescind the law , in force in one EU Member State , that introduces the notion of collective guilt ,
to learn from the example of Kosovo , to guarantee the cultural and regional autonomy of traditional national minorities living in the territory of current EU Member States .
in writing . - ( HU ) The stabilisation of the Western Balkans and strengthening its ties with Europe is an important task , since the region is of geostrategic importance to Europe .
At the same time , from numerous perspectives , including in the areas of the economy and energy , the Western Balkans remain considerably vulnerable and dependent .
Croatia , we hope , will be able to join us in 2011 , during the Hungarian Presidency , but this depends on a successful conclusion of the recently initiated bilateral talks with Slovenia , with international mediation , regarding the division of the Bay of Piran .
A further condition is that Croatia cooperate fully with the International Criminal Tribunal at The Hague in searching for and handing over war criminals .
Moreover , we need to send a positive message to those countries in the region where , due to various external and internal factors , the timetable for accession is still uncertain .
Let us ratify as soon as possible the Stabilisation and Association Agreement with Serbia and with Bosnia and Herzegovina , grant full candidate status to all the countries in the region , and decide on a precise timetable for the earliest possible agreement on visa liberalisation .
The financial crisis has dealt a severe blow to the Balkans , and if necessary , the EU Member States will have to play a part in the stabilisation of the region , and we must provide assistance to countries in difficulty .
The EU must follow attentively the inter-ethnic relations in the region , paying particular attention to the sensitive internal situation in Macedonia , which currently runs the greatest risk of serious conflict in the region .
The mandate of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the report by Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on a proposal for a European Parliament recommendation to the Council on the mandate of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , since its inception in 1993 , the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia has indicted 161 people .
Proceedings have been fully concluded against 116 of them , while for a number of other defendants , the criminal procedure is still in progress .
Proceedings are yet to start in two cases only , while two main defendants , Messrs Mladić and Hadžić , are still on the run .
Although the UN Security Council has asked the Tribunal to wind up its activities by no later than the end of 2010 , it has left some room for manoeuvre .
After an understandably difficult start - after all , everything was new and had to be invented on the spot , as it were - the Tribunal has turned out to be a very sound , serious and capable legal body that does not limit its activities to administering justice , which , by the way , it does with the greatest care , something which has boosted its legitimacy .
In addition , the Tribunal has set up proper outreach programmes to contribute to the assimilation and reconciliation process in the countries that came into being after the former Yugoslavia collapsed .
The Tribunal also helps train national legal bodies which , after all , have to handle the lion 's share of the dossiers on war crimes and crimes against humanity .
Indeed , it was never the intention for the Tribunal to step into the shoes of national courts across the former Yugoslavia on a permanent basis .
Quite the reverse .
It is the countries in question that have to ensure that the war crimes and crimes against humanity are prosecuted and tried .
With this in mind , the Tribunal has passed on a number of dossiers to national courts and has focused on the most important cases .
The Tribunal has also set up a proper completion strategy in three stages to meet the requirements of the Security Council .
The plan provides for full completion of all legal proceedings by the end of 2011 , with a possible extension into 2012 .
To provide for all eventualities but , above all , to ensure that Messrs Mladić and Hadžić will , in any event , undergo the same procedure , an effective , highly-qualified and sufficiently equipped mechanism will need to be put in place that can take care of the rest of the tasks , even after the Tribunal 's mandate has come to an end .
For all these reasons , we would ask the Council to urge the United Nations , and particularly the Security Council , to extend the Tribunal 's mandate by at least two years , to see to it that after this period , a reception mechanism is provided for and to ensure that the Tribunal 's archives are kept and made accessible .
In a similar , but somewhat broader , context , we would ask that a good working relationship with the Tribunal and the development of an effective judiciary which also handles crimes against humanity remain assessment criteria for our relations with the countries in the Western Balkans .
We urge the countries in question to continue to lend their cooperation to the Tribunal and provide sound answers to the main prosecutor .
Finally , we ask the Commission to continue to pay attention to the training programmes and other initiatives that are aimed at mutual dialogue , the joint search for the truth and reconciliation .
After all , the administration of justice alone - however good - does not yet lead to reconciliation , and this is desperately needed so that the men and women of the Western Balkans can finally start building on their future .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Madam President , I think this debate is a timely one and that Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck 's report includes a number of important recommendations .
It gives me the opportunity to raise an issue which is central to our policy towards the Western Balkans .
The work of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ( ICTY ) is an essential element in rendering justice , coming to terms with the past and moving forward .
It is also key to strengthening the rule of law in the region .
This can be a slow , and at times difficult , process , but the ICTY has made important progress .
So far , it has completed proceedings against 116 accused with very different verdicts .
Only two of 161 indictees remain at large .
When the ICTY was set up in 1993 , the domestic judicial systems in the former Yugoslavia were unprepared for dealing with crimes of this scale .
Yet it was clear that they had to be addressed .
No contract , no agreement , no society can be sustainable without justice .
Our strategy towards the region is to assist in stabilising the countries of the Western Balkans and helping them realise their EU perspective .
A central element of that policy is cooperation with the ICTY .
We support its mandate in several ways .
Firstly , the countries of the Western Balkans are part of the Stabilisation and Association Process ( SAP ) .
This process depends on respect for democratic principles , the rule of law , human rights and the rights of persons belonging to minorities , fundamental freedoms and the principles of international law and regional cooperation .
It also depends on full cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia .
SAP conditionality is monitored through the annual progress reports prepared by the Commission .
The next progress reports will be published in October 2009 .
In addition , human rights and rule-of-law issues , including strengthening the functioning , impartiality and responsibility of the judiciary system , and the fight against corruption and organised crime , are key priorities of the EU 's European Partnership with the countries of the Western Balkans .
These are updated on a regular basis .
Furthermore , the Council has adopted two common positions aimed at supporting the implementation of the mandate of the ICTY by imposing an assets freeze on indicted fugitives and a travel ban on persons assisting ICTY indictees to evade justice .
These common positions are regularly extended and updated .
The European Union will support the work of the ICTY until it has been completed .
I entirely agree that in the longer term , the legacy of the ICTY must be preserved .
Whenever this happens - and it is not a matter for the EU to decide - the domestic judicial systems will need to be ready to take over the ICTY 's files .
This is one of the reasons why the emphasis we have placed on judicial reform and good governance in the SAP is so important .
The work of NGOs and individuals , such as the Humanitarian Law Centre in Belgrade and the Research and Documentation Centre in Sarajevo , who are seeking the truth , also deserves our full support .
Let me close by thanking this Parliament for your support in this area and , in particular , for this helpful and constructive report .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I welcome the initiative and report by Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck .
This initiative and report send a very welcome signal about the commitment of the European Parliament to support the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ( ICTY ) .
For the Commission , it is clear that the international community must maintain its full support for the ICTY to complete its remaining tasks .
There can be no impunity for war crimes and , as you well know , full cooperation with ICTY is a condition for making progress in European integration .
This necessary condition affects the EU accession process of Serbia today and it has affected Croatia .
I hope it will not affect Croatia again , on condition that Croatia maintains full cooperation with ICTY .
This principle also includes the handling of war crime cases that are referred back to domestic jurisdiction by the ICTY .
We have provided financial support and we are intensifying our support and efforts at capacity-building in this important field , especially in Bosnia and Herzegovina which has by far the largest caseload .
The Commission has recently approved funding for a project initiated by Chief Prosecutor Serge Brammertz on internships in his office to train visiting war crime prosecutors and young professionals from south-east Europe .
We are also working with Chief Prosecutor Brammertz on other projects including a regional conference for war crime prosecutors from the Western Balkans .
That will take place in Brussels in early April , next month .
All in all , the Commission remains fully committed to ICTY and continues to support Mr Brammertz and his dedicated colleagues in efforts to bring to justice those who are responsible for serious violations of international humanitarian law and thus we want to support this important work contributing towards reconciliation and the maintenance of peace in the Western Balkans .
I look forward to continuing to work together with Parliament in this regard .
Madam President , I should like to extend warm thanks to Mrs Neyts for the completeness of her report .
She is right in saying that Parliament should indeed set out its priorities very clearly .
War criminals should not be exempt from punishment .
All countries in the region must lend their full cooperation , and the International Criminal Tribunal should be given the chance to conclude its activities with due care .
Madam President , clearly , the Court in The Hague , with 116 finished cases and much work in the region , can submit a very fine result .
Nobody can claim any longer that the guilty get off scot-free .
I am also pleased with the emphasis that is placed on the full cooperation that is to be given to the Court .
This applies to all countries from which suspects hail .
The people that are still on the run should be brought to justice , and all the countries in that region have given their word to the European Union to this effect .
We would not be credible if we did not hold firm to this .
In fact , with the rapporteur 's consent , I will table an oral amendment on this matter tomorrow .
Madam President , the Court 's value is considerable , not least because there is still so much work to be done in the judicial system in the Balkans .
This is why it is also good that this report stresses the importance of the proper functioning of an independent and impartial justice system .
This is , after all , one of the Copenhagen criteria .
I would like to make two points .
With regard to the deadline of 2010 or 2011 , I take the view that we should not be so strict .
It is , after all , far more important that the Court can continue to function after this deadline if necessary to bring certain aspects to a close .
Secondly , as regards completion , even with the arrest and trial of Messrs Mladić and Hadžić , the Court 's work will not be finished .
The residual mechanism and the International Criminal Court can take over , but good and less good experiences should never be lost , in my view .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , since its establishment in 1993 , the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ( ICTY ) has fundamentally reshaped the role of international humanitarian law and has provided the victims of the tragic Balkan conflicts , who would otherwise have gone unheard , with an opportunity to voice the horrors that they and their families experienced and to seek justice .
The ICTY has shown that no one , whatever their position or status at the time of the conflict , is immune from justice - a precedent that now sees the International Criminal Court promote respect for human rights across our world .
Today , we reiterate that , for the former Yugoslavia , there can be no impunity for those indictees who are still being sought .
Ratko Mladić and Goran Hadžić are still renegades from justice and must be handed in .
We should also give our full support to Chief Prosecutor Brammertz 's call for the necessary documentation , vital to the case against the former General Ante Gotovina and others , to be made available to the Tribunal - an issue that our Croatian friends , amongst others , know is pertinent to the EU accession process .
The Socialist Group has proposed two amendments to plenary .
Firstly , that it should be made clear that any proposals for a possible mandate extension should not divert attention from the key task of completing trials and moving towards the earliest possible closure .
Secondly , we appeal for free access to the ICTY 's archives by prosecutors , defence counsel and , eventually , historians and researchers .
I thank the rapporteur , and I commend these amendments to the House .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , we need to support , to its conclusion , the impressive work of the Hague Tribunal in bringing perpetrators of terrible crimes to justice and not impose an artificial cut-off , because time pressures would prejudice fair trials while shortcuts would harm the safety of witnesses .
While many lower-level cases have been successfully transferred to national courts , some of them may be unable or unwilling to conduct criminal proceedings in accordance with international standards , which means that transfers are sometimes being resisted by victims and witnesses .
In order to permit the continuation of the ICTY 's mandate , we urge the Council to encourage the Security Council to provide sufficient resources from its general budget , not least to be able to retain key specialists and highly qualified staff .
The Tribunal must leave a sound legacy , both as a model for other potential ad hoc tribunals and in order to contribute to the strengthening of justice in the Balkan countries .
There is a need for increased EU support for domestic war crimes investigations and trials and for the Copenhagen criteria to include even more support for a well-trained and high-performing judiciary , but the legacy of this is that the Tribunal must also contribute to reconciliation and inter-ethnic understanding , and the work of NGOs deserves more resources .
Commissioner Rehn reminds us that full cooperation with the ICTY is a condition of EU accession but the truth is , as Commissioner Orban candidly told me last night in the absence of Commissioner Rehn , that there is no unanimity in the Council as to what that means .
That has led to confusion and a consistent postponement of deadlines .
Much as we all want Serbia and Croatia to join , the Council , Commission and Parliament must be united and firm in saying that indictees like Mladić and Hadžić must be delivered and , in the case of Croatia , evidence and witnesses facilitated .
We cannot afford to relax these conditions .
( NL ) Madam President , I should like to bring up a few points in this brief debate .
The work of the International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia is of eminent importance , not only because it guarantees that those responsible for the war crimes in the Balkans are brought to justice , but also because it serves the public 's sense of justice .
Moreover , the Tribunal plays an important role in European policy with regard to the Western Balkans .
This is something that is also stressed in Mrs Neyts 's report .
Now that the end of the Tribunal 's mandate is in sight , we have to think about bringing its work to a close .
In my group , what is paramount is that the capacity is kept at the same level to finalise the cases that are still in progress and to bring the last two suspects who are still on the run , Messrs Mladić and Hadžić , before the Tribunal .
Indeed , we should not at any time want to create the impression that the length of the mandate and its expiry will somehow mean that these people could remain at large .
Whether this is done by extending the mandate or by creating a residual mechanism is not a question of principle for us , and as far as we can see , we can perhaps also find a way of putting the judges , the lawyers and the secretariat on a form of standby .
( FR ) Madam President , the European Union applies the principle of equal treatment to all of the countries of the Balkans .
If , on the one hand , we are insisting that Belgrade hands over Mr Mladić before the interim agreement on trade within the framework of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement can be implemented , it is clear that we are also asking for Croatia 's full cooperation with the Tribunal .
However , this cooperation leaves much to be desired , to say the least .
During the last visit by the Chief Prosecutor , Mr Brammertz , to Zagreb , in February , where he had gone to ask for the missing documents relating to the use of artillery in ' Operation Storm ' , which , for the record , resulted in the exodus of 200 000 Serbs and the death of 350 civilians , the Prosecutor demanded Croatia 's full cooperation and , although the European Commission has just given the green light to opening Chapter 23 on the judiciary and fundamental rights , some European governments will not hear of it , nor will the European Parliament .
There will , in fact , be no support for us in the Balkans without a guarantee of peace , and the best guarantee is truth and justice for the crimes of the past .
I should like to congratulate Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck on her report , which received unanimous support within the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
( RO ) I congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Neyts , and I welcome the report on the mandate of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia , a report which I have also contributed to with a few amendments and which raises a series of real issues which we have a duty to consider .
We must ensure that the results achieved so far by this tribunal in punishing war crimes and promoting reconciliation in the Western Balkans are effectively utilised .
The tribunal 's work must be fully completed .
It is also necessary to assess the results achieved so far , especially the objectives which have not yet been attained .
Based on this assessment , the Council should consider extending its mandate for as long as required .
Certainly , this tribunal will not be able to continue its work indefinitely .
This is why we need to ensure that there will be a mechanism in place to carry on the residual functions which are not met at the moment , for as long as required .
In this respect , I welcome the proposal to the United Nations Security Council aimed at setting up an institution with this in mind .
Another measure which I feel is crucial to the development of sustainable institutional facilities in the Western Balkans is the creation of a set of regulations and evaluation criteria for judicial systems in these countries in order to support national courts .
( PL ) Madam President , the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia has made a significant contribution to the process of reconciliation in the Western Balkans and has helped to bring about the restoration and maintenance of peace in the region .
It has also contributed to the creation of the foundations of a new world standard for conflict resolution after the end of a war .
It should , however , be emphasised that support for development of the potential of national judiciary in the Balkans is a fundamental matter , so that local courts will be able to continue the work which the Tribunal has begun .
Proper cooperation between courts and prosecutors in the Western Balkans is another important challenge , especially in cases involving extradition and mutual legal assistance .
There is also an obvious need to introduce mechanisms which will ensure that after its closure , the functions of the Tribunal and the material it has produced will strengthen the principles of states governed by law .
Finally , I should like to appeal to the countries of the Western Balkans , and to the countries of the EU , to support the work of non-governmental organisations and also of other institutions which help victims , propagate dialogue and understanding between ethnic groups , and which support efforts for reconciliation in the Balkans .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Madam President , in conclusion , I would like briefly to reiterate our full support for the ongoing work of the ICTY as an important part of the healing and reconciliation process in the Western Balkans , now and in the future .
Let me just mention that we will be having meetings with the Chief Prosecutor , Serge Brammertz , in Prague tomorrow .
I agree that the Tribunal should be in a position to carry out its mandate , complete the ongoing trials and open new ones against the two indictees still at large .
I also agree that the legacy of the Tribunal has to be preserved by strengthening the local capacity to deal with the outstanding cases .
After all , these are the cases which concern the Western Balkan countries and for which they themselves eventually need to take responsibility .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I wish to thank you for a very concise but important debate and congratulate Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck on her report and initiative .
The ICTY is indeed an expression of European values of justice and the rule of law , and therefore this debate is so important .
It is also an essential element of our enlargement policy in the Western Balkans .
On dates , I can only agree with the ICTY itself - that the dates in the tribunal 's completion strategy are target dates only and not absolute deadlines , as correctly stated in Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck 's report .
For the Commission , the crucial issue is retaining the support of the international community for the completion of the Tribunal 's existing mandate so as to ensure that there will be no impunity for war crimes in the future .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I wish to thank everybody who contributed to this debate .
I also wanted to say that I have found with everybody who works or has worked at the ICTY a degree of dedication and commitment which I have seldom seen elsewhere .
That has been a great pleasure .
That was all the more reason to come forward with these proposals .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Thursday , 12 March 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
Mr President , the work of the Hague Tribunal deserves the permanent support of the European Union , mainly because of the creation of foundations for a new standard in conflict resolution , and also because of its significant contribution to the process of reconciliation in the Western Balkans region .
In the light of the UN resolution calling for an end to the work of the ICTY , I agree with the rapporteur that the possibility of extending the mandate of that institution should be investigated .
The continued work of the Tribunal is needed , if only because of the fact that many criminals remain at large , and a significant number of cases still require reliable examination .
It is my conviction that a key factor here is also the creation of a perspicuous mechanism of operation for the judicial system in the Balkans , which will assume the original functions of the Tribunal after its closure .
In addition , I appeal to Member States to support the work of non-governmental organisations and also of other institutions which help victims , promote dialogue and understanding between ethnic groups , and support efforts at reconciliation .
Ten years after the dirty war unleashed against Yugoslavia by the USA , NATO and the EU , those guilty of crimes against its people are salivating over the thousands of people murdered , including women and children , and over the massive damage they caused in the Balkans .
The report in question extols the Tribunal in The Hague which they set up in order to try their victims and exonerate the American and European imperialists of their crimes , a tribunal with fabricated charges , with parodies of trials , which resulted in the murder of the former Yugoslav president Slobodan Milosevic .
With unbelievable insolence , they are calling for its operation to be extended so they can set up new guilty parties and exert terrorist pressure on the people of Yugoslavia by calling on them to sign a declaration of repentance for defending their country and of subjugation to their European murderers .
Simply voting against this despicable report does not suffice .
The Greek Communist Party has abstained from the vote .
It refuses even by its presence to participate in the legitimisation of imperialist crimes by the European Parliament .
In this way , it pays minimum homage to those who paid for the imperialist barbarity of the USA , NATO and the EU with their blood .
Real tribunals of the people will be set up and the real guilty parties and murderers in the USA , NATO and the EU , the centre left and centre right governments , will be judged and sentenced for their crimes .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time ( B6-0009 / 2009 ) to the Council .
Subject : Improvement of quality , availability and financing of long-term care
Given the challenges that Europe is facing as a result of an ageing population , leading to an increasing number of people in need of care , combined with changes in size and composition of families , labour market changes and increased mobility which will all impact on the availability of carers , the Commission 's Demography Report ( SEC ( 2008 ) 2911 ) recognised that such challenges would require a variety of policy responses including the strengthening of solidarity between the generations in terms of long term care , greater recognition for professional carers and , most importantly , greater support for family carers .
The Presidency has already indicated its priority with regard to paying greater attention to the improvement of quality , availability and financing of long-term care .
What steps does the Council propose to take during its Presidency to support informal carers throughout the EU , many of whom already provide long-term care and indeed save our health services millions of euros in healthcare provision ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - Let me react to Mrs Harkin 's question .
The Presidency is fully aware of the importance of long-term care in the context of an ageing population .
According to Eurostat , the population of over-65s in the EU will double between 1995 and 2050 .
In its conclusion of 16 December 2008 on public health strategies to combat neuro-degenerative diseases associated with ageing , the Council welcomed the work already carried out by associations that defend and support patients and their carers and called on the Member States and Commission to reflect together on support for carers and to consider ways of developing it further .
In addition , the Council also invited the Member States to establish , in cooperation with the stakeholders concerned , a national strategy action plan or any other measures aimed at improving the quality of life of patients and their carers , as well as to improve the distribution of useful information to patients , their families and their carers , in order to make them aware of the care principle and best practices that have been identified .
The Council also recommended that Member States should evaluate the complexity or redundancy of administrative procedures which confront patients and their carers and consider measures for simplifying them .
Moreover , in the 2008 Joint Report on Social Protection and Social Inclusion , transmitted by the Council to the European Council , Member States committed themselves to increasing access to quality services .
To this purpose , they reaffirmed that the right balance needs to be struck between public and private responsibilities and formal and informal care , and that provision in a residential or community setting is to be preferred to an institutional setting .
The Council also called on the Social Protection Committee to continue to promote the sharing of experiences and exchange of best practice regarding the quality of long-term care , assistance to carers , the organisation of long-term care and the importance of integrated care .
The Presidency will carry on the objective of the 18-month programme of the Council in the field of public health and focus efforts at EU level on enhancing the exchange of experiences relating to healthcare and solidarity with carers , taking into account the health challenges created by our ageing societies .
The Czech Presidency will pay special attention to issues of community long-term care , informal family care , and the dignity and rights of older persons .
The Presidency will organise a European conference on dignity and hazards for the elderly , which will take place in Prague on 25 May 2009 .
The Conference will focus on the reform of social and health services to respond better to the needs and preferences of older persons and families and will deal , inter alia , with such issues as Community long-term care , family care , geriatric frailty , prevention of abuse and neglect of the elderly , and the role of municipalities .
The Presidency will also organise the European Conference called ' Social Services - a tool for mobilising the work force and strengthening social cohesion ' , which will take place in Prague on 22 and 23 April .
The conference will pay special attention to growing employment opportunities in social services in the context of population ageing , support for informal carers and the role of social services in active social inclusion and reconciliation of care and employment .
Priority attention will also be paid to independent living in the community .
The conference should contribute to the exchange of best practices .
Let me conclude with the recent development in the area of taxation .
The Ecofin Council reached an agreement just yesterday in Brussels that all Member States should have the option to apply reduced VAT rates on a permanent basis to domestic care services such as home help and care of the young , elderly , sick or disabled .
I have been very encouraged by the Czech Presidency , particularly in the emphasis it has placed on the family .
The Commission 's report on demography , which shows that we have an ageing European population , is subtitled ' solidarity between the generations ' , but it is really within the family that we learn solidarity and that this is based on love and care .
I am also very glad that the Czech Presidency has identified respect for human dignity , because that principle is at the heart of care .
I would like you to comment on that because , as far as I can see , in order for care to be delivered to those who are dependent on care in a way that respects human dignity , we have to keep that principle in mind .
( DE ) Madam President , I think it is a very good thing that efforts are being made to support relatives so that they can take over long-term care .
Unfortunately , in reality , there are not enough relatives to do so .
On the contrary , we need an increasing number of highly trained staff .
Hence my question : what initiatives will the President-in-Office of the Council take to ensure that sufficient professionally trained carers are available ?
Has any thought been given to a form of harmonised training , as these are new initiatives ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - Madam President , I thank Members for their comments regarding the Presidency 's efforts to improve living conditions for the elderly .
The problem of ageing is one which we all share ; and we should approach this with some dignity .
It is , of course , true that many of those challenges remain in the national competences of the Member States but , at the start of the debate , I mentioned the two conferences .
I think Member States could provide training and counselling opportunities to family carers .
The development of high-quality education is a key factor for improving the quality of care , as are temporary replacement care and special leave for employees who look after family members .
Here , flexible working time , part-time jobs and other care-friendly employment arrangements are important .
Finally , social protection for family carers is also important .
The care provided by both informal and professional carers must be appreciated and organised by society .
Economic security , therefore , is a prerequisite for ensuring the quality of care .
Subject : Unemployment in Europe
What initiatives is the European Council pursuing at present to combat youth and long-term unemployment in Europe ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - I should like to thank Brian Crowley for raising the question .
I think you are certainly aware that the Member States are , in the first instance , responsible for designing and implementing their employment policies .
However , the Council has a number of responsibilities in the field of employment , including the annual adoption of the employment guidelines in accordance with Article 128 of the Treaty .
Especially now that Europe is facing a financial and economic crisis , the Council is paying special attention to the employment policies of the Member States .
You specifically asked in your question about the current initiatives by the European Council to help combat youth and long-term unemployment in Europe .
In December 2008 , the European Council agreed on a European Economic Recovery Plan to provide a coherent framework for action to be taken at the level of the Union , as well as for measures adopted by each Member State , taking account of their individual circumstances .
The European Council 's conclusion stressed , in particular , rapid additional action by the European Social Fund to support employment , especially for the benefit of the most vulnerable groups in the population .
The European Council undertook to evaluate the implementation of the plan at its upcoming March spring Council , indicating that additions or amendments to it could be made if necessary .
During the first half of 2009 , the Czech Presidency is paying particular attention to employment measures also , within the context of the spring European Council .
The spring European Council will consider the employment situation in the Community and adopt conclusions thereon on the basis of the Joint Employment Report adopted by the Council and the Commission .
The opinion of the European Parliament on the matter will be welcomed in view of the European Council in March .
Based on the assessment of the European Council , the Council will adopt the guidelines on the Member States ' employment policies .
The present employment guidelines adopted last year , as well as previous versions , have consistently stressed the importance of tackling youth and long-term unemployment in the Member States .
Since the autumn of 2008 , when the effects of the present crisis on employment started to be evident , the Employment Committee , which was established by the Council in accordance with Article 130 of the Treaty , has undertaken the new task of continuous monitoring of the Member States ' employment situation .
The committee 's findings are being passed on to the Council .
Moreover , the Presidency has decided to organise the Employment Summit so as to maintain a platform for the debate and eventual decisions , and that will be held on 7 May .
Topics for discussion will be confirmed after the spring European Council - so we are planning to have the orientation debate on this next week .
It should also be mentioned in this context that during this year , the European Parliament and the Council , as the co-legislators , are evaluating and considering amendments to the European Globalisation Fund , an instrument aimed at the elimination of negative globalisation impacts , where job losses certainly belong , as well as decreasing the risk that redundant employees will become long-term unemployed .
The aim is to avoid long-term unemployment by timely assistance to the employees affected through activation programmes , such as training , which would enable improved qualifications .
On the whole , promoting employment , including fighting long-term unemployment and youth unemployment , has always featured high on the agendas of the Council and of the European Council .
The Presidency supports the implementation of the flexicurity principles .
Their implementation to national policies , together with continuing structural reform , will help improve the situation of vulnerable groups in the labour market , which include the young , the elderly , the long-term unemployed and people with low qualifications .
The honourable Member can be assured here that during spring 2009 , amidst the global financial and economic crisis and rising unemployment , this continues to be the case .
I would like to thank the President-in-Office for his response .
I think it is a tribute to the Presidency that they had planned an employment conference before we recognised or realised ourselves the seriousness of the unemployment arising from the economic crisis .


But in light of that employment summit that will be taking place , there are three key issues which have to be focused on and dealt with : firstly , not just using the European Social Fund merely for training but also to ensure that that training leads to actual jobs and is not just training for training 's sake ; secondly , ensuring that the Globalisation Fund is made more active immediately because the job losses are occurring now ; and thirdly , and most importantly , encouraging our colleagues in the Council not to engage in national protectionism of jobs in their own countries to the detriment of jobs in other countries , since if we coordinate and cooperate , we have a better chance of success .
Would the President-in-Office agree with me that the situation we are in is not akin to the 1930s , but more akin to the situation at the end of the Second World War , and that what we really need is something more akin to a Marshall Plan-type new input for recovery in Europe ?
Would he agree , therefore , that there is potential for the European Investment Bank to get an investor , such as China , to lend money to the EIB to invest in Europe , which could then be refunded through the extra trade tariffs and VAT collected by the Union to whoever lent that money to the EIB ?
Would he agree that while the Employment Conference is welcome , we need some new thinking and something as dramatic as what happened at the end of the Second World War ?
( DE ) Madam President , existing barriers to mobility are , without doubt , partly responsible for youth unemployment .
We have excellent cross-border training programmes , including for apprentices , but the barriers in the field of social rights and health insurance mean that all this potential for mobility and additional training abroad cannot be used .
What is the Council Presidency doing to counter this ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - Madam President , I think there are two separate points , one from Mr Crowley and one from Mr Mitchell .
I think we need to avoid the various protectionist temptations here which could even lead to growing unemployment in various Member States .
The national solution should not be to the detriment of the neighbours and the price for it should not be paid by future generations .
We need to have measures and to react to the current situation , and we are trying to do this .
I agree with Mr Mitchell that we need a plan , yes , and we have some plans .
We have the European Economic Recovery Plan and we need to implement it .
Of course , we are in discussion with and working with the European Investment Bank .
Its President Maystadt held a conference two days ago at which he demonstrated how much the EIB had spent since the crisis started - about EUR 10 billion more than in the previous year .
There is another initiative by the EIB , together with the EBRD and the World Bank , to allocate resources amounting to more than EUR 24 billion to cover the needs of the various SMEs , for example .
That is important in maintaining employment .
Regarding the revision of the regulations on the European Social Fund and the European Globalisation Fund , an agreement on the proposal for a revision of the regulation on the European Social Fund , simplifying the recording of the expenditure and increasing payments on account to the Member States , has been reached in the Council .
Currently the Parliament 's position is awaited and the revised regulation could enter into force in May 2009 .
Subject : Disparity in global production standards
Europe imposes high standards , which we all applaud , on food production and manufacturing inside its borders but does not require these standards to be met by imports .
European standards , particularly for food production and the manufacture of clothes and toys , are the best in the world ; but these high standards add costs and make production inside EU borders more expensive .
Imported products , which are not subject to the same high environmental and other standards , are placed on our shelves , often at much cheaper prices .
What is the Council doing at the WTO and other global fora to raise awareness and encourage higher production standards around the world , giving better protection for workers and consumers ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - I appreciate another question again from the Irish MEPs - it looks like the Irish are most active during Question Time here .
So , concerning the initiative at the WTO to raise awareness and encourage higher production standards around the world , let me first of all remind the honourable Member that the Commission is the main trade negotiator of the European Community at the WTO , acting on the basis of the mandate given by the Council .
Therefore , we would need Commissioner Ashton here .
Regarding production standards , Article 20 of the GATT allows governments to act regarding trade in order to protect human , animal or plant life or health , provided they do not discriminate or use this as disguised protectionism .
In addition , there are two specific WTO arrangements dealing with these issues : the sanitary and phyto-sanitary ( SPS ) measures and technical barriers to trade ( TBT ) agreements .
The SPS is a separate agreement containing basic rules on food safety and animal and plant health standards .
It allows countries to set their own standards , provided that these are based on science .
The TBT agreements oblige the WTO members to ensure that technical regulations , voluntary standards and conformity assessment procedures do not create unnecessary obstacles to trade .
Members of the WTO are therefore encouraged to use international standards , guidelines and recommendations where these exist .
They may take measures which result in higher standards only if there is a scientific justification for doing so .
The European Community imposes high-level standards through which we protect our consumers .
However , we must ensure that the required standards are not in conflict with the agreements mentioned above .
We all know that there are different viewpoints on these issues and that the European Community has been many times on the defensive side of a dispute over such measures .
In the Community 's view , good regulatory practice can , among other things , help to avoid unnecessary obstacles to international trade and make sure that legislation is not more trade-restrictive than necessary .
At the same time , it can defend the right to set public policy objectives , for instance , in relation to human , animal and plant life and environments at levels it considers appropriate , provided these are not applied in a manner which would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination .
In the current context of the financial turmoil and economic meltdown , the importance of full compliance and effective implementation of all WTO rules and agreements cannot be over-emphasised .
The European Community has been working towards strengthening the international standards within the relevant WTO committees , in particular , the TBT , SPS , TRIPS , trade and environmental committees .
A recent case which may be mentioned is the hard stance of the European Community in the SPS committee at the end of February on the issue of some members ' non-compliance with the standard of the World Organisation for Animal Health .
I would like to thank the President-in-Office for the detailed and technical response , but let me give you a practical example which may focus your mind .
In a few years , the European Union will ban the production of eggs from caged systems .
However , the system will still be used outside of our borders and we will import liquid egg or powdered egg from those cages that are banned in the European Union , and producers wonder at the logic of all of that .
I ask you , as a man who is quite logical and detailed in your responses , how do you argue the case for that type of system unless we say that you cannot import the liquid egg or the powdered product coming from a caged system ?
It is ridiculous to ban it internally .
Minister , I think the key focus of the question was that of competitiveness and how we retain competitiveness for EU producers .
Given that EU producers , particularly of food , have the extra costs of meeting EU standards and , at the same time , compete with imports from countries that do not , in those circumstances could I ask you whether you are persuaded that the CAP should be used to fund maintaining the competitiveness of EU producers ?
Without that funding , we are going to suffer exactly the fate that Mrs McGuinness has referred to .
President-in-Office of the Council . - I am not among the greatest defenders of the CAP .
I am generally in favour of continuing reform of the CAP , but I hope that we will not be in a situation of importing liquid or dried egg .
Also , I believe that most of the EC 's standards regarding placement on the market are based not just on what we have agreed here in Europe but on the internationally agreed Codex Alimentarius standards and the UN Economic Commission for Europe standards .
It is important that everybody follow certain standards , and that we do not create the conditions which would seriously undermine this .
TBT agreements oblige the WTO and its members to ensure that technical regulations , voluntary standards and conformity assessment producers do not create unnecessary obstacles to trade .
Subject : Climate change
What preparations is the Council making in the run up to the G8 summit in July and the climate change conference in Copenhagen later this year in order to move international negotiations forward on climate change ?
In particular , can the Council report on any improved cooperation between the EU and the new US Administration in this area ?
In addition , what further action in the fight against climate change is the Council planning in order to consolidate the package of measures agreed upon in December ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - In December 2008 , the Poznań Conference agreed on a work programme for 2009 , which clearly identified steps towards the Copenhagen Climate Conference to be held in December 2009 .
Poznań has also sent the message that the current financial crisis is not to be seen as an obstacle to further action on climate change , but instead as yet another opportunity for transforming profoundly our economic system and moving toward a low-carbon economy .
That being said , we have to be aware that we will not have an easy time in doing so .
The economic downturn will affect the willingness of the stakeholders involved to absorb additional costs related to the reduction commitments , as well as mitigation and adaptation measures .
The Czech Presidency intends to pursue efforts at international level towards a successful agreement in Copenhagen in December .
As you know , as a follow-up to the Commission communication called ' Towards a Comprehensive Climate Change Agreement in Copenhagen ' and on the basis of the input of the Temporary Committee on Climate Change set up by the European Parliament , the Council adopted conclusions on this issue last week , thereby further developing the EU position on a comprehensive post-2012 agreement .
The forthcoming European Council is also expected to agree key political messages .
In addition to the shared vision of the long-term action on mitigation and adaptation as well as technology , the identification of appropriate means for financing effective and long-term climate policies is key in the EU 's position and will determine , to a large extent , the success of the Copenhagen Conference .
The EU has already started to engage in active outreach , not only with key negotiating partners and the main emerging economies , but also with the new US Administration , which has already signalled its readiness to engage again in a meaningful way .
The Presidency has had its first meeting with the new US Administration and plans to have further exchanges as soon as possible .
Climate change will be one of the topics discussed during the informal EU-US Summit in Prague on 5 April .
The first signals coming from Washington are , in any case , encouraging so it will be crucial to ensure good cooperation between the EU and the US in order for our positions to be as ambitious as possible and to ensure that , consequently , the major emerging economies will follow suit .
For the EU 's efforts to fight climate change to deliver , it is absolutely crucial that we bring other major world CO2-producing economies on board .
It is for this reason that several of these countries have also been invited to the G8 meeting - South Africa , Egypt , China , India , Australia , Mexico , Brazil , Indonesia and South Korea .
As far as the climate and energy package is concerned , by reaching agreement on this package in December 2008 , the EU sent a very strong political signal to all its negotiating partners in the world .
Now we will start its implementation , which involves a lot of technical work .
Aware of the need to determine in further detail the criteria which the European Union would wish to apply in deciding to move from a 20 % to a 30 % reduction , the Council is currently considering the issues of complementarity of effort and of the adequacy of possibly developing country actions on the basis of the Commission communication .
The relevant text is included in the Environment Council conclusions of 2 March 2009 .
What would Question Time be without our Irish colleagues and their effective and articulate contributions ?
I am speaking first now , but really to make a point to the Presidency .
The point behind my question is that we should be aware that our younger constituents in particular - and I am sure I am not the only one in this situation - want to urge both this Presidency in its mid-term , and also the Swedish Presidency , to look carefully at what the Americans are trying to do in ensuring that there is no conflict - and Mr Vondra did mention this - between tackling the urgent priority of the economic crisis , unemployment and so on , and encouraging action on climate change , promoting the climate change package and encouraging industries to be involved in the low-carbon economy .
I am not asking the world , but I should like to say : please , always be aware that they are not mutually exclusive objectives .
Many of our younger constituents across the EU are telling our presidencies this very thing .
( RO ) Bearing in mind the effects of climate change such as the long periods of drought , the decrease in drinking water resources and the desertification of large areas of European territory , I would like to ask the Council if it is considering the development of a European irrigation system .
I believe that investment in agriculture must be a priority during this economic crisis .
In addition , in terms of the European Union 's trade balance , agriculture is an extremely important area and we must guarantee the availability of sufficient , accessible healthy food for Europe 's citizens .
I would like to recall for the Presidency-in-Office that at the Summit meeting last December , all Heads of State and Government agreed to a declaration which stated , inter alia , that , in the context of an international agreement on climate change in Copenhagen in 2009 , for those who wished to do so , part of the auction revenues would be used to enable and finance actions to mitigate and adapt to climate change in developing countries which have ratified the agreement , in particular , the least developed countries .
My question is very simple .
Because Summit declarations do not appear in any Official Journal or on the record , before the end of your Presidency , Minister , could you put the full content of that declaration at last December 's summit on the record here in the House ?
It is most important that we have a record of such important declarations .
President-in-Office of the Council . - I think it is in the conclusions of the Environment Council in early March .
I do not have the papers with me so I will look carefully again .
My feeling is that I have read this .
We are ahead of the European Spring Council meeting and I would expect confirmation of all those ambitious goals .
I do not know - and this raises some other questions - whether we will come up with an appropriate amount of money to put on the table for funds to help the developing countries with mitigation and adaptation , because we are just at the beginning of our talks with the US and other partners and it would not make sense to show our cards right now .
The debate with the Americans is ongoing .
The Deputy Minister of the environment met Carol Browner early this month and Martin Bursík , who is the Czech Minister for the Environment , is going to meet his partners in Washington - I think later this week or early next month - so there is already a dialogue .
Yes , of course , we need to find common ground .
There is the economic crisis ; there are those ambitious environmental goals .
You are right that we can find a lot of synergies and there is no need to fight .
If you read the European economic recovery plans , there are a lot of programmes which have a green cover or a green colour .
At the same time , a lot of public explanation lies ahead .
The conditions in the Member States of the EU are not necessarily always the same so I expect a lot of public work and public diplomacy lies ahead of us in this area .
Subject : Road safety
According to the priorities of the Czech Presidency , the high number of people killed on European roads requires an enhancement of Europe-wide effort to improve road safety .
What plans does the Presidency have to tackle this issue ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - As the honourable Member has pointed out , improvement of road safety and reducing the high number of fatal accidents on Community roads are among the priorities of the Czech Presidency for the transport sector .
This is not surprising , as we are the country located right at the centre of the continent .
Traffic intensity and the related dangers are a top priority for us .
Sharing the same concerns as you and with a view to improving the current situation in the short term , the Presidency intended to hold a ministerial debate at a Council meeting in spring 2009 on future development in the area of road safety in the context of the preparation of a new action plan on road safety .
However , in view of the fact that the Commission has indicated to the Presidency its intention to postpone the date of the adoption of this new action plan , the Czech Presidency considers this debate to be premature .
One example of concrete action under our Presidency in the field of road safety is a final negotiation between the Council and the Parliament on a proposal for a regulation concerning type-approval requirements for the general safety of motor vehicles .
As you know , the Presidency and Parliament 's representatives managed to reach an agreement concerning this proposal and the European Parliament adopted the regulation yesterday .
The general safety regulation requires the mandatory fitting of electronic stability control systems on all vehicles , and an advanced emergency braking system and a lane-departure warning system on heavy duty vehicles .
These new technologies can significantly improve vehicle safety and it is clear that road safety will benefit when they are introduced as the standard system on new vehicles .
Agreement at first reading will allow the obligatory introduction of electronic stability systems in new vehicles from 2011 , one year earlier than foreseen in the original Commission proposal .
Furthermore , the Council has just started the examination of the Commission 's action plan for the deployment of Intelligent Transport Systems ( ITS ) in Europe and the associated proposal for a directive laying down the framework for the deployment of Intelligent Transport Systems in the field of road transport and for interfaces with other modes of transport .
Both items have as one of their goals the improvement of road safety through the application of information and communication technologies to the road transport sector .
The Presidency intends to invite the Ministers to adopt the Council conclusions on the action plan at the Council meeting in March 2009 and a general approach or a political agreement on the abovementioned proposal at the Council meeting in June 2009 .
The role of the ITS in the area of road safety will also be discussed during the informal meeting of transport ministers to take place in late April in Litoměřice in my country .
Intelligent Transport Systems and applications such as emergency call and driver hyper-vigilance systems , speed alerts and alcohol locks could make a considerable contribution to enhancing our road safety .
Electronic stability systems and eCall alone could save up to 6 500 lives a year in Europe if they are fully deployed .
Given the importance the Presidency attaches to road safety , it will examine any other proposals on these issues that the Commission may present shortly , provided the limited time available until the end of June allows it .
( GA ) There is another question from Ireland , though it is in our own language this time round .
In your opinion , what are the biggest causes of the high number of deaths on the roads ?
Does the Czech Presidency intend to develop any new coordination between the different standards in place in the different European countries in relation to cars being in good condition .
As well as this , do you think that more than just technology should be employed to reduce the number of deaths on the roads ?
( RO ) The EU has not done enough to reduce road accidents .
Road safety can be improved through investments in infrastructure , improving the behaviour of those involved in traffic and by compliance with road legislation .
The European Commission has come up with a proposal for a directive on cross-border enforcement in the case of fines issued for breaking traffic regulations .
The European Parliament has voted for this .
What stage are things at and what are the prospects of this dossier being approved by the European Union 's Council ?
Firstly , I would like to ask the Council if it accepts that what we need are specific targets for each Member State in relation to reducing the numbers of deaths and fatalities on our roads .
Secondly , would the Council accept that we need the enforcement of a system whereby , if an offence is committed in one jurisdiction , the offender can be prosecuted by the courts in that jurisdiction , even though the offender has returned to his or her native homeland ?
Last , but by no means least , I welcome the Council 's information in relation to the eCall system , but when will it be mandatory in all Member Sates ?
It is vital from the point of view of accidents , and particularly single vehicle accidents .
President-in-Office of the Council . - First of all , I understand how these issues are very important during the election campaign because everybody cares about this road safety problem .
I think we have to be aware of one thing , that the governments and the European Council in particular cannot be responsible for every single life on our roads .
It is also and primarily the responsibility of the drivers behind the wheel .
But of course we need to focus on this issue and , again , for us it is among the priorities , so we need to move this discussion ahead .
That is why we have selected this as one of the key items on the agenda of the informal Transport Ministers ' meeting at the end of April and certainly , I will tell my colleague in my government , our Minister of Transport , how important this issue is for you , too .
The main topic of this informal meeting is the deployment of the Intelligent Transport System ( ITS ) in the EU .
Road safety and security are certainly one of the six priority action areas which were identified by the Commission in this ITS action plan .
We want to move the debate forward .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
Green Paper on the European Workforce for Health ( debate )
The next item is the Green Paper on the European Workforce for Health .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I am very pleased to have been invited to make a statement to Parliament on the Green Paper on the EU Workforce for Health , adopted by the Commission on 10 December 2008 .
That invitation comes at an opportune moment , as we are now approaching the end of the consultation phase , which will be closed at the end of this month .
It is clear that there are growing pressures on all EU health systems arising from an ageing population , health threats , as well as the rising cost of new technologies and patients ' increased expectations - and all this against the background of a difficult economic situation .
Without a well-trained and motivated health workforce throughout the EU , the financial sustainability of European health systems will be threatened and health inequalities will increase .
As the European population gets older , so does its health workforce , and there are insufficient new recruits coming through to replace those who leave .
We need to reflect on the reasons why young people are not motivated to become health workers .
This , coupled with the mobility of health professionals within and between Member States is creating common health workforce problems for most European health systems .
I expect a large number of responses to the Green Paper from the many stakeholder organisations in the field of health that have expressed concerns about this important issue .
I also look forward to receiving contributions from the members of this Parliament .
Those will really facilitate our work and serve our common objective .
The analysis of the answers we receive will guide us in developing strategies at EU level to support the Member States in tackling these challenges .
The health workforce debate is distinct from the issues covered by the draft directive on patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare .
Indeed , that proposal focuses on the rules and arrangements needed to provide access , in equitable conditions , to safe and high quality healthcare for patients moving across Europe .
The primary aim of the draft legislation is to enforce , in a fair and consistent manner , patients ' rights as recognised by the European Court of Justice .
It does not seek to regulate cross-border provision of health services , freedom of establishment or the mobility of health professionals .
However , that does not mean that the draft directive ignores safety and quality of care for patients seeking healthcare abroad - which is intrinsically related to the context in which healthcare is provided by health professionals .
In this respect , the draft directive sets out very clearly an essential rule , which is that , as regards cross-border healthcare , the rules of the country of treatment apply .
Let me also briefly mention other provisions , such as those in Article 5 of the proposal : Member States would commit to defining national quality and safety standards , to implementing them effectively and to making them public .
Healthcare providers would provide all the relevant information to enable patients to make an informed choice - including details of their insurance cover or other means of personal or collective protection with regard to professional liability , which must be in place in all Member States , patients would have a means of making complaints and of receiving remedies and compensation when they suffer harm arising from the healthcare they receive .
With this set of principles and rules , I believe that the draft directive defines a clear relationship between the patient and the provider to ensure sound information as well as safe and quality care for European citizens who decide to travel to another Member State for treatment .
Let me also recall that , under the primary responsibility of my colleague Commissioner McCreevy , there is another important piece of EU legislation which regulates mutual recognition of qualifications for doctors , nurses , dentists , midwives and pharmacists .
I refer to Directive 2005 / 36 / EC , which is now in force .
That Directive also provides for specific obligations for Member States as regards the exchange of information in the case of movement of health professionals .
Those flows of data are facilitated by the use of the internal market information ( IMI ) system , which already allows for the electronic exchange of information on the five main health professions .
Furthermore , an extension of IMI to all regulated professions is envisaged .
To conclude , tackling the challenges of the EU health workforce whilst ensuring financial sustainability of health systems will be one of the major tasks for Europe over the next decade .
This requires a comprehensive policy approach , as no Member State can realistically find its own solution in isolation .
The solution cannot simply be to attract health workers from developing countries , where the shortage is even greater .
To that effect , the Green Paper will allow for discussion and further definition of the issues at stake , leading to the design of common actions , where appropriate .
I know that your expectations are high , and I count on your help in building solutions to support the invaluable contribution that health professionals make to the lives of each and every one of us .
Commissioner , I have no doubt that you will have a very fruitful response from MEPs to your request for contributions to the Green Paper on the European Workforce for Health .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , I would like to thank the Commissioner , both for giving up her evening to come and join us in this packed House , but also for bringing the message that she has brought .
It is an important Green Paper and it should start a major discussion within this Parliament and beyond .
She raised one or two questions during her submission just now , including her question about why more nurses and doctors are not coming forward .
If I may say so , I think that is half the question .
The other half is why so many are leaving .
The key to this will be to find ways of recruiting and retaining healthcare professionals .
That goes particularly , perhaps , for nurses , but also for doctors and for other therapists and so on .
I think we have to look at the career structures that we provide .
We have to see how promotion is seen as a potential .
We have to cut down some of the barriers within and between the professions .
We have to ensure that the work environment is pleasant .
It is going to be tough but it can be comfortable as well .
We have to make sure that research facilities are available in Europe so we do not lose people abroad .
Perhaps , above all , we have to listen to the sharp-end professionals .
Too often - I know from when I have been in government and you know as a Commissioner - we listen to the top people and we do not go down to the beds and listen to the nurses and the doctors who are actually dealing on the ground .
If we did more of that , then perhaps we would get more of our policy right .
I , of course , want to refer - as the Commissioner has referred - to my report , the Parliament 's consideration of cross-border health .
We said right from the beginning that important with that were the two measures that were not coming at the same time .
One of them , of course , was patient safety and we do have a measure that has sped its way on the fast track to join us .
This one is somewhat behind .
It concerns the health professionals .
We do need to have the health professionals providing that service - that back-up - to cross-border health to enable patients to move safely and with confidence .
Indeed , standing here in Strasbourg , we think of the Strasbourg , Liège , Luxembourg example of where the reference network concept may be of great value in terms of both patients and training and research .
The Commissioner has referred to the movement of health professionals , and we need to look at ways of making that a reality without endangering patient safety .
I think that certainly includes the issue of language tests , which are not an obstacle but must be a protective measure for patients .
She has referred to the recognition of qualifications .
That clearly is important , whether you are treated at home by an incoming doctor , or you are going abroad to meet a local doctor there .
There are some professions - and chiropractice is one - where you have recognition in some countries and not in others .
We need to look at ways of bringing those ancillary health professionals into the centre of our planning .
We also , of course , need to be sure we have patient safety in terms of doctors who are disciplined or struck off - doctors , nurses , any health professionals - and in my report , I call for this to be facilitated by the Commission .
I think that is something we need to look at more .
The Commissioner rightly referred to the brain drain .
It is tragic that we are not providing enough health professionals but go and grab them from the countries that can least afford it .
If you look at the figures , we see , on average , 1 in 4 doctors and 1 nurse in 20 has trained in Africa and is working in OECD countries .
It is partly that we as countries pinch them and it is partly our NGOs who also use them and recruit them in the country concerned , pay them more than they would be paid in their own countries .
Therefore , they do not go back to work there .
All those things are important , Commissioner .
We need to look at the safety of health professionals .
We need to put needle-stick injuries and hospital acquired infections on our agenda , as well as assaults on staff .
We know from talking to midwives recently about the difficulty of getting professional indemnity insurance .
Those are some of the issues that I hope will be to the forefront in our discussions on this very welcome Green Paper .
Madam President , I should like to endorse much of what Mr Bowis said a moment ago .
The Green Paper we received from you , Commissioner , is a fine document .
Needless to say , we cannot wait for the reactions to it , as is always the case with a Green Paper .
These are , of course , partly predictable , but it is , in any event , useful to receive these , so that they can be incorporated in possible future legislation .
This Green Paper is important , seeing as it concerns a matter that needs to be dealt with .
The Green Paper is the result of a controversy that arose over the proposals submitted by Mr Bolkestein at the time , and we welcome the fact that the Commission handles it in this way , with due care , with a Green Paper , and with ample room for debate , because there is , above all , much anxiety surrounding this issue , in my view .
This is why I do not want to confine my contribution to the topic of health workers alone , because I think that we will discover the same fear of the unknown in the European dimension in healthcare in other areas too .
Much has been done in recent years in the area of public health in the European Union , both under your predecessors and with you , Commissioner ; I should therefore like to seize the opportunity to congratulate you , Commissioner , on the stamp which you managed to place on this policy in a relatively short space of time .
I did not think it possible in such a short space of time , and I think that we can all be proud of the way you managed to achieve this .
A great deal has been achieved in recent years , for example in the area of drugs for paediatric use , a matter in which respect the public is not even aware that there is a problem , but where a European solution is very much on the agenda , because Member States cannot resolve this on their own .
It is precisely the economies of scale that come into their own here .
I take the view that this also applies to other areas : to the policy on tobacco and discouraging smoking , for example , where the European Union leads the way , not only in the Union , but also beyond .
In this instance too , it is precisely the economies of scale that make us effective .
We are also very involved in cross-border care and the protection of patients ' rights in Europe , also under the watchful eye of rapporteur Mr Bowis , and I hope and expect that we will achieve a positive result in that area too .
Each time , though , with each topic that is discussed , you notice that not only ministers , but also fellow MPs in national parliaments , are reluctant to further deepen European cooperation in the area of healthcare .
With 27 different systems in the European Union , we are all convinced that our own healthcare model is the best .
Anyone you talk to will convince you that their system stands out .
This is , of course , impossible .
You cannot have 27 different systems that are all the best all at the same time .
Needless to say , a great deal of thought has gone into such a system in each country .
In each case , people and well-intended interests are involved .
When finally a difficult balance is struck , the European Union suddenly comes storming in with an idea that we happen to think is the best .
I can understand very well that this will meet with resistance .
In a few areas , however , precisely these economies of scale - for example , in the case of rare diseases - can benefit the patients and systems alike .
There are plenty of reasons for more European involvement in the area of public health .
Nearly 40 000 patients in Europe are waiting for organs , and every day , nearly ten people on these waiting lists die .
Every year , alcohol abuse claims 195 000 lives and costs the European economy EUR 125 billion .
This is a matter that is probably best tackled not even nationally , but locally .
There are also European trends , though , for example in the case of alcohol abuse among young people .
We have to examine whether this should not be better addressed at European level after all .
We are , however , being stretched on the basis of the present Treaty texts to tackle these problems .
We should nevertheless achieve more , for example - and this is where the value of a Green Paper lies - where the actual free movement of health services is concerned .
I am convinced that if we faced up to all the problems , because there certainly are some , and came up with solutions , for example , to prevent medical blunders , or to enhance the legal certainty of patients , but also that of health workers , that eventually everyone would benefit , provided this free movement is organised in a responsible manner but becomes possible nonetheless .
If better cooperation in the area of organ donation and effective cooperation in the protection of pandemics - something I always bring up - are not addressed at European level , I am convinced that we will be faced with major problems if , some time in the future , a flu epidemic travels our way from Thailand .
In actual fact , the Commission should , in those cases , be able to take crisis measures within 24 hours .
Finally , Article 152 is , to my mind , not up to standard after all when it comes to organising effective European action in future .
If we were to consider changing the Treaty at some point in the distant future , we should , in my view , consider extending the legal basis for public health in a new Treaty .


Madam President , I should like to join Mr Bowis and Mr Maaten in congratulating the Commissioner on her Green Paper which is not a day , or even hour , too soon , in my view .
The Commissioner said herself that a rise in the ageing population will indeed bring more pressure to bear on health systems , but also , and mainly , on workers .
Indeed , anyone who takes the time to listen to the people working in the sector will know that the general working conditions are extremely tough , both physically and often also mentally .
Working in this sector demands a great deal from workers , and is often underpaid .
It should not come as a surprise , therefore , that the turnover of staff in the sector is very high .
It is also a fact that all too often , the contracts are very precarious , resulting in many people leaving the sector prematurely .
In my judgement , the Union will therefore need to pursue a number of things in its policy : sustainable employment , a good working environment , safe work , no brain drain , and decent work .
The Commissioner was right to make reference to the directive which Mr Bowis is currently working on , the Directive on cross-border healthcare .
In my contacts with people in the sector , however , they were also keen to point out the relationship between working as a health worker and the Working Time Directive .
In the Working Time Directive , contracts , rather than the people , are now used to determine the duration .
I have found out that there are Polish doctors who work in Polish hospitals on normal contracts during the week , and travel to the United Kingdom during the weekend to do a 48-hour shift there .
This is unheard of , of course .
This is something that should be taken into consideration , certainly in the Working Time Directive .
I therefore hope that this topic will also be addressed when we discuss the Green Paper .
Madam President , the Green Paper on the European Workforce for Health reveals the plans of capital and of the European Union for privatising health and welfare , with painful consequences for working and grassroots families in the health sector .
These changes form part of the more general anti-grassroots reversals in social insurance and social services being promoted in all the countries of the European Union with the active support and complicity of the centre left and centre right forces , which treat health as a commodity , a source of profitability for capital , and patients and their families as customers .
The core objective is to extend the business activity of capital and construct a system in which public-sector health services operate on private-sector criteria , in competition with the private sector .
The first victims of this commercialised health system are the very people who work in this sector .
10 % of the workforce of the European Union , these workers , often work under unacceptable conditions which are dangerous to patients .
The constant violation of working times is probably the rule rather than the exception .
Their pay , in the public sector at least , is being cut , as is their efficacy , due to the choices of private insurance companies .
The central theme of the Green Paper is the mobility of workers and the application of the rules of the Bolkestein Directive in the health sector .
Health is a social value , not a commercial commodity .
Health workers provide a social service and are not a means of generating profit .
Only by fighting will the workers be able to secure a high standard of free services provided solely by the government , well away from any private business activity .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , more people work in health than any other area .
The groups of health workers we instantly think of are doctors , nurses , pharmacists and dentists , who are supported by radiologists , lab technicians , researchers , therapists , biochemists and an army of administrators and staff who keep health services functioning .
There is also a second group of professionals : the herbal physicians , chiropractors , osteopaths , homeopaths and nutritionists who focus on a more natural approach to health .
Lastly , there are the family carers , the largest single group of health workers who labour day and night without pay in the health sphere .
Going back to the first group , in this report , the Commission is concerned that the number of professionals working in mainstream healthcare is not sufficient to meet the needs of the growing demand .
The Commission further stresses the need to attract young people to choose these professions .
However , in some countries , this is not the problem .
In Ireland last month , 3 500 young people took an exam in the hope of securing one of a few hundred medical school places .
Similarly , there will be far more young people applying for nursing , therapies , etc . , than our universities are willing to train .
Commissioner , it is not a question of attracting young people .
It is a question of allowing them to train .
Our secondary students in Ireland are working towards a career in medicine , but it is , unfortunately , made unattainable by a rationing system that is out of touch with demand , which leaves us with severe shortages of qualified professionals .
I know that similar disconnects between training and demand exist in other European countries .
I would suggest that , in working to attract young people to this profession , you will only frustrate them until we provide them with the opportunity to gain these skills .
Having not allowed these students to train and thereby creating an artificial shortage , we then , of necessity , bring in medical personnel from third countries - even the poorest countries - leaving their own people without medical help and creating a brain drain .
The second group of health professionals I mentioned , like herbal physicians , were unfortunately completely left out of this report .
To leave them out fails to acknowledge the valuable contribution they make in keeping Europeans healthy and is out of touch with the wishes of many Europeans who seek their help .
This sector is very important .
The Commission 's apparent attempts to suppress it with directives , like the Vitamin and Mineral Supplements Directive , further compound this growing gulf between EU policy and people 's everyday health choices .
Finally , I would like to make reference to the third and largest single group of health workers : the family carer .
These are the people who care for dependant older people and those with disabilities .
We need them more every year , not less .
As Europe ages and the number of people with disabilities increases , we cannot take them for granted .
The only way we are going to keep these essential carers is if we support them in their work .
Finally , our health force is more important than ever .
The Commission is right to say that there are new and re-emerging threats to health , such as communicable diseases .
Yet the Commission should also take careful note that every chronic disorder related to the immune system dysfunction is on the increase , for example , asthma , allergy , multiple sclerosis , autism , diabetes , epilepsy , fibromyalgia and many more .
I would advise the Commission to look at every one of these diseases that is on the rise and try to understand what is triggering these epidemics because , allowing them to increase unchecked and to affect more and more people , is both cruel and unsustainable .
Madam President , I welcome the Commission Green Paper and its objective of increasing the visibility of the issues around the EU health workforce and identifying challenges and action that can be taken .
However , I wish to take the opportunity to emphasise one aspect of the Green Paper , namely the training of the health workforce .
I initiated Written Declaration 0095 / 2008 on this issue , which is ongoing .
I strongly support the idea that it is absolutely essential to develop training communication courses for the health workforce in order to provide clearer and more complete information to patients .
Patients ' ability to understand health and medical issues and directions is closely related to the clarity of the communication .
Despite various initiatives to improve the quality and the availability of health information , studies indicate that patients want more information than they currently receive and that health professionals tend to overestimate the amount of information that is supplied .
( PL ) Madam President , the shortage of healthcare staff is a global phenomenon .
However , we feel this most acutely in our own back yard .
The lack of specialised medical assistance , the lack of clinical experience in particular specialities and of specific medical services leads people to seek medical help in other countries .
It is therefore very important to regulate the principles of cross-border medical care .
The patient has the right to know what standard of services is offered by specific centres , how the care will be financed , how much the healthcare system of the patient 's own country will pay for treatment or rehabilitation , and how much the patient will have to pay .
A directive on this matter is essential .
A further question is raising the qualifications of medical personnel , including help connected with language courses , which should aid mobility .
I think the proposal to establish a reference network for health personnel is expedient .
Commissioner , thank you for your Green Paper .
Madam President , the promotion of a sustainable workforce for health across Europe is crucial in continuing our improvement in healthcare services and facilities across the 27 Member States .
Europe faces a number of challenges in sustaining and improving our healthcare services .
The demography of the Member States poses a major issue for health workers as Europe 's population ages and life expectancy increases by 2.5 years every decade .
Increased pressures apply to the workforce because , as the population ages , so too do the workers .
The key to maintaining an adequate workforce in the face of this imminent retirement is to ensure that there are sufficient younger recruits available to replace those who retire .
The importance of improved healthcare research and data across Europe cannot be stressed enough .
At present , there is a lack of up-to-date , comparable data and information among the Member States on a number of key healthcare issues including training and employment of workers , age , gender and international flow of health professionals .
The availability of Europe-wide information is immensely important for the planning and provision of future health workers and for all health authorities .
( PL ) Madam President , it is very much in our interest to ensure that our healthcare system functions as efficiently as possible .
It is therefore necessary , in accordance with the guidelines of the Green Paper , to raise the qualifications of medical personnel and to provide comfort and suitable working conditions for medical staff .
We cannot allow doctors to be on duty for too long .
I would also like to draw attention to the question of health promotion .
Promoting a healthy lifestyle is a good prophylactic method which can prevent a variety of diseases and illnesses .
This is why , bearing in mind that prevention is better than cure , every kind of publicity and campaign promoting health should be supported .
Let us remember that investing in any kind of innovative treatment method , clinical equipment and new technology amounts to investing in ourselves .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I wish to thank all the speakers for their valuable contributions .
This shows that your contributions can be very helpful , because already some very important points have been made .
These include , for example , the question of how we can create the right work environment for workers in order to keep them in their home countries and , also , how we address the very serious problem of the brain drain .
I was in Liberia last week and was shocked to hear that for a population of 3 million , they have only 150 doctors .
The rest of their doctors are all in the United States of America .
This is a very big problem - not only for Third World countries , but also within the European Union , as there is a very serious brain drain from the east to the west .
We have to see how we might possibly encourage health workers and health professionals to stay in their home countries .
In order to do that , we have to create better work conditions for them .
Formal care cannot be addressed without taking into account the need for , and the capacity for , informal care , which we indeed reconcile in the Green Paper .
Mrs Sinnott raised the very important question of how to train more people and offer people more opportunities to train .
That is the other side of the coin .
On the one hand , we want more health workers , but on the other , we do not have the capacity to train them .
All these are very important questions which we shall be able to answer and give solutions to once we collect all the important comments that you and other stakeholders make on the Green Paper .
At the end of the process , we hope we will arrive at some solutions to the problem before it becomes truly insurmountable .
The debate is closed .
5th World Water Forum in Istanbul , 16-22 March 2009 ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission on the 5th World Water Forum in Istanbul , 16-22 March 2009 , by Mr Borrell Fontelles , on behalf of the Committee on Development - B6-0015 / 2009 ) .

Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in a few days ' time a delegation from this Parliament will travel to Istanbul to take part in the 5th World Water Forum , an event which will bring together all the global players with an interest in water : UN agencies , development banks , States , professional organisations , NGOs and local authorities .
At a time when water is becoming an increasingly scarce resource and the pace of climate change leads us to expect more and more conflicts in relation to access to water , I wanted to prepare for this meeting by putting a strong text to the vote within our institution in order to lay the foundations for European action in this field .
The situation is serious , as you know .
Water shortages have spread beyond the traditionally arid areas .
Access to water , the quality of which is constantly deteriorating , has become a concern for all of us .
The UN figures speak for themselves .
One billion people do not have access to safe drinking water ; two and a half billion people do not have access to sanitation ; five thousand children under the age of six die every day from diseases caused by lack of clean drinking water or sanitation , or by their poor quality .
The scandal is that the first victims are always the poorest .
Access to water , which will be one of the main challenges in the years to come , could further delay the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals .
The next World Water Forum must be an opportunity to find solutions together to respond to this enormous challenge .
My first priority was to emphasise that water is a shared resource of mankind that should be a universal right .
That is the first paragraph of the proposed resolution , and it is vital , because the policies we are implementing depend upon it .
Remembering this basic principle means saying ' no ' to making water a commodity , since , unfortunately , we know only too well the disastrous consequences of that .
The United Nations Development Programme ( UNDP ) report of 2006 shows there has been flagrant injustice .
The lack of distribution systems has often resulted in a lack of safe drinking water for the most disadvantaged people .
Consequently , millions of people have to resort to unofficial sources which , taking into account the intermediaries , charge prices that are five or ten times higher .
We are fighting for access to safe drinking water and sanitation for all .
This means that water has to remain under public control , which alone can assert the common interest .
It is this principle that should guide our policies , and I am pleased that the resolution makes reference to it .
Public intervention is indeed able to resolve this problem of access .
A pricing system that is fair and sustainable for all would be both less costly for poor people than having to resort to the unofficial sector and would allow investment in the necessary infrastructures .
This goal can be achieved only if we all contribute to it .
Public development aid must therefore be used together with the resources of local authorities , bank loans , private capital and innovative partnerships .
I should like , in particular , to stress the importance of financing based on solidarity , such as that made possible under the Oudin law in France .
The latter allows local authorities to collect one cent per cubic metre from their users ' water bills to finance international cooperative actions dedicated exclusively to water .
Is the Commission prepared , Commissioner , to encourage the development of this kind of instrument ?
Such development has to be done in accordance with the notion of the public good , and that is why I am pleased that the text of the resolution points out that public-private partnerships must be strictly defined and subject to regulation .
Since the last World Forum , the role of local authorities has been recognised by all the stakeholders , including members of Parliament and ministers .
The next forum , in Istanbul , will stand out because of two major advances : the signing of an agreement by local authorities on water and the organisation of two days wholly devoted to the role of the local authorities .
Are you prepared , Commissioner , to make use of the enormous reserves of expertise and of human and financial resources of the local authorities to encourage the North-South Partnership ?
With their successful experience and their technical skills behind them , the cities of the North are keen to help their counterparts in the developing world .
Finally , the UN has today published a report on water that makes some frightening projections for the future .
Under the double pressure of demographic growth and climate change , the water crisis has been made worse by the inadequacy of the political reaction .
While water is the priority for all development policy , only 6 % of international aid is devoted to it .
That is why I want Europe , our Parliament and the Commission to send a strong message to the people of the South , because this inequality of access to water cannot continue .
I should like to make a brief personal comment : I sincerely hope that water will not cease to be a common resource and that it will be a right for all .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , first of all I would like to convey the apologies of my colleague , Louis Michel , for not being able to be here in person , as he is in the Congo .
However , it is with great pleasure that I will take up the points , because they are so important .
The Commission fully agrees that water and sanitation service provision is naturally addressed at the local level , through local government , municipalities and communities .
We have to recognise , however , that weaknesses exist between those different levels , most notably in weaker countries where the provision of basic services is not a strong priority .
Last year , the European Development Days here in Strasbourg focused on the role of local authorities , who are at the heart of access to essential services , as well as on the importance of local governance and the participation of citizens .
This is obviously a central issue for the water sector and the Commission , through its different instruments , is working to increase support to local authorities and reinforce partnerships between local actors from the North and the South .
At EU level , European water policy is also based on the principle of good governance , encouraging the involvement and participation of citizens , local communities , NGOs and stakeholders .
This is reflected not only in the Water Framework Directive but also in initiatives such as the EU Water Initiative launched at the World Summit on Sustainable Development in Johannesburg , which contains the reinforcement of the role of local actors among its objectives .
In Africa , where the Millennium Development Goals linked to water and sanitation are still not on track , investments need to increase , and the Commission has demonstrated its political commitment by creating a financial mechanism .
The Water Facility of half a billion euros has enabled mobilisation of double that amount through cofinancing of a large number of programmes to improve the water , sanitation and hygiene situation of millions of people .
It has also improved water governance and management in ACP countries .
The focus on the involvement of local actors has been one of the added values of this facility .
The EU will be represented at the Ministerial Segment of the World Water Forum by the current Czech Presidency .
The statement that is being prepared includes references to the need for good governance through capacity development and institutional reform at all levels .
The Commission 's policy , approved in 2002 , promotes integrated water resources management in developing countries .
It is in this framework that the different uses of water - such as drinking water , sanitation , irrigation etc . - have to be addressed , in order to reach an optimal allocation of benefits among all users .
Moreover , the best practices of different experiences of green belts around cities , particularly in Africa , are currently being analysed in the context of the ' Great Green Wall for the Sahara and the Sahel ' initiative as part of a feasibility study supported by the European Commission .
Further support to this initiative will be considered within the framework of the Africa-EU Partnership on Climate Change .
I am pleased to announce that the Water Facility will continue under the 10th European Development Fund and that EUR 200 million has been set aside for that purpose .
Member States are invited to participate with additional funding .
The Commission 's strategy is based on an integrated framework for collaboration with partner governments , EU Member States and all the stakeholders concerned .
The Water Facility complements the national programmes with its capacity to work with decentralised actors and develop innovative solutions .
The ongoing preparation of the 10th EDF Water Facility identifies in particular the potential offered by public water operators , who provide over 90 % of water and sanitation services globally .
Therefore , public-public partnerships potentially constitute a very cost-effective approach in terms of promoting the relevant ' good governance ' principle in the ACP water sector , with potentially long-term and sustainable impacts on institutional and organisational change .
Such ' twinning ' partnerships - for instance through training and technical assistance - can be efficient ways to promote the principles of good governance in the water sector in ACP countries .
Finally , let me confirm that aid effectiveness and the division of labour are discussed with relevant partners within the mechanisms of the EU Water Initiative .
A mapping of EU Development Assistance in the water sector has been carried out to improve that ongoing dialogue .
The question of donor orphans is an important one in the water sector and the Commission intends to take this into account in the conception of the new Water Facility under the 10th EDF .
Madam President , Commissioner , I would repeat the words spoken in this House several years ago , on 13 March 2006 , by Eija-Riitta Korhola .
She described the situation with regard to access to clean water as follows : ' The figures are alarming : 3 900 children die every day because of a lack of clean water .
One fifth of the world 's population , some 1.1 billion people , suffer from a lack of clean water .
More than 40 % , meanwhile , are without proper water and sewage services . '
Three years have passed since that statement and what has happened ?
What has happened is that the global scenario is worryingly exactly the same , which cannot fail to be cause for concern .
We are now facing a serious crisis in basic sanitation that involves us all .
I would point out that this problem particularly affects the poorest and least developed regions of the world , not least sub-Saharan Africa .
This continues to be the area most affected by a lack of water quality , particularly in rural areas and in the slums that surround the major cities .
However , the problem is vast .
I have here with me a UNICEF brochure which dates from 2001 .
However , in the main , its statements still hold true and are striking .
What does it tell us ?
It tells us that these 1 billion people are spread throughout virtually the whole world .
These 1 billion people have no access to clean water : 4 % in the Middle East and North Africa , 4 % in Central and Eastern Europe , 19 % in South Asia , 25 % in sub-Saharan Africa , and 42 % in East Africa and the Pacific .
If we look at the figures within each of these areas , it is the regions of East Africa and the Pacific , and sub-Saharan Africa which present alarming numbers , with 24 % and 43 % of the respective populations still not having , at the beginning of the decade in 2000 , any access to clean and safe water .
It is vital to remember the health complications , some of them fatal , which stem from this lack of water , and how these impact on the development and progress of the populations deprived of this essential good in terms of both quality and quantity , and also the border tensions caused by access to water and how these risk becoming more acute if nothing is done to prevent them .
The European Union , as a global player and as a contributor par excellence to the world effort to tackle this problem , cannot excuse itself from taking part in the major debates on this issue .
I welcome the reports that the Commissioner has made to us in this House .
I therefore also welcome the holding of and the European participation in this 5th World Water Forum .
This will provide another opportunity for all the main players to debate the issue objectively and to prepare a clear approach to this problem .
I cannot do other than support this effort , as the whole Committee on Development has also done in the sense of promoting subsidiarity .
Furthermore , as there are many responsibilities in this respect at local level , I also support the other concerns of our committee .
Ladies and gentlemen , water is a good which is essential to life , to the life of each one of us and to the life of humankind .

Madam President , I am , on the whole , pleased that this 5th World Water Forum is to be held in Istanbul and , above all , that the European Union is to participate with a delegation from the Commission , and also one from the European Parliament .
I also understand and endorse the need to support the local public authorities in their attempts to establish democratic , participative systems and improvements or innovations in water management , and also to support decentralisation processes .
The primary and fundamental aim of all this is to protect the fundamental right to water and sanitary services but , clearly , this must be within a rigorous framework of respect for sustainable development which , in the European Union , is set out in the Framework Directive on water as a reference point , with the Millennium Development Goals as the basis for development .
I must say that all this - and I will set this out tomorrow in an amendment which I hope this House will adopt - was the subject of debate last autumn at the Zaragoza International Expo 2008 which , in addition , was the first time that the European Parliament participated alongside the Commission on equal terms .
At the Expo , over 2 000 experts , in the Water Tribune , and NGOs , in the forum named the Agora , as well as the delegations from the Commission and Parliament , debated and generated an enormous volume of debate and very interesting , creative proposals on water management .
This took on a permanent form in the ' 2008 Zaragoza Charter ' , adopted on 14 September 2008 .
This contains 17 points , some of which I would like to highlight .
The Charter states :
' that access to drinking water and sanitation is a human right that must be guaranteed by all public authorities ' ;
' that access to water has an enormous influence on development ' ;
' that forecasts show that climate change is capable of modifying the availability and demand for water all over the planet ' ;
' that the sustainable production of food is directly linked to the efficient use of water ' .
' that river basins are the best suited environments for harnessing water and their good management makes it possible to resolve conflicts between countries , regions and users ' ; and , finally ,
' that the public authorities must take the initiative in promoting the legislation and arrangements required to ensure access to water by all ' .
I call upon the Commissioner to take into account the conclusions of the Zaragoza Charter , in the drafting of which we , the Commission and Parliament , participated , alongside experts , NGOs and associations , and that , in fact , it constituted a forum for preliminary debate in view of the 5th World Water Forum in Istanbul .
I believe that it is worthwhile incorporating the conclusions of the Charter and also of the Water Tribune into the European discussion and debate materials that we , as the European Union , are displaying at the pavilion at this international expo .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , two years ago , we held a debate in this House and adopted an exacting resolution on the subject of water on the occasion of the Fourth World Forum held in Mexico City .
We wrote then that water must be considered a human right and that active policies must be developed to realise this right through forms of public-private cooperation , focusing , in particular , on local communities .
Unfortunately , that resolution was not supported by the European Commission , which was present in Mexico City - I would remind the Commissioner of this today - despite the fact that it was widely praised by many countries , especially in Latin America .
The very nature of this kind of forum , a private structure , unfortunately prevailed .
We now have the opportunity to send a parliamentary delegation to Istanbul , and it would be advantageous if our presence there were supported by an equally strong resolution as that of 2006 : we are not quite there yet , which is why I am tabling these amendments .
We need to reach a real turning point on the water issue .
The terrible statistics on water shortages are well known , and they are destined to get worse as a result of climate change .
Indeed , it is in the area of climate change that new action is needed .
Climate change is making access to water more difficult , and poor water access in turn aggravates climate change .
So , as well as the rights issue , and that of public-private collaboration , we also have to look at building a strong relationship with the Kyoto Protocol .
It is the UN that must be involved at the heart of matters concerning water .
A dedicated UN body could be entrusted with global water governance , removing it from the private philosophy still present in the current forum .
This would encourage connection with the important conventions on climate change and desertification that form part of the UN framework .
Appropriate finances will then , of course , be required .
These could come from general taxes and charges , for example , on mineral water which - I would like to point out to my fellow Members - we use to excess even in this Parliament .
The privatisation of water must be opposed : it would make access to a vital resource no longer a right but a market .
I believe that the whole history of Europe teaches us that it is the public that has guaranteed the right to water in our homes , which does not happen on other continents increasingly prone to infiltration by the private sector .
These are practical matters , but they also have enormous moral importance .
It is not by chance that the right to water is championed by large secular but also religious movements and celebrities .
Recently , and many times over the last few years , the European Parliament Chamber has been made available - rightly , and I thank the presidents for this - for important meetings of global activist organisations .
At the latest of these , the idea was put forward of a true protocol on the right to water , which I am convinced we should all support .
( PL ) Madam President , the majority of us can take free access to water for granted .
We use large amounts of water every day .
It is worth remembering , however , that according to estimates of the World Health Organisation , one sixth of the Earth 's population , that is to say , over one billion people , do not have access to water which meets basic , minimal standards of cleanliness .
This means that in the civilisation of the 21st century , millions of people are suffering thirst and dying as a result of diseases caused by drinking contaminated water .
Recently I was in Lagos , the largest city in Africa , where barely 1 % of the people have access to running water .
Statistics of this type are horrifying , but nonetheless the problem of water does not make the front pages of newspapers , does not excite the general interest of the media , and is not the subject of discussions and disputes , as is the case , for example , with AIDS , the fight against malaria or global warming .
This surely results from the fact that the problem concerns only 2 % of Europeans , whereas it concerns 27 % of people in Africa .
It is estimated that in Africa alone , more people die each year from diseases caused by drinking dirty water than from AIDS and malaria put together .
It can , therefore , be said that lack of access to drinking water does not kill in a spectacular way likely to be given prominence in the media , and does not generate as broad interest as a disaster like an earthquake , a tsunami , flooding or armed conflicts .
As Mr Ribeiro e Castro has already said , however , the facts are that , on average , every day 6 000 children die from diseases caused by a lack of water .
This means that one child dies every 15 seconds .
Can you imagine the reaction of the world , the response , the degree of mobilisation and determination , if this were happening in Europe , and not in Sub-Saharan Africa or Asia ?
Consequently , the problem of access to water is not only a problem for developing countries , but also for developed countries .
Universal access to drinking water is an essential condition for the development of countries and the fight against poverty .
Unless this need is met , there is no point in talking about improving healthcare or developing education .
Unless water for the needs of farming or simple industry can be guaranteed , whole societies are condemned to a battle for daily existence .
This leads to armed conflicts , migration and destabilisation .
In other words , it hinders development and increases developmental inequalities .
Politicians will also be present at the Forum we are debating .
They will discuss matters of current importance .
One of these matters is the situation in Darfur , where President al-Bashir is expelling organisations which , among other things , have been helping to ensure that the people of Darfur have access to water .
There will therefore be an opportunity to persuade , amongst others , President al-Bashir , to allow international organisations to supply water to the people of Darfur .

( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , would like to remind you as Mr Musacchio did , that in February , this Parliament , together with Mikhail Gorbachev 's World Political Forum , hosted a conference with a meaningful title : ' Peace with Water ' , a conference that produced a memorandum for a world water protocol that deserves serious consideration and was , moreover , supported by all the major political groups in this Parliament , but which seems to have been ignored by the Committee on Development , which drew up this document .
I do not think this was by accident : the text we are debating today in fact appears weak and vague on all the crucial points that will be on the agenda in Istanbul .
Take the example of water as a fundamental human right .
If it is a right - and it is absurd to deny it - then it cannot also be a commodity .
A right cannot be bought or sold in a free society .
A right is only bought in a society of slaves .
We are well aware , however , that the giant private interests want to take possession of this right .
So what will Europe say at Istanbul ?
Who , as it says for example in recital J , needs to increase the financial priority of water ?
That is a prime example of ambiguous wording .
Furthermore , is the state , or public ownership , the sole player in water policy ?
Or , as it says in paragraph 12 of the resolution , is it the ' major player ' ?
What does this phrase really mean ?
For the rest , it contradicts paragraph 2 of the same document , where it is rightly stated that water is a ' public good ' to be kept ' under public control ' .
In short , we are in the midst of a general crisis in our society 's model of development yet we are still clinging to an idea of the market that appropriates nature itself for private gain .
Lastly , there is another very weak point : the document contains no organisational proposal for world water management .
The aforesaid memorandum did , however , outline a proposal for a world agency , which is repeated in one of the amendments that I will support with my vote .

( PL ) Madam President , the 5th World Water Forum is an event which should be an opportunity to work on systems of public water management which will be effective , transparent , regulated and in keeping with the objectives of sustainable development for meeting the needs of society .
A special role and special tasks in this area await local authorities .
In addition , the food crisis has shown a need for the development of new techniques , such as for the irrigation of farming areas .
At the same time , it is important to ensure that natural fertilisers are used , or fertilisers which are rapidly broken down in the soil and do not pass into underground waters .
Finally , how does the Commission intend to act upon the will of the European Parliament expressed in its resolution of 15 March on the Fourth World Water Forum , concerning support for and ways of jointly financing water management ?
The problem of water is the most important challenge faced by the world and by Europe .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , my fellow Members are right , the figures are alarming and warrant serious reflection .
Many , too many , people in the world are still denied their fundamental right to water .
In recent years , regulation in this field has been significantly extended .
At Istanbul , I would , however , like to see attention drawn to the need to rationalise the many international bodies that play a part in the governance , direction and control of world dynamics associated with water , whose activities and competences often overlap at present .
This reform can be deferred no longer .
I also hope that the 5th World Water Forum will recognise the concept of water as a global public resource and that this idea will gain support , with consequent appropriate policies on its protection , on public ownership and on usage and distribution procedures .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think that , together in this House , we have been repeating the same things for years .
I think everything has already been said about water , about this shared resource of mankind , and , unfortunately , it has to be said again because the situation is far from improving , rather the opposite .
The latest United Nations report shows that , in fact , the situation seems to be getting worse .
I therefore think that , despite the proposals that have been made and the policies that have been conducted by the European Union , which are a first step forward , we really need to go further than that because , without water , there is no life .
We must also be aware that many populations , particularly countries we trade with and have dialogue with , have had their water supplies cut off or still do not have access to drinking water .
This is absolutely inadmissible and unacceptable .
In my opinion , we really must support - and I think that the European Union must provide support at international level and at Istanbul - the status of water as a shared resource of mankind .
It is not a commodity which can be sold or which could be sold by our multinational companies .
That is really what we must fight for at Istanbul , and I think that our fellow Members will fight for it .
Madam President , I have listened to my colleagues quite rightly highlighting the shortage of water , lack of access to water , the diseases that come from that .
All that is fundamentally important for this water forum .
I just wanted to raise the other side of that coin because those of us who were recently in Guyana with the ACP regional conference were made very aware of those countries which have too much water because of climate change .
Mr Musacchio was talking about the climate change impact on water ; how it can contaminate , how it can dry it up , lose the access , but here we have too much and we have to bear in mind what that does in terms of polluting water supplies and causing damage to crops and all the rest of it .
So we have , I believe , to add to this list for the water forum the issue of forestation / deforestation , because , unless we get that right , we will go on having floods as well as droughts .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , nobody can underestimate the importance of water and the need to manage our water sources well .
However , as I said in my introductory remarks , we also need to assist the poorer parts of the world in gaining access to clean drinking water .
The Commission will continue to assist these countries .
Water is a primary human need , as was recognised and reaffirmed during the Fourth Water Forum in Mexico in 2006 .
Of course , as I said before , the EU will be represented and will put forward a strong case on all the points I have made at the forthcoming Forum in Istanbul .
Mr Bowis referred to another very important question - and I agree with him - namely that , because of climate change , we see other parts of the world being flooded with water .
We really have to take action about that .
As he said very clearly , forestation is one of the solutions to the problem .
I have received one motion for a resolutiontabled in accordance with Rule 108 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 12 March 2009 .
Court of Auditors Special Report No 10 / 2008 on ' EC Development Assistance to Health Services in Sub-Saharan Africa ' ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission on Court of Auditors Special Report No 10 / 2008 on EC Development Assistance to Health Services in Sub-Saharan Africa by Mr Borrell Fontelles , on behalf of the Committee on Development - B6-0016 / 2009 ) .
author . - ( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Africa is the only continent that has not made any progress to speak of when it comes to meeting the Millennium Goals , particularly in the area of health , that is , in mother and infant mortality , the fight against HIV / AIDS , TBC and malaria .
This is wholly attributable to their weak healthcare systems and the human resources crisis that is sweeping that sector .
It is therefore abundantly clear that investing in health systems is essential in the fight against poverty .
This is , moreover , also the Commission 's view , but according to the report by the Court of Auditors , even though the Commission has claimed this for years , it has done precious little in the way of making any practical changes .
The Commission is making efforts , mainly via vertical funds in the fight against AIDS , and this may well be necessary in our view , but this should not be at the expense of the overall package of investments in basic healthcare .
Commissioner , the budget for basic healthcare has not increased even proportionately since 2000 in the framework of the whole package of official development aid .
There is therefore enough reason for this Parliament , on the basis of the Court of Auditors ' report , to ask the Commission a few questions and make a few recommendations .
I would like to make four points .
Firstly , the budget for healthcare must be increased .
Clearly , a joint initiative is what is needed here from the EU along with its partner countries .
The developing countries have committed to investing 15 % of their budgets in the framework of the Abuja Declaration .
This cannot possibly be done , though , Commissioner , if the Commission and Europe are only prepared to spend 5.5 % of the European Development Fund ( EDF ) on this .
I should therefore like to find out from you in what way the Commission would like to ensure that in the framework of the 10th EDF , the investments in health will be increased .
Secondly , better and efficient use should be made of budgetary support .
Even though this is one of the Commission 's showpieces , it receives low scores in the Court of Auditors ' report .
Nonetheless , budgetary support very much has the potential of meeting the shortcomings in southern healthcare systems .
Whilst sectoral budgetary support can really target health systems , it is hardly used in sub-Saharan Africa .
General budgetary support can also prove helpful , provided the Commission can commit , and kindle enthusiasm in , the partners to select healthcare as a central sector , and we would urge the Commission to do this .
My question to the Commission is : in what way will you ensure that much better and much more targeted action is taken both via sectoral support and general budgetary support ?
Millennium Development Goals ( MDG ) contracts are one of the Commission 's promising instruments .
I am 100 % behind them , but in all honesty , they are somewhat too insubstantial and too short-sighted because they are only meant for the good students , and so alternatives are very much needed for the others .
Thirdly , expertise must be enhanced .
According to the report , the Commission has too little expertise to put its policy proposals in the healthcare sector into practice .
This is why we would ask the Commission to guarantee this expertise by drafting in more health experts and also by working more effectively with the WHO and the Member States .
Fourthly , the healthcare sector must be better coordinated .
Commissioner , it is absolutely vital for the European Code of Conduct on Division of Labour to be put into practice , and that the investments in , and programmes on , healthcare between the different EU countries are better coordinated .
In addition , we must ensure that the so-called orphans among the needy countries can also guarantee aid in the area of health .
I should like to finish off with a word of thanks to Mr Staes who , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , supports the concern expressed by the Committee on Development , and has asked the Commission to clarify its plans with a view to the discharge procedure , and preferably before the end of 2009 .
It is clear , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , that this Parliament urges the Commission finally to translate its policy priorities into reality with more conviction and with better instruments .
This is more than necessary if we want to be in with a chance of achieving the Millennium Goals by 2015 , because , Commissioner , basic healthcare deserves sustainable investments in the long term .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the Commission really welcomes the European Court of Auditors ' special report on EC support to health services in Africa .
The debate on this oral question gives us an opportunity to discuss our health support to Africa with you , the European Parliament .
I am not going to repeat here the formal reaction the Commission has already made regarding the Court of Auditors ' special report , which has already been published on the Internet .
Unfortunately , this report has not received wide coverage in the press and , when it was mentioned , things were sometimes oversimplified by saying that ' Europe has not kept its promises in Africa ' .
Let me therefore just clarify a few essential points before we enter into the debate .
The Commission remains fully committed to supporting the Millennium Development Goals , the health-related Goals 4 , 5 and 6 being an integral part of these goals : reduction of child mortality by two thirds , reduction of maternal mortality by three quarters , and halting and reversing the spread of HIV / AIDS .
This is what our development cooperation stands for , but our commitment must not be measured by budgetary allocations to the health sector alone .
Doubtless , child mortality will be reduced by effective health service interventions , vaccinations in particular .
Therefore , we monitor vaccination coverage not only in our health programmes but also in many of our general budget support operations .
However , child mortality also depends on other factors such as nutrition , housing , access to safe water , sanitation and education .
Therefore our contribution can , and will , frequently be outside the healthcare sector itself .
When deciding on sectoral allocations and modalities of our development assistance , we agreed in Paris and Accra to increasingly respect basic principles of aid effectiveness .
Here are just two examples .
The first is leadership by partner governments .
This means , after an in-depth discussion with the partner country , accepting the sectors proposed for support .
It might not be the health sector but education or water and sanitation .
Second : alignment on national systems .
This means channelling our aid , preferably as budget support ( provided that the basic criteria are fulfilled ) .
If the country has a sufficiently well formulated poverty strategy , our support may preferably be channelled as general budget support .
Although this support will not then be earmarked as health sector support , it is linked to targets for health , such as vaccination coverage rates or proportions of births assisted by skilled health personnel .
Such targets are usually part of the poverty strategy and are monitored , and budget support disbursement is often linked to progress on them .
In addition to the global commitments on aid effectiveness made in Accra and Paris , we , the European Union , have collectively agreed on a code of conduct that foresees , for example , a reduction in the number of sectors in which each and every donor is active , in order to reduce the administrative and managerial burden on our partner countries through the multiplicity of donors .
This is the meaning of the division of labour approach that EU Member States and the European Commission have agreed upon .
We know that it will not always be easy to agree on this at the country level , particularly as health scores high in public opinion , and all donors and donor countries want to be present and to be seen .
We will , at times , have to resist such a tendency and leave it to the other donors to do the job .
I therefore hope that our debate today will contribute to further clarifying these issues and to helping ensure that Europe fulfils its promises to Africa .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , I thank the Commissioner for that response .
I am sure you are right , Commissioner , that figures can mean many things and we need to look very carefully at them .
But of course , today we are looking at the Court of Auditors , so we have to look at the figures .
I sometimes wish we would look at people rather than figures , but we agree ' no wealth without health ' .
That is not just a slogan but a reality in so many low-income countries .
We agree that the Court of Auditors says only 5.5 % of EDF funding is going to health , whereas the European Union 's policy - and Parliament 's policy - is that 35 % should be spent on health and education .
There is a wrong figure there , and it may well not be as bad as that figure suggests .
Nevertheless , it shows we have got to do a lot better , and that involves cooperation - if I can use that term - with the 15 % pledge enshrined in the Abuja Declaration by the countries themselves .
However , Commissioner , I want to come back to the people .
Go to Mali and see the diabetes out of control and look at the cost to families : over 30 % of their family income spent on insulin , if they have to buy it - and they do have to buy it .
Go to Chad and ask about the mental health services , and they will tell you that they used to have them before the civil war .
Go anywhere in Africa and see the inhumane treatment of people with epilepsy , whereas for a few cents , we could make most of them seizure-free .
Go anywhere in Africa and see the AIDS orphans and see and meet the grandparents trying to raise the grandchildren because the parents are dead .
The statistics are there .
We know that in the Americas , 14 % of the world 's population has 10 % of the global burden of disease and 42 % of the health workers .
Sub-Saharan Africa has 11 % of the world 's population , 25 % of the global burden of disease and 3 % of the health workers .
It reflects the debate that we had earlier .
But we have to look at those things because you cannot have health without health services , without health workers and without health education .
We also have to look at some of the projects that we are embarking on .
It is not just TB , AIDS and malaria , but all the other diseases .
It is the neglected diseases , for which the Commission stands proud with its cooperation with the pharmaceutical companies on that initiative to bring help to people in need of those medicines .
We have to look at the causes of ill health , and the debates this evening have centred round those .
Only if we pull all these things together will the statistics add up - and that means the people will add up .
What we do better will help people to be better , and then their economies could be better too .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the report of the Court of Auditors will not be officially presented in the Committee on Budgetary Control until next week .
I should therefore like to congratulate the Committee on Development and also Mrs Van Lancker , who have made sure that this debate is being held here today and that tomorrow , we will be adopting a resolution which gives a detailed account of what has gone wrong .
We should pay close attention to Mrs Van Lancker 's long speech and the recommendations she has made in it .
Commissioner , we should pay close attention to Mr Bowis 's speech , who managed to list the shortcomings very expertly .
Anyone who reads the Court of Auditors ' report cannot simply skate over the issue .
The figures are there for everyone to see , and Mrs Van Lancker was right to point out that the Millennium Goals for this sector will be achieved with great difficulty , if at all .
Studying the figures which the Court of Auditors quotes for each country will bring you back down to earth with a bump .
With regard to AIDS prevalence , 34 % of the population is affected in Swaziland , 23 % in Lesotho and 14 % in Malawi .
Child mortality in Swaziland was 78 / 1000 in 1997 , compared to 86 / 1000 now .
In Lesotho , life expectancy in the mid-90s was 60 , now only 41 .
In Kenya , more than 1 in 10 children die before the age of five .
The recommendation , the analysis of the Court of Auditors about the efficiency of EU policy has , in the last few years , been painfully disquieting .
I therefore hope , Commissioner , that the Commission will indeed succeed in answering the questions by 10 April , which I , as rapporteur of the Committee on Budgetary Control , managed to have included in this resolution , so that we can incorporate the answers in the discharge procedure that is due at the end of April .
( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , anyone visiting sub-Saharan Africa can easily see , in most countries , the enormous weakness in their health systems and the extremely negative impact that this weakness has on the lives and health of the people who should be helped by these services .
The figures regularly published at international level constantly confirm this .
In this respect , the idea that simple and practical gestures , which are not particularly elaborate or even particularly expensive , might be sufficient to save many lives is extremely disturbing .
European financial support can be crucial in this respect and we must always keep in mind that cooperation in the area of health is truly strategic and directly involves not just one of the Millennium Development Goals ( MDG ) but many of them .
The Court of Auditors found , and I quote , that ' EC funding to the health sector has not increased since 2000 as a proportion of its total development assistance despite the Commission 's MDG commitments and the health crisis in sub-Saharan Africa ' .
End of quotation .
It also recognised , and again I quote , that : ' The Commission contributed significant funding to help launch the Global Fund [ to fight AIDS , tuberculosis and malaria ] but has not given the same attention to strengthening health systems although this was intended to be its priority ' .
End of quotation .
According to the Court , this will have happened , and again I quote , because ' the Commission has had insufficient health expertise to ensure the most effective use of health funding ' .
End of quotation .
The Court of Auditors therefore directly presents the European Commission with a huge challenge , which I endorse .
For our part , I want to reiterate this challenge , based on the objectivity of this data and this assessment .
Health services already form part , but must increasingly form part , of our development assistance priorities , and they therefore merit an increase in funding .
Optimising how aid is given , bearing in mind the apparently opposing needs of coordination of management and proximity to the beneficiary populations , will be to provide a service that can save many lives .
The European Commission cannot fail to respond positively to this challenge and I urge it to do so .
Just now , Mr Bowis made a touching speech in which he managed to put faces , human faces , to the dry coldness of these numbers from the Court of Auditors .
The challenge for us , Commissioner , is to ensure that our cooperation can put a look of happiness and hope on these same faces .
That is why , Commissioner , it is vital that we change the numbers in our health cooperation .
( FR ) Madam President , I did not really want to speak on this report , but just to add a point that is particularly close to my heart and which I have raised on several occasions at the ACP meetings .
It is the issue of health conditions for the Tuareg people in Niger .
In this context , Commissioner , I should really like to raise the problem of European companies that exploit natural resources in African countries and , in particular , the French company , Areva , which is going to exploit uranium in Niger , without giving any information to the local communities , with the result that the people living there are using , for example , radioactive materials or scrap metal for cooking utensils .
Today , the authorities in Niger are not allowing serious studies to be carried out on the situation regarding radioactivity among these people , but we know that they are in an alarming situation .
We had asked , during one ACP meeting , for an epidemiological study to be carried out on these people .
I am putting this request again today to the Commission .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , not only have I listened carefully to what has been said tonight , and not only have I paid attention to what was said in the report by the Court of Auditors , but also , as I said before , I have just come back from a visit to Côte d 'Ivoire and Liberia and have seen with my own eyes what the needs of these countries are in the field of health .
They have needs in terms of infrastructure , needs in terms of the trained health providers we have already talked about , and needs in terms of medication .
Those needs are immense , and I cannot but agree with you that we have to intensify our efforts in offering our help , in the field of health , in the poor countries of Africa .
I can assure you that I will convey your comments to my colleague , Louis Michel , and I am sure he , too , will consider all your suggestions and comments with great attention , just as I have done .
I have received one motion for a resolution tabled in accordance with Rule 108 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Implementation of the Single Euro Payments Area ( SEPA ) ( debate )
The next item is the oral question to the Commission by Mrs Berès , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the implementation of the Single Euro Payments Area ( SEPA ) .
Mr President , I am speaking on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
Commissioner , the European Parliament , under the authority of our rapporteur , Mr Gauzès , has been very committed to ensuring that the legislative measures necessary for implementing the SEPA - Single Euro Payments Area - project come into existence .
When we drew up the accompanying legislation , the Directive on Payment Services , we asked ourselves some questions .
We now realise that these questions were probably justified .
Now that this project is to be launched , we have some concerns , because we do not have the impression that the level of mobilisation , which it seems to me has nothing to do with the challenges of the crisis , has not quite materialised as it should have done .
The fact is , this project , which has received a great deal of support from those in the sector and from the legislator but which , above all , must provide a modern payment tool that is suited to the circumstances of our single currency , the euro , is in danger of not achieving the critical mass that it should have in order to be fully effective .
We are particularly concerned that the launch of the SEPA Direct Debit scheme , which is undoubtedly one of the most original aspects of this project , is running into some difficulties .
We feel that , in view of the Commission 's responsibility , there are two questions to be asked .
Firstly , how does the Commission intend to promote and support migration to the SEPA payment instruments ?
A timescale had been fixed , and it is obvious that it does not take all the practicalities into account .
Secondly , is the Commission of the opinion that the migration of a critical mass of transactions to the SEPA instruments should have been achieved by 2010 , and , if not , what should be done to achieve this ?
When we adopted this legislation , we did not decide on a clear and binding end date for migration to the SEPA instruments .
We think it is undoubtedly time to do so .
We understand that some questions still remain about the compatibility of national systems with the SEPA system and about what is meant by definitive migration , but we feel that it is the Commission 's responsibility to support the industry in finding solutions to the questions they still have .
Next , there is the matter of interchange fees , which clearly has been ignored or neglected , when , for many players , it is absolutely central to the success of the SEPA project .
From this point of view , it sometimes seems that , among the various competent bodies , be they in the professional banking sector , the Internal Market and Services Directorate-General or the Directorate-General for Competition , we are passing the buck somewhat .
Perhaps it is part of the legislator 's responsibility to talk with these players and to demand some sense of responsibility from them .
We feel that , at this stage , we cannot call a consistent piece of legislation into question without supporting the market operators in their efforts to develop an alternative system .
This is precisely the difficulty we have with this issue of interchange fees .
The Directorate-General for Competition has indicated , in some cases , that it considers this piece of legislation to be contrary to the competition rules , but then it believes that it is up to the industry to find an alternative solution .
The fact is , the alternative solutions that exist at Member State level have not been tested by the Directorate-General for Competition .
Therefore , there is no way of knowing whether the Directorate-General for Competition could support them , or whether some of the solutions are appropriate for the problems we face .
For example , imagine that financing an interchange system relied on penalties imposed under the legislation , that is to say , on errors committed .
In practice , this would very often mean making the most vulnerable people pay , and that does not seem to me to be reasonable or socially just .
I therefore call on the Commission to take action on two important points : to fix an end date for migration and to help develop an alternative system or a system that is acceptable from the point of view of the rules of the Treaty on interchange .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all may I convey the regrets of Commissioner McCreevy for not being able to attend .
Well , this is indeed a long question but I believe both the question and the draft resolution on SEPA implementation correctly identify the key issues we need to resolve to make a success of SEPA .
The first question asks how the Commission intends to promote and foster migration to SEPA instruments .
SEPA is primarily a market-driven project , but given the substantial benefits to the wider economy , the Commission has sought to encourage SEPA migration , for example by acting as a catalyst to raise the political profile of SEPA through our SEPA Progress Report and by encouraging early migration by public authorities .
And , also , by striving itself to be an early adopter of SEPA .
And finally , as announced in last week 's Commission proposal ' Driving European Recovery ' , by coming forward with proposals to ensure that the full benefits of SEPA are realised .
The second question asks if a critical mass of payments will have migrated by the end of 2010 .
Clearly we favour rapid migration to keep extra costs during migration to a minimum .
Although the SEPA Credit Transfer ( SCT ) has been successfully launched , less than 2 % of payments have migrated .
Furthermore , the Sepa Direct Debit will only be launched later this year .
So the current pace of migration is too slow to attain critical mass migration by 2010 .
The third question was on the necessity of a clear and binding end date .
We see the strong merits of fixing an end date and , of course , 2012 does not seem unreasonable .
However , for many Member States this remains a very sensitive question .
We therefore favour establishing a clear process to examine this question , by collecting information on the impact of an end date on different stakeholders and launching a meaningful debate with them .
This could pave the way for some political endorsement and , if needed , a possible legislative proposal , for example , at the end of the year .
Your fourth question asks how to enhance legal certainty for the SEPA Direct Debit in relation to the MIF and existing mandates .
We need a temporary solution to the business model problem to provide legal clarity and get the SEPA Direct Debit successfully launched .
That is why the Commission fully supports the efforts of Parliament and the Council to find a temporary solution within the context of the revision of the Regulation on cross-border payments .
The Commission also supports the continued legal validity of existing national direct debit mandates under SEPA migration .
However , this is a legal matter for national authorities to solve , for example , by using the opportunity provided by the Payment Services Directive 's implementation .
The fifth question related to how the Commission is tackling the MIF issue for card payments .
This work is progressing primarily through the Commission 's assessment under the competition rules of the two major international card schemes , namely MasterCard and Visa .
On 19 December 2007 , the Commission decided that the MasterCard MIFs for cross-border card payments with MasterCard and Maestro branded consumer credit and debit cards were not compatible with the competition rules .
MasterCard is appealing the Commission 's decision .
In March 2008 , the Commission opened proceedings to establish whether Visa Europe 's MIF constitutes an infringement of Article 81 .
Discussions with Visa are ongoing as well .
The Commission seeks to maintain a level playing field for MasterCard and Visa Europe as well as for the other payment card schemes which might emerge in the future .
Your penultimate question asks if the Commission should propose a concrete solution to the MIF issue .
In a market economy , it is incumbent upon industry to propose an appropriate business model .
In relation to cards , as I have said , discussions are ongoing with Mastercard and Visa .
In relation to SEPA direct debit , the Commission is willing to assist industry by providing urgent guidance within the framework of a sustained dialogue with the banking industry and on the basis of contributions by the relevant market actors .
This guidance should be provided by November 2009 at the latest .
And your final question asks what specific measures the Commission intends to propose to make sure that SEPA migration does not lead to a more expensive payment system .
In the Commission 's opinion , this should not happen .
Firstly , SEPA should foster competition and increase operational efficiency through economies of scale - both producing downward price pressure .
Secondly , SEPA should also increase transparency , which will limit cross-subsidisation and hidden pricing , although optically , some users may perceive the switch from high hidden pricing to low visible pricing as a price increase .
Here , clear communication by banks will be important .
Third , the Commission is carefully monitoring the impact of SEPA on customers by launching studies .
Finally , we agree that there is concern that efficient national debit card schemes may be replaced by more expensive alternatives .
However , there are initiatives that could develop into a new pan-European debit card scheme and an overall backstop is provided by the existing powers of EU and national competition authorities .
Therefore , in conclusion , SEPA should result in a more efficient payment system and adequate safeguards under EU and national competition policy exist .
I therefore very much welcome this Resolution and Parliament 's strong support for SEPA .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , much has just been said about what has become of this Payment Services Directive for which I was Parliament 's rapporteur and which was adopted at first reading in 2007 .
The purpose of this directive was , among other things , to give the various banking institutions , grouped within the EPC , the legal instruments necessary for the implementation of SEPA .
A European regulation has therefore been adopted for bank cards , credit transfers and direct debits .
SEPA is an integrated market for payment services in euros where there will be no difference between cross-border payments and national payments .
This situation will have benefits both for the banking sector and for consumers .
As you said , the Commission has committed itself to ensuring that migration to the SEPA instruments does not result in a more expensive payment system for the citizens of the European Union .
Since the adoption of this report , migration to SEPA has progressed very slowly , much too slowly .
On 1 October 2008 , only 1.7 % of transactions were made by way of the SEPA Credit Transfer format .
That is why , today , we are approving the European Parliament resolution calling on the Commission to fix an end date for migration to SEPA products .
This date must not be later than 31 December 2012 , after which date all payments in euros should be made using the SEPA standards .
Before this migration can take effect , however , the sensitive problem , the sensitive issue of multilateral interchange fees , needs to be resolved .
These fees should not be abolished .
Payment services are a commercial activity .
It is legitimate to cover costs and keep a profit margin for participants .
On the other hand , opacity or arbitrariness should be avoided .
It is therefore appropriate for the Commission to lay down guidelines with respect to the application of these interchange fees .
In order to have more legal certainty , these guidelines must be known before the SEPA system for direct debits is launched .
Without this legal certainty , banks in many countries might not launch the direct debit system , and this could bring implementation of SEPA to a halt .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and the Socialist Group in the European Parliament have tabled very similar amendments along these lines for tomorrow 's vote .
Obviously , we hope that they will be taken into consideration .
( LT ) At this difficult time , it is very important to find possible sources of economic growth .
The development of our European financial market is exactly such a source of possible growth for the European economy .
In this instance , we are talking about the payment market , and it is regrettable that the decisions we have taken are being implemented rather slowly .
Technical possibilities of banks are usually cited as the main reason , as these are mostly technical solutions , but I would like to say that technical modernisation of banks is in the interest of the banking sector and the banks themselves and , in this way , they can modernise their market , their payment systems and increase their profits .
Therefore , it is very important that Member States implement the Single Euro Payments Area implementation plan with more determination .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we know that the Single Euro Payments Area represents a genuine challenge to small and medium-sized enterprises .
They have recently been working very intensively with the credit card system and the prices and costs which result from these systems differ greatly .
I believe that the required degree of transparency is not present here .
It is precisely during a crisis that we need commensurate support for business .
It must be possible to improve the creditworthiness of companies by reducing costs , because then , of course , they can get access to credit again .
I think that the SEPA would be a good instrument here .
It should be implemented as quickly as possible in order to achieve a situation where not only can small and medium-sized enterprises work cheaply and efficiently , but where this also applies to transactions between small and large businesses .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and its Chair , Mrs Berès , for this debate .
The Commission welcomes Parliament 's support for SEPA , which is not only a self-regulatory initiative , but also a major public policy initiative reinforcing economic and monetary union as well as the Lisbon agenda .
Parliament and the Commission clearly share the same vision and the same goal for SEPA .
Let me , however , recall three important points .
Firstly , as mentioned earlier , the Commission has been very active in helping to drive forward the SEPA migration process , in particular , by putting pressure on public authorities to be early adopters .
We will relentlessly continue our efforts as a SEPA catalyst .
Secondly , although we share Parliament 's interest for an end date for SEPA , we do not believe that the time is right to carve an end date in stone .
We have put a process in motion and are convinced that a lot of ground work is needed before such a commitment can be envisaged .
Thirdly , I can confirm that the Commission will provide guidance on the compatibility of multilateral , interbank remuneration with competition rules .
We know there is little time left before the entry into force of the SEPA direct debit , and that our guidance should therefore be available before November 2009 .
However , let me insist on one point : that guidance can only be provided subject to the industry supplying us first with concrete ideas for possible business models .
I have received one motion for a resolution tabled in accordance with Rule 108 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , 12 March 2009 .
Sri Lanka ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the motion for a resolution tabled by the Committee on Foreign Affairs on the deteriorating humanitarian situation in Sri Lanka .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like first of all to thank the Chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs for agreeing to accept the procedure laid down in Article 91 and to put this emergency resolution on last Monday 's agenda , since , at our last plenary here , in Strasbourg , we already had an emergency resolution on this issue of Sri Lanka .
I would also like to thank Parliament for having agreed to this debate taking place this evening , and I thank you , Commissioner , for coming to this debate , as I know the time is difficult for you .
We wanted this resolution because we have to send a strong political signal to the government and the Tamil representatives in Sri Lanka , because the situation is getting worse every day .
We have first hand accounts from Tamil families and people who are in Europe and who are always sending us messages and accounts of what is happening to them and what is happening to their families trapped in the conflict between the Tamil Tigers and the Sri Lankan army .
These people are enduring really terrible suffering .
We do not know how many people are affected , but we estimate that between 150 and 200 000 people need to be evacuated .
What is meant by ' evacuated ' , though ?
The NGOs are asking us to have them evacuated by sea , but , there again , I have to ask : to go where ?
Where are these people going to go ?
This afternoon , I met a little girl who was born in a Sri Lankan refugee camp and who is now in Europe .
If it is that these people have to leave their country to go and live in refugee camps , then that is not the solution , either .
Therefore , we are asking in this resolution for there to be an actual ceasefire .
Of course , there will be debate with the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats about an immediate or temporary ceasefire .
We are really asking the authorities for an immediate ceasefire so that civilians can be removed from danger , because we know that there are people who have been killed .
We have had another example of this today with these testimonies .
We are asking , of course , in this resolution , for the Sri Lankan Government to cooperate with the NGOs and with countries that are willing to help to resolve this conflict .
We are also asking if the European Union can help to deliver desperately needed food and medicines .
Finally , may I say on behalf of my group - since it is on the initiative of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance that we tabled this emergency resolution on Monday in the Committee on Foreign Affairs - that we are asking for this issue to be taken very seriously by some of our fellow Members , who have different interests in this country .
I would remind you that , for a long time now , some of the political groups have been asking for the opportunity to speak about the situation in Sri Lanka and that , for internal reasons in some countries , we have not been able to debate this issue of the Tamils and their situation , which has deteriorated since the 1980s .
Since you are here with us , Commissioner , maybe we can ask ourselves another question .
The European Union appears to have the ability to help in resolving conflict .
Perhaps the time has come for us to consider the possibility of setting up a conflict resolution unit within the European Union .
We can see in the Caucasus , we can see everywhere else in the world that the European Union is taken seriously for the proposals that it issues .
In resolving conflict today , we must no longer be just a supportive participant , but an actual promoter of conflict resolution .
If , today , we can start to lay the foundations to resolve this conflict with a strong European Union presence and a strong message to the authorities , I believe that we will have also increased our stature in terms of political union .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , as one of the Tokyo Co-Chairs of the Sri Lanka peace process , the European Commission and I personally have been following the developments in Sri Lanka very closely .
We are deeply concerned about the current situation and the tragic humanitarian consequences of the conflict , as expressed in the GAERC Council conclusions of 23 February and the Co-Chairs ' statement , issued locally on 3 February .
We are particularly preoccupied about the plight of thousands of internally displaced persons - you are right - trapped by fighting in Northern Sri Lanka .
We are no longer facing a crisis but what I think is already a humanitarian catastrophe .
This was confirmed to us by a wide range of independent sources , including the UN and the ICRC .
The Government 's recent announcement about opening two evacuation roads at the north and at the south of the safe zone is a positive step but we want to know how this will work in practice .
We have called on the parties - the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam ( LTTE ) and the Sri Lankan authorities - to protect the civilian population as required under international humanitarian law and to allow the safe and voluntary movement of people away from the combat zone .
Both the LTTE and the Sri Lankan army are responsible for the dramatic increase in civilian casualties during the past months .
There is an immediate and urgent need to act to save lives in Sri Lanka , as was also confirmed by the UN Under-Secretary , Sir John Holmes , who drew attention to the high casualty rate , and also the ICRC .
The Commission is convinced that the outcome of this crisis will have lasting consequences for peace , for reconciliation and for the unity of Sri Lanka and , in this context , strongly supports the call issued by Sir John Holmes to the Government of Sri Lanka to interrupt hostilities to allow time for the civilian population to get out safely and to the LTTE to let the civilians go and agree on a peaceful end to the fighting .
The Co-Chairs have also appealed to the LTTE to lay down their arms but unfortunately , this call has been rejected , even ignored .
We feel that the Government of Sri Lanka has an obligation to protect all its own citizens and agree to a humanitarian ceasefire - this was also said in the Council conclusions last time - to allow sick and wounded people to leave Vanni and to arrange for food and medicine to be let in .
This is also what India suggested last weekend .
We continue to be alarmed about the human rights situation in Sri Lanka , against the background of reports of extrajudicial killings , abductions and serious intimidation of the media .
It is very important that the Government follows up the most prominent high-profile cases .
There cannot be any impunity for such crimes .
At the end of the day the European Commission continues to be convinced , as I myself would say , that there is no military solution to Sri Lanka 's ethnic conflict .
An inclusive dialogue is required , leading to a political settlement .
Lasting peace and reconciliation can only be achieved by addressing the concerns which led to the insurgency in the first place and by providing adequate space for all the communities .
As a Co-Chair , I have always said there can only be a political solution by means of some sort of devolution package , which has been on the table , has been taken off the table , and now has to come back on the table .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam Commissioner , Sri Lanka 's brutal civil conflict is finally nearing its end .
Of course , it is too early to say whether this will mean the end of terrorist activity by the Tamil Tigers .
We certainly should not support a permanent ceasefire at this stage in case it allows the Tigers to regroup .
In my view , their only option now is to lay down their arms or be defeated militarily with more casualties .
A long-term ceasefire would be a disaster because - as a suicide attack in Sri Lanka earlier this week demonstrates - the LTTE is ruthless , bloodthirsty and rightly identified as a terrorist organisation by the European Union and the United States .
We should be resolute in our support for President Rajapaksa in his efforts to end an insurgency that has only brought untold human misery to Sri Lanka and severely retarded economic development on that beautiful island .
However , thousands of innocent civilian IDPs still remained trapped on a narrow coastal strip .
These civilians must be allowed to leave so that the army can conclude its offensive .
It is reprehensible , but entirely to be expected of the Tigers , that they are exploiting these civilians as human shields .
The Tigers have been deaf to appeals from the international community to surrender and establish a temporary humanitarian corridor .
Nevertheless , allowing the UN and other organisations to arrange safe passage from the conflict zone for these civilians is essential to avoid further bloodbaths .
Sri Lanka appreciates its own responsibility in this regard and wants to avoid civilian casualties but , understandably , the army 's patience is limited and fears that the Tigers will seek to escape by a sea evacuation procedure , mixing in with the civilians .
Therefore , we on this side of the House endorse the establishment of a humanitarian corridor and a temporary and immediate ceasefire or cessation of hostilities , but we also want to see the comprehensive defeat of the LTTE and a peaceful , just and multi-ethnic Sri Lanka established in its place , where there is maximum autonomy to the Tamil majority areas and an equitable sharing of resources and power within a unitary Sri Lankan state .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , I very much welcome this debate in the presence of the Commissioner , whom I thank very much for her serious , her strong and her profound statement .
It is clearly a very important subject , although it is regrettable that we are discussing it at 11 o 'clock at night with so few people here .
But the attendance does not , I think , reflect the interest in this topic , nor the seriousness with which many Members view it .
We are , to use the Commissioner 's words , deeply concerned about the situation .
Tonight 's debate recognises also that the situation has moved on and , as Mrs Isler Béguin said at the beginning , that we need to send a strong signal about the deteriorating situation that is worsening day by day .
I support the original resolution tabled , with the exception of the one word ' temporary ' .
I deplore the language that Mr Tannock has just used , when he said that a long-term ceasefire would be a disaster .
Surely - I appeal to you - we are not interested in just a temporary ceasefire .
In every case of conflict around the world , this Parliament , composed of compassionate people , has argued for a permanent ceasefire that can pave the way for diplomatic rebuilding , so that dialogue can begin - and , yes - so that we can get that peaceful , just and multi-ethnic society that Mr Tannock spoke about and with which I agree .
So I applaud the Greens for their first amendment , Amendment 1 , and I am sure that all decent people here , concerned about the civilians in Sri Lanka , will too .
A temporary ceasefire by its very nature implies a return to war later on , which nobody wants .
A return to war will mean more deaths , more suffering , more humanitarian tragedy and I cannot believe that anybody on either side of the House really wants that .
Likewise , Amendment 2 : I support this amendment too because it condemns all acts of violence by whoever is perpetrating them , on whatever side of the conflict .
We cannot condone any violence , including the recent suicide attack which has been referred to .
Then I turn my attention to Amendments 3 , 4 and 5 .
I would like to read a short piece that I received from a Sri Lankan Member of Parliament in the Jaffna district , Mr Selvarajah Kajendren , dated 10 March .
He says ' I wish to bring to your urgent attention the civilian deaths in Sri Lanka .
The Army fired artillery shells fitted with cluster munitions from 2 a.m. till 10 a.m. on Tuesday 10 March 2009 ' - this week .
' The Sri Lankan Government forces indiscriminately attacked all parts of the ' safe zone ' using every kind of lethal shells , some of them banned in many countries .
In this indiscriminate cluster shelling , more than 130 civilians were killed , including children , and more than 200 were severely injured . '
I doubt that anyone would suggest that this is fabricated .
More , I would suggest that we all want to do everything we can to help bring an end to that sort of violence .
He also refers to his colleague , Mr S. Kanakaratnam , who is living right in the middle of the ' safe zone ' .
He says that from 1 January to 6 March this year , 2 544 civilians have been killed in these ' safe zones ' by bombing campaigns and well over 5 828 civilians have been gravely injured .
Yet the Sri Lankan army , he says , have been bombing by air and artillery fire , killing on average 30 to 40 civilians on a daily basis .
I do not believe that he would be fabricating .
From what the Commissioner has said , from all the evidence given by all the NGOs that have got anywhere near there , that seems to be reflective of what is happening .
Amendment 6 : I refer here to the report by Sir John Holmes , which was sent to me by His Excellency , the Ambassador of Sri Lanka , in Brussels .
In the report , he says there is serious overcrowding in some of the transit sites .
His words are reflected in my amendment and it is right that we should be concerned about these camps .
I have some pictures of the camps .
Anybody is welcome to look at these pictures that have been sent to me .
Again , I suggest they are genuine and not fabricated .
I know that the Commissioner 's office in Colombo is following this very closely and has close contacts within the real danger zone .
Amendments 7 and 8 strengthen the original reference to the war zone so that civilian needs can be fully attended to .
We ask for unhindered access not only to the combat zone but also to the refugee camps so that humanitarian agencies , which everybody in this House supports , are granted full access .
Everybody round the Chamber would support the work of the humanitarian organisations .
Finally , Amendment 9 suggests we send this resolution to the Secretary-General of the United Nations because I believe that this is an international humanitarian crisis , as reflected in the title , and that we should do everything we can .
That is why I thank the Greens for putting this down and I ask all colleagues to support the amendments tabled by all political groups .
Mr President , I wish to thank Mrs Ferrero-Waldner for her speech and for her response to the call from the NGOs and the people who are trapped .
We are afraid of finding ourselves in a somewhat similar situation to Burma after the tsunami in 2006 , where the junta prevented access to humanitarian aid .
Now , therefore , we must do everything possible so that humanitarian aid and our aid reaches the people who need it .
I should also like , however , to speak to my fellow Members from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , because I believe , ladies and gentlemen , that we must appeal to wisdom .
Indeed , we submitted this proposal for an emergency resolution in order to allow Parliament to express an opinion and adopt a position tomorrow .
What I would not want , under any circumstances , is for one side or the other not to vote for this resolution because of differences of opinion about an immediate ceasefire or a temporary ceasefire , which we understand because the debate has already taken place .
I therefore genuinely call upon you , please , to act wisely .
On the other hand , I should like to say , particularly to Mr Tannock , that , to repeat the words of Mrs Ferrero-Waldner : armed conflict never solved any problem .
We know that .
War never resolves anything .
In my opinion , asking for a temporary ceasefire is irresponsible with regard to the people concerned .
That would mean , in fact , putting them back into battle at some future time - and what a future that would be - once the people had been evacuated .
Can we allow ourselves to leave people to be evacuated ?
Tamil people are people who own land .
Therefore , they want to return to their land .
They are Sri Lankan .
I therefore believe that we have to pay close attention to this matter , but I am prepared to make concessions and to withdraw amendments provided that , together , we can reach a common position so as to send out this strong political signal to the entire world .
Mr President , we should be under no illusions about the terrible impact of war on innocent civilians and our moral duty to do all that we can to reduce their vulnerability and to help in the provision of humanitarian assistance .
That is why Parliament passed its urgent resolution on Sri Lanka less than three weeks ago .
For decades now , Sri Lanka has been afflicted by a terrorist campaign conducted by the internationally proscribed LTTE .
There is no equivalence between terrorists and the legitimate forces of a democratic government .
Let us remember that it was the LTTE that perfected suicide bombing as a tactic , that it pioneered the use of women in suicide attacks , and that it makes undisguised use of child soldiers and of human shields .
Over the last 26 years , it has systematically carried out thousands of deliberate murders across Sri Lanka and , just two days ago , 14 people were murdered in a suicide attack during an Islamic festival in the Matara district .
The LTTE is now in a desperate end game and , typically in such situations , is turning to international apologists to get it off the hook .
A tiny minority of Members of this House were unhappy with the resolution passed by the majority in this Parliament and , disgracefully and improperly , they wanted to focus condemnation on the Sri Lankan Government .
We cannot support amendments based on unattributable - and often nonsensical - allegations , as we have heard from Mr Evans , or selective quotation from one NGO report .
We have no good reason to dispute the Government 's firm assertion that its troops have not fired on no-fire zones and will not do so .
Six days ago , the Secretary-General of the United Nations called on the LTTE to remove its weapons and fighters from areas of civilian concentration and to cooperate in all humanitarian efforts calculated to relieve the suffering of civilians .
The European Union has condemned the action of the LTTE in preventing civilians from leaving the conflict area .
The greatest service all in this House can do is call on the LTTE to lay down its arms and to release the civil population from its grip .
Then , much-needed humanitarian aid can be delivered , people can begin to look forward to better lives and all Sri Lanka can get back on the path of democratic politics and to building a fair and more prosperous society for all its citizens , free from terrorist oppression .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I totally agree with you that we need a political solution , not a military solution in Sri Lanka .
I have visited this country many times as a member of the South Asia delegation .
I know how the people long for peace after 25 years of violence .
However , I must say that , in this sort of war , the LTTE should make a move and unfortunately , is not doing so .
You too mentioned that and the Foreign Ministers again urgently called on 23 February for this organisation to lay down its arms and end the terror .
Just imagine a Member State of the EU in which terror has reigned for 25 years .
That there is a great deal of chaos and disorder there is easy to imagine .
I support the Tamils ' cause , but I reject the LTTE 's methods equally decisively .
For weeks , we have heard that in this small district , more than 100 000 people have simply been seized .
Reuters reported just yesterday that , according to eye witness reports , people are being shot when they try to leave this zone .
So we need to call on the LTTE and the forces behind the LTTE to end these practices .
The game is up ; they cannot carry on like this .
Obviously civilians in this war zone are exposed to barrage fire from both sides .
We must also call on the government to respect international law and permit humanitarian actions .
It is the fundamentalism on both sides that is demanding so many victims .
I think we should prepare for post-war order .
As you said , the 13th amendment in the Sri Lankan constitution must be implemented , which provides for decentralisation in the sense of regional administration by the people who live there and the EU can provide valuable help here .
I am sure that you in the Commission and we in the EU are prepared to do so .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner , ladies and gentlemen , I think that what the Commissioner said , namely that a military solution is not possible , needs to be reported on the front pages in Sri Lanka .
Namely that , in terms of the tensions in the country and the problems that have piled up here over the years , the government does , in fact , keep trying to make an offer .
It founders quite simply on the communication strategy .
Of course , you also have to see that the strategic position of Sri Lanka also gives external factors room , setting external factors in motion that are very hard to control within the country alone .
Care therefore also needs to be taken to ensure that the economic situation improves and that the infrastructure in these areas is improved , so that the necessary communication between the parties to the conflict is possible .
Perhaps it would be possible to use one or other of the mediators here .
( NL ) Mr President , what is happening in Sri Lanka now has been in the making for quite a few years .
It is not simply a humanitarian problem , but mainly a serious political failure .
After years of violent struggle for the separation of the North-East of the country , a previous administration of Norway offered mediation between the Sinhalese majority government and the rebel Tamil movement .
The Norwegian negotiator who worked for a long time to reach peaceful solutions is now a minister in the new government himself .
Unfortunately , though , this option for a peaceful solution has since been abandoned .
In the summer of 2006 , the Sri Lankan Government ended the peace attempts and opted again to unilaterally impose a military solution .
This government is now probably labouring under the illusion that it managed to achieve a major success , whereas in reality , a peaceful , harmonious co-existence of the two peoples as equal partners will be even more difficult in future .
Without a compromise on a peaceful solution , the future looks gruesomely violent .
We have to revert back to peace mediation without winners or losers .
( DE ) Mr President , thank you Commissioner for speaking so plainly .
I think that our main focus now must be directed towards the fate of the civilian population and the only thing that can , in fact , apply here is what was said in the Council of Ministers on 23 February , namely that the EU calls for an immediate ceasefire .
I am against adding the word ' temporary ' , otherwise the humanitarian disaster which you referred to will continue .
I also think that , in this situation , where the people are trapped in this zone , we must oppose all acts of violence that prevent people from leaving the combat zone .
In this situation , it does not matter to me if the violence is being perpetrated by the LTTE or by government troops .
Our focus must be on the people themselves .
Perhaps I might make a comment to my honourable friends from the former colonial power who are preparing to leave our group .
I hope that the impression which has imposed itself upon me , that there is also a certain domestic incentive to lash out so unilaterally at the LTTE alone , is false .
I also hope that they do not have a specific segment of the electorate in mind .
Mr President , this is not a point of order .
I was indicating to your colleague that I wanted to ' catch the eye ' to speak , which I am allowed to do and which I thought I had done .
I want to thank Mr Meijer for his remarks .
He also referred to the valiant work of Mr Erik Soldheim , from Norway , whom I met 10 days ago in Oslo .
I very much agree with Mr Gahler , who spoke a great deal of sense : it is the fate of the civilians that concerns us .
I suggest that of all the amendments , the most important is Amendment 1 , which calls for an immediate and total ceasefire , and which must be in the interests of all the people of Sri Lanka .
There is much evidence .
It is not circumstantial .
Some of it is from the office of the regional director of the health services of the Sri Lankan Government , which talks about a humanitarian catastrophe and the substandard conditions in which people are living .
This is echoed by the European Commission , the ICRC , the UN , the International Crisis Group and Refugee Care Netherlands .
The title of the debate this evening is the deteriorating humanitarian situation in Sri Lanka , and we have a duty to do everything we possibly can to prevent that , which I think we can , if we find the right way forward .
Ladies and gentlemen , I strictly applied the Rules of Procedure .
As I was able to give the floor to five speakers , and as only three actually spoke , I decided to also give the floor to Mr Evans .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank the honourable Members for what has been a very important debate , even if it was short and took place late in the evening .
Since the beginning of this Commission 's term of office , as a Co-Chair , I have been very much preoccupied by Sri Lanka .
There were moments when we had some hope - rather more at the beginning - but hope has now faded away .
I wanted to take part in the Geneva Process , but it seems that was difficult for the Government of Sri Lanka .
In any case , this process unfortunately broke down .
I was also ready to go up to the north to start mediation , like my predecessor , Chris Patten .
But the north was not ready - officially Mr Prabhakaran had measles or chicken pox .
In any case , I am in complete agreement with Mr Gahler , who said - and this is also my own concern - that we should put people and humanitarian concerns first .
As is so often the case , we have been the largest humanitarian donors in Sri Lanka .
In 2008-2009 , we allocated EUR 19 million for humanitarian assistance , which was then channelled through partners like the ICRC , the United Nations and also some international non-governmental organisations .
These organisations are ready to help the affected populations , but they have real problems - which they tell us about - in gaining access to the conflict area .
Since September 2008 , the ICRC has been the only agency allowed to operate in the LTTE controlled areas in Vanni .
The World Food Programme has been allowed to send some food convoys , but this has only been sufficient for around 50 % of needs .
Since 2008 , we have provided another EUR 7 million in humanitarian assistance to the two organisations .
We have also been pushing consistently , in both Colombo and Brussels , for better access to these populations by humanitarian organisations .
Therefore , I can only say - together with the other Co-Chairs and also particularly with Norway - that we have used every opportunity to press the parties in conflict to implement the 2002 ceasefire agreement and to solve the conflict using peaceful means , but nothing has worked .
Numerous calls for a return to negotiations have always been totally ignored and unfortunately , the military route has prevailed .
The scope for intervention by the international community has narrowed more and more over the last three years , but not one of the Co-Chairs has abandoned the mission .
We have all remained committed to contributing to a peaceful solution to the conflict , as can be seen from the last Co-Chairs ' press statement released on 3 February , of which I am sure you will all be aware .
Therefore , what we must do now is again press for humanitarian access , get the humanitarian and civilian population out , and then try , when the time is right , to start to foster a political dialogue with the parties in conflict and try to persuade them that a political solution is the only way out .
Otherwise , there will be a guerrilla war , which will not solve anything for this beautiful island .
It was once a paradise and could become a paradise again .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , 12 March 2009 .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.35 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9 a.m. )
Documents received : see Minutes
Workers ' participation in companies with a European Statute ( motion for resolution tabled ) : see Minutes
Eastern Partnership ( debate )
Ladies and gentlemen , the first item today is the Commission statement on the Eastern Partnership .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I am very glad to have this opportunity for a timely debate on the Eastern Partnership .
It is one of the flagships of the European Union 's foreign policy , and its strategic rationale is clear : more security , more stability and more prosperity in our eastern neighbourhood .
The conflict in Georgia and also the gas crisis in Ukraine are just two examples of the periodic crises and the instability affecting this region .
These have had a direct impact on the Union and its citizens .
To these two crises we now have to add the financial crisis , which hits our eastern neighbourhood particularly hard .
While each crisis requires its own immediate response , we also have to provide medium- and long-term action to prevent new problems from arising and , in addition to these immediate issues , our eastern neighbours all want stronger links with the European Union , albeit to varying degrees .
They also need reinforced help to consolidate their democratic institutions , statehood and rule of law .
The European Union can and must respond to these challenges and the Eastern Partnership is , so to say , our political answer .
Increasing our support for reforms and helping our partners to align with the EU acquis will help stabilise our eastern neighbours .
On 3 December 2008 the Commission put forward an ambitious communication on the Eastern Partnership on my initiative .
It built on prior ideas by our Czech , Polish and Swedish friends , and it built on many of the European Parliament 's suggestions , including deep free trade agreements , more mobility of people and greater funding .
As part of the Eastern Partnership , we also proposed upgrading our political relationships through association agreements with each partner - but only once they have fulfilled the relevant political reform criteria .
We proposed measures to enhance cooperation on energy security and , importantly , increase support for economic and also social development to address the imbalances within countries that are so often a destabilising force .
We also recommended setting up a multilateral framework for the Eastern Partnership with four thematic cooperation platforms : firstly , democracy and governance stability ; secondly , economic integration and convergence with EU policies ; thirdly , energy security and , fourthly , contacts between people .
We suggested making the European Parliament 's Euronest initiative an integral part of the Eastern Partnership and setting up an Eastern Partnership parliamentary troika for the European Parliament , the OSCE and the Council of Europe .
To implement all these proposals and step up support for internal reforms , the Commission asked for EUR 350 million additional funds over four years .
That is only 3.1 % of the total ENPI envelope and , for example , much less than the additional allocations to the occupied Palestinian territories in 2007 to 2009 alone .
In short , this is not an excessive sum : it is a necessary investment in our long-term security .
I know some of you would like to do even more for our eastern partners .
You have said that the Commission proposals do not go far enough or fast enough , particularly for the mobility of people , but other voices have said the opposite .
We need to strike the right balance , therefore , between ambition and realism , and we need to move fast .
I am glad that we all share the goal of bringing our eastern partners gradually closer to the Union and also tackling the threats to their stability .
The Eastern Partnership is a key tool to accomplish that .
I hope that today 's debate sends a strong signal to the 27 Member States in the run-up to next week 's European Council and in preparation for the Eastern Partnership Summit on 7 May 2009 .
The Eastern Partnership goes to the very heart of the challenges we face today .
It is in the EU 's direct strategic interest : a new security crisis in our eastern neighbourhood would have implications not only for our neighbours but also for the whole EU and its citizens .
I am , therefore , very grateful for the support of this Parliament , and I look forward to working with you on your contribution and in the implementation .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , as rapporteur for the eastern dimension of the European Neighbourhood Policy , I welcome the Commission 's commitment to deepening relations with six countries to the east in the new Eastern Partnership .
It is important to emphasise that the Eastern Partnership should not by itself preclude the possibility that some of those countries should one day join the EU as full members .
For example , as you well know , I have long been an advocate of Ukraine 's EU membership , and I remain convinced that absorbing Ukraine is definitely in the EU 's strategic interest .
I also welcome the establishment of a new parliamentary body , Euronest , as a forum for MEPs and national parliamentarians to reinforce each others ' democratic mandates through dialogue including , for instance , facilitating Armenia and Azerbaijan to sit down together and discuss the Nagorno-Karabakh dispute , and negotiating free trade agreements and visa facilitation through these new association agreements .
However , I hope that the Eastern Partnership will not lead to new dividing lines being drawn between those countries in the Partnership and those countries further east and outside of it .
We must bear in mind that countries in Central Asia like Turkmenistan , Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan are looking west to the EU for assistance and engagement .
We must therefore be careful not to lose sight of our responsibilities to Central Asia simply because we wish to strengthen relations with countries adjacent to the EU to its immediate east .
With regard to Belarus , I have been a staunch critic in the past of the Lukashenko dictatorship .
Nevertheless , I welcome the recent thaw in relations .
I have long advocated a carrot-and-stick approach whereby President Lukashenko 's efforts at democratic reform and openness should be recognised and rewarded by closer ties to the European Union .
As to whether Mr Lukashenko should be allowed to participate in the summit in Prague to launch the new Eastern Partnership in May , such a step , to my mind , is probably premature , as President Lukashenko still needs to demonstrate an irrevocable commitment to EU common values and democracy .
Mr President , Commissioner , thank you for your opinion and your commitment to this matter .
I would like to underline what you said , namely that we are facing huge challenges in our neighbourly relations as regards stability , democratic change and now , of course , economic development as well .
Now is therefore also a good time for us to express our commitment and our readiness to cooperate closely with our eastern neighbours .
It is clear - and we should also say openly - that we have an interest in the influence we as the European Union have on our eastern neighbours .
However , we want to extend our influence , not by violence , not by threats and not by coercion , but by offering to support precisely those countries in their search for stability and democratic change .
I hope that they really are all seeking democratic change , particularly now when , like Ukraine , they have huge economic problems .
Economic problems , for some of which they are not to blame , but of course for some of which they are also partly responsible .
We should also be aware that we also need to be critical of some things .
Precisely because we are offering our support , we also need to criticise what we think needs criticising and to demand what is necessary in order for these countries to play their part too .
I am thinking in particular of Ukraine , but I will come back to this country shortly .
It is absolutely vital that we do not see this Eastern Partnership as a tool to use against Russia , but rather as a strengthening of the countries which , in terms of neighbours , have the European Union on one side and Russia on the other , as - all being well - Russia should become our partner , particularly with regard to this policy .
I am very pleased that the United States and President Obama , together with Vice-President Biden and the Secretary of State Mrs Clinton , are now pursuing a different policy .
We should not hold back our criticism with regard to internal developments in Russia .
However , the reset button of which Mr Biden spoke in Munich should also be pressed as an attempt , as an offer to Russia to start a new relationship .
In this regard , my group is not particularly happy about the fact that the report by Mr Onyszkiewicz , as agreed in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , does not take up what the US is now offering .
We are lagging behind the US .
That is terrible .
We should be going forward with the US , while naturally always keeping the issue of human rights in the foreground .
This will be necessary and I hope that we shall still achieve a joint resolution on Russia .
This , in my opinion , is vital .
I have already mentioned that our offer , our Eastern Partnership , does not mean that we approve of everything that is happening in our neighbouring countries .
For example , if I consider the situation in Ukraine , it must not be a case of ' no matter what you do , what disputes you have and what problems you fail to solve , you will have the support of the European Union ' .
The leading forces in Ukraine must ultimately address the problems together , because the gas crisis is linked to a dispute within the political spectrum of Ukraine , and that , to us , is totally unacceptable .
I do not wish to apportion blame here - we can all form our own opinion .
However , it is absolutely vital that we make this clear to Ukraine .
The same applies to Georgia and to all other countries .
The European Union has made an offer and I hope that our eastern neighbours will accept this offer , take it seriously and actually make stability and democracy a reality .
The Eastern Partnership , as a logical and essential new priority resulting from the expansion towards the east , is perhaps the most ambitious foreign policy initiative of a reunified Europe .
It is a good step , but it will make sense and be successful only if there is real political will behind its implementation .
It is therefore not enough simply to stick a new label on our existing neighbourhood policy ; we have to set our sights far beyond the existing policies and formulate much higher aspirations .
The first task is undoubtedly to convert the existing cooperation agreements into association agreements .
Part of that process also entails setting up a permanent institutional organisation , but that is not the most important part .
Meetings of Heads of State or Government and ministerial meetings are obviously essential , but they succeed only if real advances are made in the domain of the two fundamental pillars .
The goal is to establish a free trade zone with free trade agreements and gradually to abolish visa requirements .
We know that both of these seem distant goals at the moment .
The countries concerned are not yet ready for this , and the Eastern Partnership has to help these countries fulfil these conditions as soon as possible , since this is to everyone 's mutual benefit .
The gas crisis in the past months has demonstrated how vulnerable Europe is in terms of energy .
Therefore , an especially vital part of the agreements is energy cooperation , which may involve transit countries like Belarus and Ukraine or exporting countries such as Azerbaijan .
Consequently , we consider this of extreme importance .
I would like to emphasize that this cooperation must also convey values .
The Eastern Partnership will be a success when the values of democracy , the rule of law , human rights and minority rights are constantly kept in the forefront , lending a helping hand to partners in their steps forward but also making them accountable in these areas .
The Eastern Partnership must also be open to Belarus , but only once the conditions have been fulfilled .
It must be made clear that distancing themselves from Russia does not in itself mean getting closer to Europe .
Indeed , they have a lot to do in guaranteeing human rights and democracy before the road to cooperation opens up for them as well .
The Eastern Partnership has obvious budgetary consequences : EUR 350 million have been appropriated for the next few years - and even this will probably not be enough .
The task of Parliament is to furnish the necessary financial backing , and thus we must recognise that within the Eastern Partnership the most crucial motivating factor for the partners is their European aspiration . Thank you .
Mr President , the announcement of the Eastern Partnership has raised new hopes amongst our European neighbours .
If we dash these hopes again , we will be limiting our influence in the East in every respect .
Our neighbours will thus be pushed into Russia 's sphere of influence , marked by destabilisation and authoritarianism .
I would appeal for caution in the case of Belarus .
This country 's current promises that it will achieve democracy remain groundless .
In the meantime , the Belarusian authorities are deporting Catholic priests linked to the television channel BelSat , and have refused to grant them permission to register their office in Minsk .
Young people who support the opposition are being conscripted into the army .
Attempts to use the crisis as a pretext to refuse the Eastern Partnership funding and to slow down the process of signing agreements on free trade and visa freedom are a recipe for disaster for the European Union in this part of the world .
If that happens , remember not to grumble about Moscow 's policies .
We have the necessary instruments available to us today .
If the Eastern Partnership winds up merely providing new packaging for the same old content , then we should not be surprised if we fail in the East .
Mr President , I would firstly like to welcome the Commission initiative , which is very well prepared .
Secondly , it is not about the eastern policy of the Union , it is about a new formula , so the question should be raised of what is the value added .
I would say that , besides what we have been trying to do , whether successfully or not so far , we are now trying to have not only friends around us , but also friends who are friends amongst themselves .
That is key for the stability and security of the European Union .
In this multilateral dimension I see the value added of this new project .
I hope it will be approved in March by the Euroepan Council .
We know that it is the priority of the Czech Presidency - although we do not have the pleasure of seeing the Czech Minister in the Chamber .
Association agreements are the key element of this and should be similar but , at the same time , differentiated according to the possibilities and performance of every one of the six parties in this multilateral framework .
Energy security , as was said , is a key issue .
It is of key interest to us and to the six countries to be linked by this energy security access .
There were questions during the debate on whether to have third countries involved .
I think the approach whereby we have Turkey and Russia linked on a case-by-case basis is the correct approach .
Belarus should obviously be invited , but on a very conditional principle , where we should fix the minimum thresholds on fundamental values .
We are very happy that the Commissioner has noted and taken into account that the parliamentary assembly of the Eastern Neighbourhood , Euronest - invented by this House - will be an integral part of the project .
Regarding funding , properly addressed , it will have to be in the next financial perspective .
So far I hope that this 600 will be fine , but I have one important remark in order to eliminate all the controversies .
It should not be done to the detriment or at the expense of the southern neighbourhood .
The southern and eastern neighbourhoods should be both synergetic and symmetric in this context .
( BG ) Mr President , Commissioner , we cannot but give a positive assessment of the Commission 's proposal .
Its timing is perhaps really ideal too because in the current crisis situation all European countries need solidarity .
We discussed fairly extensively just yesterday and the day before yesterday the issue of solidarity between new and old Member States .
This is an artificial argument to a certain degree , but is one which is actually going on in the heads of many people .
However , it is the European Union 's eastern neighbours which are in need of a particular show of solidarity at the moment because , in practical terms , they do not have those support mechanisms which their neighbours immediately to the west of them have .
Therefore , such an initiative will offer them a significant assurance that the European Union is still thinking about them and is prepared to invest in developing relations with them .
At the same time , we can say that this is a good initiative , but we will have to see from now on how this initiative will develop because , on a number of occasions , we have witnessed good initiatives fizzle out over time .
On the other hand , the fact is that some of these countries which this initiative is targeted at have membership of the European Union as their prime objective .
In this sense , it is very important that this notion of Eastern Partnership is not perceived either by us or our eastern neighbours as an attempt to replace future membership for good by such an initiative .
With this in mind , I would like you to tell us , Commissioner , based on your contacts , how this initiative is being received by our eastern partners .
Officially , of course , they are bound to support it , but specifically from the point of view of possible future membership , I wonder whether they have these misgivings .
I also think that this initiative has one element missing , which was also emphasised by fellow Members , namely the role of Russia .
We are aware , of course , how delicate this matter is , given that the countries we are talking about are neighbours not only of the European Union , but of Russia as well .
It is also very important for us to develop relations with Russia in respect of these countries so that no rivalry emerges between the European Union and Russia , no clash between the two main influences in these countries , resulting in political instability .
In fact , this is exactly what we are witnessing at the moment , to a certain degree .
Some of the countries are literally divided and their citizens are split between expectations of Russia and expectations of the European Union .
I believe that we must be more active and have much more to offer these countries .
I would like to conclude by saying that I support the easing of visa requirements , which is a very important step , but I want to see as part of this initiative more measures linked to education and exchanges , all of which is related to expanding contacts between citizens in these countries and the European Union , as well as , of course , to increasing the knowledge in these countries about the European Union .
Thank you .
( LT ) The Eastern Partnership policy is a particularly important policy , like the Euronest project which should be implemented in the nearest future .
Therefore , I am convinced that we must find the additional EUR 350 million required to implement the Eastern Partnership policy in the coming four years .
Regarding Belarus , three weeks ago a delegation from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats in the European Parliament visited Minsk .
Our delegation arrived the day after High Representative Javier Solana 's visit to Belarus .
On the one hand , his visit was a clear signal to Minsk that the European Union is ready to begin a new stage of pragmatic relations .
On the other hand , it seemed that many of the European Union 's earlier requirements are , if not forgotten , at least not being mentioned .
For the majority of people in Belarus , resonant phrases about a constructive dialogue and the discussion of fundamental problems failed to show clearly what policy the European Union will pursue in the future .
What is done is done .
The visit took place and not a word on democratic values was uttered .
I am pleased that the PPE-DE delegation was in Minsk the day after Mr Solana , and we especially emphasised the human rights situation and requirements for freedom of the press .
In conclusion might I add that an invitation to Mr Lukashenko to participate in the Prague Spring Summit would be incomprehensible and hard to justify .
Secondly , the Belarusian government must implement democratic reforms , and must continue implementing them .
There should be no carte blanche for the Lukashenko regime .
Mr President , the Eastern Partnership is a project which covers six countries .
One of them , Belarus , is a dramatic example of self-isolation , to which we have responded in the past with a policy marked by the ' too little , too late ' syndrome , both in terms of sanctions and of incentives .
Belarus has little in common with , say , Georgia .
Cooperation between Mr Lukashenko and Mr Saakashvili looks like political fiction and political horror combined .
The other five countries are on the Black Sea , where we have a synergy - which means that there is no strategy yet .
Could the Eastern Partnership stand in for a Black Sea strategy ?
One could hardly imagine a regional strategy there without Turkey and Russia , but these particular countries are left out of the process .
What all these countries have in common is the fact that they were all part of the Soviet Union , and they are all neighbours of Russia as much as they are neighbours of the European Union .
In other words , we are dealing with a common neighbourhood .
Russia looks to that neighbourhood as being its reserved sphere of interest .
We certainly cannot accept that but , on the other hand , the Eastern Partnership appears to be a way to reciprocate the Russian policy on its neighbourhood .
This makes that neighbourhood an area of conflicting interests and rivalry .
The real challenge is how to develop an EU-Russia common policy in respect of their common neighbourhood .
Otherwise we will not achieve security and stability there , but the opposite .
As far as everything else is concerned , we already have democracy and good governance , economic integration and convergence , energy security and human contacts on the agenda .
From this point of view , Ukraine is much further advanced than the others , and I assume that it is not very happy to see that our offer now has to be shared with the others .
The real problem was not the lack of labels but the lack of delivery .
By putting our money where our mouth is - and of course , Madam Commissioner , you are perfectly right to say that we need a budget in order to make good policy - and by adding a little visionary realism instead of naive confrontation , we might really transform the Eastern Partnership into a valuable and positive asset .
Mr President , I would like to welcome the Eastern Partnership project that will hopefully strengthen democracy and reforms in our eastern neighbourhood .
This is not just a regional initiative , however : it should be seen as an all-European project .
Therefore , it is crucial that all Member States commit themselves to making their full contribution .
With commitment of that kind the traumatic conflict in Georgia last August could probably have been prevented .
It is high time , therefore , that all states in the region understand that such projects cannot be seen as an old-style fight over spheres of influence , and I share the view of the Commissioner that the goal is to achieve more stability and security in our neighbourhood .
The Eastern Partnership will mean upgrading the EU 's relations with six of its neighbours .
It could be compared to establishing four common spaces between the EU and Russia , but the main element of this relationship will be reciprocity and conditionality .
The Partnership will mean bilateral commitments to advance both free market economic relations and the rule of law , and the scope of the relationship will depend on the progress of each partner in these areas .
I would like to stress one more principle .
The Eastern Partnership should not be limited to cooperation between governments .
It has also to involve civil society and especially stimulate grass-root exchanges between citizens , NGOs and local authorities .
Belarus opposition leaders who were here this week were , by the way , worried by the EU opening up to Belarus because it did not include the civil society , and in the case of an authoritarian country like Belarus I think partnership must be clearly based on concrete steps of progress in the field of human rights .
( RO ) The Eastern Partnership initiative is especially important and a set of instruments needs to be implemented as quickly as possible to facilitate its application .
I welcome the platform for cooperation promoted by this new partnership framework as the need to readjust our relations with our neighbours is vital , not only with a view to making cooperation with them more effective , but also in order to be able to resolve the major problems which we are facing at the moment , such as the economic crisis and energy security , and which cannot be handled solely internally .
The partnership encourages projects of the utmost importance to the EU by promoting an institutionalised framework which puts both relations with neighbours and intraregional cooperation among neighbours at a higher level .
There are priority projects which are vital for dealing with the energy crisis : those in the Black Sea region and those using resources from the Caspian Sea area .
These projects can only be carried out against the backdrop of a secure neighbourhood and close relations with the relevant regional players , based on joint , mutually beneficial commitments .
Mr President , I would like to refer to Ms Andrikienė 's speech on the recent visit to Minsk by a delegation from this Parliament .
Commissioner , in your reply perhaps you could confirm that you would reject the view of Lukashenko and his colleagues that we should have a relationship without condition .
When we were in Minsk we obviously met the democratic opposition leaders and we also spoke with the press .
It is clear that Lukashenko does want good relations with us , but this is not out of the goodness of his soul : it is because he has very serious economic problems and wants to stay in power .
He has ordered his police to break up peaceful demonstrations and , having released political prisoners , he is now re-arresting them .
Commissioner , in your speech - which I was present for - you talked about people-to-people contact .
What do we , here in the EU , say to the people of Belarus and the students of Belarus ?
Are we supporting them , or are we supporting the dictatorship which , for the time being , rules over them ?
Mr President , my speech looks at the relationship between the Eastern Partnership and the Black Sea synergy .
In my opinion , the main obstacle is finding the synergy 's proper place in this increasingly complex picture of EU initiatives towards the east .
Consequently , the real substantive issues of the Black Sea area , like energy and frozen conflicts , are approached either through : the EU Neighbourhood Policy , where the money is ; the future Eastern Partnership , designed to increase the security confidence of the countries involved and secure the energy deliveries to the EU after the Georgian war ; the EU 's strategic relationship with Russia and Ukraine ; or the accession talks with Turkey .
What then , is , left for the Black Sea synergy to achieve ?
Not much , I should say , apart from seminars and studies on how to extend the existing European initiatives towards the area and non-political issues .
It is , therefore , necessary to improve the substance , too , of the framework known as ' synergy ' if one wants to maintain its credibility .
( PL ) Mr President , the Eastern Partnership is a complex set of proposals which should support our eastern neighbours along the path of democratic change .
Each of these countries is faced with a choice .
They can follow either the Russian or the European model .
The European Community can certainly offer them more .
The European Partnership is not an attempt to gain control of this area , or to extend our sphere of influence .
Instead , it is an agreement which will clearly benefit both sides .
Partner states are being given a new opportunity and support for their economic and social development .
The Community will guarantee greater energy and political security for itself .
We should aim to relax visa restrictions .
If we make it easier for the citizens of Eastern Partnership countries to enter EU territory , they will discover how significant the benefits of cooperation with the EU can be .
Greater contact between citizens , especially young people , will certainly also help to bring the partner countries and the EU closer .
We should make it possible for young people to learn and to travel , and we should promote educational and cultural exchanges .
Young people , who are aware and educated , are the future of our continent .
( LT ) During my visit to the Ukraine I noticed that little attention is being paid to the development of the legal framework in our eastern neighbourhood .
The introduction of the Community acquis helped Lithuania to reform its economic and legal system and to become a member of the European Union .
I hope that the Eastern Partnership Programme will devote ever more attention to the development of the legal framework in our neighbouring countries .
Not only will this help ensure institutional stability , it will also help implement economic reforms .
On the other hand , the development of the legal framework allows us to encourage cooperation between the European Union and its eastern neighbours , because it ensures a stable environment for capital investments and for the application of human knowledge .
Mr President , as two of my colleagues are not in the Chamber , I am availing myself of the time to say a couple of extra words on this issue , which is so vital to the immediate external priorities of the European Union in the coming years .
I want to congratulate the Commission on its initiative on the issue of making energy security one of the prime objectives for dialogue and for the political agenda .
External energy security policy is vital .
We saw the recent spat between Ukraine and Russia and the downstream effects it had on consumers in countries as far afield as Bulgaria and Slovakia .
It is important to remember that a number of the countries of the six concerned - such as Belarus , Ukraine and Georgia - are key transit countries .
There are also producers - like Azerbaijan and the Caspian gas and oil fields .
There is potential for a trans-Caspian link to central Asia which , as you know , Commissioner , is dear to my heart , and I have always been an advocate of further rapprochement with Kazakhstan .
It is important that we maintain stability in the Caspian region and also diversify away from over-dependence on gas supplies from Russia , and in particular Gazprom , which is often used as a sort of branch of the Russian Foreign Ministry .
I have to say also , with some regret , that while the Eastern Partnership is great for the countries of the South Caucasus - although it remains to be seen whether they can also integrate more regionally , rather than just enjoy bilateral relations with Brussels - it does not bring much that is new for countries like Ukraine .
Such countries already have access to free trade agreement negotiations , with the issue of visa facilitation on the table , along with participation in the CFSP and the SDP .
There is nothing much new for Ukraine , I am sorry to say , but it is great for the other countries .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would still like to remind you that we have not managed to settle the frozen conflicts in these eastern regions , nor have we managed to avoid war between Russia and Georgia .
I believe in fact that this Eastern Partnership is welcome because there is a need , in the first place , to stabilise these regions and to avoid falling into the trap of the area of influence because there is us , there is the United States , there is Russia and there is Turkey .
I also believe that we have to ask ourselves , in the context of this partnership , if there is not a need to introduce a neutral buffer zone , in other words states which would have neutral status to avoid the friction which we are witnessing today with Georgia and the Ukraine seeking NATO membership .
We know perfectly well the effect of this membership on Russia .
We are looking for stability and energy security from this Eastern Partnership .
We must ensure this security because , as one of the Members said , energy from the Caspian Sea travels through the Caucasus ; so we must have stability in the Caucasus .
I also believe that our fellow citizens should get to know these regions and , for this , I believe that the Commission must invest in some projects .
The problem showed itself in fact when the new countries gained accession .
I think then that we must introduce projects to make these regions known and to ensure that they have a European perspective .
Mr President , catch-the-eye is a good opportunity for polemics .
I disagree with my colleague Mr Severin .
He would admit a droit de regard in zones of influence for Russia .
If we want stability on our eastern frontiers we need more democracy and more market economy .
Russia is less democratic and less a market economy than those neighbours , so no joint policy will bring us closer to that goal .
Symmetry with Russia in this policy will not provide us with more progress in the region .
We were not invited by Russia when the CIS was constructed , and a mix of our and Russia 's policies would be totally counterproductive .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , this is a really interesting debate , and I wish to thank the Members very much for their overall great support for this Eastern Partnership approach .
Let me say at the outset that it is based on values .
It gives support for both political and economic reform .
It will require resources - and I wish to thank Mrs Andrikienfor her clear support on this - and , as many of you have said , it will also require political will .
It is crucial that , apart from government-to-government cooperation , there be cooperation with the population , which is clearly there , and there is also the parliamentary aspect to things .
Therefore , it is very important that you also use the new Euronest and all other means in order to really instil our ideas .
That is my first comment .
A lot can be said about this Eastern Partnership .
The first thing to ask is what the added value is to our normal neighbourhood policy .
The answer is ' quite a lot ' !
We are going into greater depth : the association agreements are already very broad and deep .
There should normally also be free trade agreements , which cannot easily be offered to everybody , because it requires a lot of structural changes in the countries concerned .
That is very important .
There is a move to more political cooperation and mobility for security , which many of you have mentioned .
It is very important to have visa facilitation , but other countries need to do more on border management and documentary security etc .
There is an outreach - a greater offer .
Then there is the multilateral component because , as I have always said , the neighbourhood policy , along with the Eastern Partnership , is in principle a bilateral offer - as Mr Swoboda rightly said - but it also has a multilateral component that enables countries to work with each other , which , as in the case of the south , is always more complicated .
This is an offer , and by that offer we are trying to bring the countries closer to us .
We do not have the same instruments as one has with candidate countries , where in order to enter the ' club ' they have to comply with a certain number of conditions , and if they do not , then they cannot enter .
Therefore , we have to work with initiatives , with instigations and with positive momentum .
That will take time , because this is also a question of societal change , but it is very important to be there and offer and agree to that .
I also agree with those who said that we should not see this as a threat to Russia .
That is true , and at the same time this is a small group of six eastern partners , together with the European Union , and on an ad hoc , case-by-case , basis we can here or there maybe associate Russia or Turkey .
However , the Black Sea synergy is a very important initiative on projects that reaches out to all partners , including Russia and Turkey .
It is a young policy and one has to give it a chance .
We cannot implement a strategy in just one year .
We have to be patient with this very important policy , which we must continually try to develop .
I would say to Mr Szent-Iványi that we support the eastern partners in meeting our conditions .
That is crucial .
We therefore have a mechanism for giving them more capacity-building and more institution-building , because we can see that sometimes the institutions are weak .
Concerning Ukraine , we are working on the legal framework , but implementation is up to the governments in every democratic country , once the parliament has adopted the legislation .
Therefore , with the Eastern Partnerships , we are trying to support and to push , but it is also up to those countries to do their job .
As Mr Swoboda mentioned , it is very important that we are also critical when necessary , and there has to be genuine leadership in a country .
At present we are not always sure about that , and want the country to move ahead .
I am very grateful to Mr Saryusz-Wolski for his support .
It is absolutely right to say that differentiation is also key here , because the various countries are very different : Ukraine is in the forefront , in principle , then there are Moldova and Georgia , and then there is a country like Belarus , in which the situation is very delicate .
I am preparing for a visit to Belarus , where we have to work a delicate balance , because we want to offer something - particularly to the population .
From the very beginning , the Commission has supported the students in Vilnius , and I would like to see more support from the various Member States , because the ones that always speak up about this should also do something .
I have always been in favour of that .
However , we also want Mr Lukashenko to go on with his reforms , which is what we are saying .
It is important to communicate in such a way that this message is clear .
On Monday , there will be a GAERC meeting at which the question of what to do about Belarus will certainly come up .
The outcome will most probably be along the same lines as now , because we are not yet satisfied but , at the same time , we have seen some positive steps .
In reply to Mr Vigenin , I would say that this does not replace membership .
There cannot be membership , because neither these countries nor the European Union is mature enough for their membership .
Therefore , we have to design .
This is a policy designed to give as much as we can , provided the countries want to take it .
The difficulty is that it is much easier , as I have already said , to give something if you lay down conditions or if you say : ' well , try to do this , try to do that , and we will give you opportunities ' .
In this case there is no immediate goal of having a specific result , but the overall result is better stability , more security and more opportunity .
Concerning security questions , I would say to Mrs Isler Béguin that it is absolutely true that we have to work for more security , but many other questions also come into the picture .
We are working very hard on Azerbaijan , on the question of Nagorno-Karabakh , on Moldova , Transnistria and on Georgia , and are sticking very firmly to these questions .
It is a principal question .
We will not recognise the independence of Abkhazia and South Ossetia but , at the same time , we have to work with Russia and have to engage with Russia .
On this point , I agree with Mr Swoboda that we have to be realistic , but also to make our firm position clearly known .
These are the major issues , on which all of you have made very valuable points .
In a multilateral framework it is very good to have civil society involved , in all its different forms , and also presents a great opportunity for them and for us to work on energy security .
Energy security today is one of the important issues where we have a real win-win situation : we are highly interested and they are highly interested .
We have to bring that together .
That concludes this item .
( PT ) I should like to ask the Bureau whether we are going to discuss a proposal for a European Parliament recommendation to the Council , given that the Council representative is not here .
Is there any news as to whether or not he will arrive during the debate ?
in writing . - In a time of economic crisis , one could ask the question : should Europe focus on looking after its own rather than assisting its eastern neighbours ?
Europe should decidedly continue supporting them .
Firstly , economic instability in the eastern neighbourhood , mostly notably in Ukraine , which is suffering major problems , poses a threat to security in Europe .
Conversely , a stabilised Ukrainian economy , increasingly integrated with the EU , is an enormous potential market for EU Member States .
Secondly , bringing our eastern neighbours into the European family , even if the prospect of actual membership of the EU is probably still a not a realistic option in the immediate future , is a long-term project .
Dealing with the current crisis is something we will have hopefully resolved in the next year to 18 months .
The Eastern Partnership is a project for many years .
Thirdly , even if the leaders of some of our eastern neighbours , such as the Belarusian President , and , to a lesser degree , bickering leaders in the Ukraine , may discourage us from tightening these ties , we must remember that our eastern neighbours are more than their current leaders and , in the light of their internal political problems , they need our support , example and encouragement .
We should be pleased that the European Union is opening up new opportunities in terms of relations with its eastern neighbours .
In December 2008 , the European Commission adopted a proposal , tabled by Poland and Sweden , to strengthen the European Union 's cooperation with six of its eastern neighbours .
This move encourages hope .
I hope that this project will not remain on the figurative drawing-board , and that it will be implemented in the context of our relations with Ukraine , Moldova , Georgia , Armenia , Azerbaijan and Belarus .
The Eastern Partnership provides for a real increase in the level of political cooperation , including new types of association agreements , far-reaching integration with the EU 's economy , easier travel throughout the EU for citizens of the countries covered by this partnership ( provided that security requirements are met ) , agreements aimed at improving energy security , which benefit all those involved , and increased financial assistance .
We should be aware that the Eastern Partnership requires commitment from both the Eurpoean Union and from the partner countries .
This effort can bring tangible political and economic benefits .
It will contribute to increasing the level of trust between partners and , as a result , stability and security for all .
We may have particularly high hopes for the proposed main framework of the Partnership , especially the creation of four political platforms , democracy , good governance and stability , economic integration and convergence with EU policies , and energy security and interpersonal contact .
Of course , there are many doubts , such as the matter of the real intentions of the Belarusian government and the issue of relations with Russia .
EU-Brazil Strategic Partnership - Mexico Strategic Partnership ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
by Mrs Koppa , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , with a proposal for a European Parliament recommendation to the Council on the European Union-Brazil Strategic Partnership , and
by Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , with a proposal for a European Parliament recommendation to the Council on an EU-Mexico Strategic Partnership .
Mr President , Latin America is a continent with more than 600 million inhabitants , contributes more than 10 % of the world 's gross domestic product , has 40 % of the earth 's plant species and at the same time has a dynamic and extraordinarily active young population .
Despite the economic boom of recent years , however , this is not the best time for Latin America in terms of its integration .
This is what President Óscar Arias said at his inauguration and I was reminded of it last weekend at a seminar organised in São Paulo with Alejandro Toledo , the former President of Peru , and Fernando Enrique Cardoso , the former President of Brazil .
There have been tensions between Argentina and Uruguay ; the ALCA project has failed ; Venezuela has left the Andean Community ; there have been problems between Brazil and Bolivia over the nationalisation of energy resources , and between Argentina and Bolivia for the same reason ; there have been disputes between Ecuador and Colombia , between Colombia and Venezuela , between Mexico and Venezuela , and so on .
This initiative by the European Commission , supported by Parliament and the Council , to establish this strategic partnership therefore sends out a clear , well-defined message that Latin America remains on the list of action priorities for the European Union , due not least to Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner 's personal commitment .
In the case of Mexico , this strategic partnership aims specifically to underline that country 's importance on the Latin American and world stages and , in addition , it is an essential , key step in consolidating our existing relations with Mexico and expanding coordination on topics of world importance .
This new step is an opportunity to boost political dialogue even further and to coordinate the positions of both parties at world level and also in the various multilateral forums and international bodies .
Consultation mechanisms will enable joint positions to be adopted on concrete issues of global reach such as security , the environment or socioeconomic questions .
For the European Union it is also an excellent opportunity to develop privileged relations with a country that plays a leading role in Latin American forums such as the Rio Group , in which it holds the presidency until 2010 .
Mexico takes part in the G20 , the G8 + 5 , the World Trade Organization , the International Monetary Fund and also the OECD , in which it is the only Latin American member .
Therefore , seeking joint solutions to the world economic and financial crisis , drawing up ambitious strategies for the success of the United Nations Conference on Climate Change to be held in Copenhagen , developing a structured dialogue on immigration , or collaborating to achieve the Millennium Development Goals are some of the things that can be achieved at the annual summits between the European Union and Mexico if the strategic partnership that we are proposing is set up .
In the resolution that it will adopt this morning , Parliament will also reiterate its support for President Calderón in the fight against drug trafficking and organised crime .
In addition , and in a spirit of mutual respect , dialogue and shared responsibility , I believe we should take on joint challenges , such as seeking to protect vulnerable groups in society like women or representatives of the media .
Commissioner , this year we are celebrating the 25th anniversary of the political talks held in San José , at which , thanks to the major mobilisation of political talent in Central America and the monitoring by the European Union , peace was finally brought to the conflict-torn Central American isthmus .
In its support for peace , understanding , concord and reconciliation , the European Union has , in my view , been doing an honourable job in Central America and also in other parts of the world .
Now that these values are being consolidated , albeit not without difficulty and not everywhere to the same extent , it is clearly time for development .
Based on our European experience , however , that will be more difficult if there is no integration .
I believe that we are providing a substantial impetus through this strategic partnership with Mexico and , above all , we are sending out a clear , well-defined message about Europe 's commitment to Latin America .
rapporteur . - ( EL ) Mr President , I am delighted that we are debating and will be voting today on the report on improving our relations with Brazil .
The creation of a strategic relationship between the European Union and Brazil is of mutual benefit , firstly due to Brazil 's changing position at global level to become a leading force in the developing world and , secondly , because Brazil plays a vital role in bridging differences on questions of global interest .
Over recent years , the European Union has maintained a very broad spectrum of relations with Brazil and a coordinated cohesive framework is therefore needed for relations on both sides .
Stronger relations will be based on historical , cultural and economic ties and on common values for democracy , the rule of law , human rights , concern about climate change and sustainable development , disarmament , energy and the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons .
The strategic partnership must be substantial in scope and of a gradual nature .
Brazil is also a country of decisive importance to Mercosur .
It must therefore commit , within the partnership , to strengthening relations between the European Union and Mercosur and addressing questions of common interest .
Within this framework , the strategic relationship will be a means of deepening interregional , economic and trade relations .
Due to its enhanced role in the area and its active involvement in the UN , Brazil can , I believe , play an essential role in preventing and resolving regional conflicts in Latin America , thereby helping to consolidate peace in the area .
In light of the global economic crisis , the European Union and Brazil must cooperate at World Trade Organization level with a view to the successful conclusion of negotiations on the Doha Development Agenda .
Brazil is in a position to do more to address the new challenges of the global economy , given that regulatory matters play an important part in safeguarding competition law and in sustainable development .
As far as the reform of the financial system is concerned , its membership of international fora may help in reviewing the role of international institutions in the surveillance and regulation of financial markets .
Like other developing powers , Brazil is becoming more and more active in international efforts to deal with global poverty and inequality through cooperation programmes with the long-term objective of sustainable development .
As far as environmental protection is concerned , Brazil is the country with the largest areas of vital rainforests .
The European Union and Brazil must cooperate proactively at international level to protect them and to address climate change and the loss of biodiversity .
Political undertakings need to be made to implement the UN Convention on Biological Diversity .
Action also needs to be taken to protect and manage water resources .
I should say at this point that Brazil is the first country to develop important biofuel production , thereby achieving tangible results in reducing emissions of greenhouse gases .
Consequently , exchanging experiences and cooperating in this sector may prove to be very useful to the European Union and , conversely , renewable energies and energy-saving measures will be very useful to Brazil .
Migration is one basic issue on the European political agenda .
Consequently , the strategic partnership should , in light of the Lima Declaration , promote a wide-ranging dialogue on migration , covering regular and irregular migration and the protection of migrants ' human rights .
Finally , the European Parliament welcomes the launching of negotiations on a visa agreement between the two sides , which will facilitate the free movement of people .

Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Honourable Members , friends , allow me first of all to thank in particular the rapporteurs , Mrs Koppa and Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra , for their excellent reports on , respectively , the strategic partnership between the European Union and Brazil , and between the European Union and Mexico .
I must also say that I am proud , as Commissioner , that we have brought forward many proposals and many communications concerning Latin America in general , and Brazil and Mexico in particular , because it seems to me that it was the right time to do it .
In recent years , Brazil and Mexico have proved to be front-line actors , both on the world stage and at regional level .
In line with this fact , the European Union has recognised the need to consider these countries strategic partners , in particular because of their economic weight in Latin America and also because of their role as regional leaders and , very often , their importance in regional security issues .
The foundations of our relationships are extremely solid .
Not only do we have , as we all know , close historical and cultural links , but we also share common interests and values , and our economic links are increasingly solid .
The European Union is , in fact , the top trading partner for Brazil which , for its part , is the principal beneficiary of European Union investments in Latin America .
Brazil alone has , in fact , attracted some EUR 87 billion , in other words more than all of the capital invested by the European Union in the other three ' BRIC ' countries , namely Russia , India and China .
It is also true that Brazil is very important to cooperation in relation to the WTO .
As a partner , it can sometimes be difficult but , naturally , it has its own point of view .
Since the implementation of the European Union-Mexico agreement , which was a pioneering agreement between a Latin American country and the European Union , average annual European investment has tripled and the Union is today Mexico 's second biggest trading partner .
Naturally , Mexico is also a partner that shares the same values and the same interests .
That is why we have drawn up this strategic partnership as a powerful instrument that , we hope , will bring tangible benefits not only to our respective citizens , but also to those of other countries and regions in the world .
I wish to stress that the European Union , Brazil and Mexico continue to cooperate to confront the financial crisis and to prepare the ground , as you said , Mrs Koppa , to ensure the success of the G20 summit taking place in London in April .
They also continue to work together on common challenges such as climate change - the major issue for us - the fight against drugs , in which we are relying greatly on President Calderón , who has a major fight on his hands , and the sensitive and difficult question of migration .
We have seen the Mexican Government 's current efforts to fight the illegal drugs trade , even though , unfortunately , the government is having to confront an almost unprecedented level of violence .
We must absolutely , therefore , help Mexico .
Honourable Members , what does the strategic partnership mean for us ?
I believe that it will allow us better to prepare for the future by addressing a whole host of bilateral and world issues of common interest in a more structured , more coherent and better coordinated framework .
I am very happy to note that , with the deepened relations with these two countries , we have laid the emphasis , correctly , on several priorities identified in the European Parliament 's report , such as coordination at a multilateral level , meaning the United Nations as well , democracy , human rights and the other global issues that I have just mentioned .
With Brazil especially , we have also begun work on the question of renewable energies , like biofuel , in which Brazil has real experience and on which President Lula himself addressed us during the Portuguese Presidency .
On the monitoring and implementation of this partnership , Mr President , our main challenge for 2009 , as relates to Brazil first , is to make a reality of the joint commitments entered into in the action plans .
We would like to complete the negotiations on two major aspects .
First , the agreement on the exemption of short-stay visas and the granting of market economy status to Bulgaria and Romania .
Also , we are planning in 2009 to open new dialogues on education , culture and economic and financial affairs , as well as pursuing the current dialogues , and we will continue to work with Brazil on all the other global questions .
As for Mexico , the strategic partnership decided on by the Council will , I hope , soon be announced at a European Union-Mexico summit .
Meanwhile , the Commission , with the Member States , has committed to work with the Mexican Government on an operational document that specifies the practical actions that will optimise the strategic partnership .
Finally , let me mention the role of the European Parliament .
We have always been in favour of any contribution Parliament could make in relation to the launch of this strategic partnership , and we enthusiastically welcome these recommendations today .
In this context , I wish to say that I can only welcome the fact that the Parliamentary relationships appear to be extremely promising , given that some 96 members from the Brazilian Parliament 's parliamentary group on the European Union are here .
I believe that we share the same interest and , as for the joint EU-Mexico parliamentary committee , we can also see that it is in operation and its next meeting will take place at the end of March .
To summarise , Mr President , I believe that we are actively engaged in making a reality of the numerous commitments that we have made in the framework of the partnership and we hope in this way to work for greater security in the world as a whole .
Mr President , I shall take the floor first of all to congratulate the Commission on its initiative , which implies recognising Brazil as a regional power and upgrades its relations with the European Union to strategic level .
These relations have until now been based on the 1992 Cooperation Framework Agreement and the 1995 EU-Mercosur Framework Agreement .
In recent years , however , Brazil 's role in world affairs has changed for the better and the country has shown itself to be a key partner for Europe .
This new scenario leads us to intensify and diversify our relations .
Firstly , the EU-Brazil Strategic Partnership should help that country exercise regional and world leadership .
Secondly , in connection with the Millennium Development Goals , although programmes such as the ' Bolsa Família ' ( ' family fund ' ) have succeeded in improving human development and in cutting extreme poverty practically by half , it cannot be ignored that income inequalities are still very great , that there exist considerable concentrations of poverty and that there are also substantial regional differences between the north and the south of the country .
In this respect , an exchange of political experiences would be welcome , which could lead us to propose innovative solutions in the fight against poverty , inequality and social exclusion , the reduction of imbalances , and in terms of social protection and decent work for all .
We share basic concerns in the area of environmental protection and , on this basis , we should begin a dialogue on issues such as climate change , water management , biodiversity and deforestation , as well as on the role that indigenous peoples should play in all these things .
In the field of energy cooperation , the dialogue initiated in 2007 has enabled us to make progress which we now need to consolidate on topics such as sustainable biofuels , renewable energy , energy efficiency and low-CO2 energy technology .
The strategic partnership with Brazil also brings with it a commitment to greater regional integration to strengthen our cooperation with Mercosur .
Mr President , Commissioner , I am pleased that we are having this debate .
Of course we have intensive relations with both these countries , but I would like to talk about Mexico in particular .
In our debate , we in the Committee on International Trade saw it as particularly important to discuss matters that affect our area .
It is especially important to us that we strengthen the free-trade agreement once again .
If you look at the figures , you can see that , although our trade has definitely intensified in recent years , there is still considerable demand and that we - and the European side - still have considerable restrictions when it comes to market access .
I would sincerely ask you , Commissioner , to again do everything you can to analyse the situation once more together with your competent colleagues and , where problems exist , to really lift these restrictions .
It makes no sense whatsoever for us , on the one hand , to talk about strategic partnerships with such important countries in Latin America and then , on the other hand , to still have to battle with such absurd market restrictions .
Sometimes , of course , they make sense , but as a rule they are in fact not useful at all .
I would be very grateful to you , and to the committee , if we could resolve this matter .
The second point that we feel is important is that , in the context of global international relations , we should also truly give Mexico the status it deserves .
This , of course , relates in particular to the still very fragile arrangement in connection with the G20 .
Our delegation has written a letter , which we have also sent to you , in which we ask that Mexico also sit at the G20 table and for this to be a permanent arrangement rather than merely a brief appearance .
My final request is for you to attend our delegation meeting on 30 and 31 March ; I know that you cannot attend personally , but for you to arrange for someone from your area of competence to attend when Mr Guadarrama , Mr Buganza and Mr Green , who chair the Mexico delegation , come so that they really feel that the Commission values the delegation and its visit .




Mr President , the countries of Europe are linked to Latin America by close historical , cultural and human ties .
As a Spaniard and , what is more , a Galician , I am very aware of that .
In addition , we share principles and values that are also a result of our Christian heritage .
Latin America and the European Union are , in general , natural partners , and we must intensify our relations .
I am delighted that there is broad agreement in this House on the fact that the European Union should establish strategic relations with both Mexico and Brazil .
I said as much myself with regard to Mexico in April last year during a debate here in Parliament on the Lima summit .
The strategic partnership should be accompanied by regular yearly summits .
We have held them with Brazil since 2007 , and the Salafranca report rightly calls for them in relation to Mexico , in view of the Council 's somewhat ambiguous conclusions of October 2008 .
I hope such a summit may be held with Mexico this year .
Ladies and gentlemen , the European Union 's strategic partnership with Mexico and Brazil is highly beneficial at both bilateral and global levels .
Bilaterally , there is ample potential for the relations to grow .
In the case of Mexico , for example , the association agreement has resulted in a spectacular increase in trade and investment .
The fight against organised crime and drug trafficking and cooperation in the field of energy are other areas where joint cooperation is necessary , as well as greater coordination in multilateral forums .
In the case of Brazil , the intensification of relations should also help to unblock the EU-Mercosur Agreement .
I should like to highlight the positive economic results achieved by Mexico and Brazil throughout this decade , in contrast to previous periods .
Without that progress , which has been due to well-conceived policies , the current extreme world crisis would have devastated their economies .
In contrast , their governments can now use the reserves they have built up to implement anticyclical policies in the same way as the developed and some emerging countries .
Mexico and Brazil are also playing an increasingly important role on the world stage .
They take part in the Heiligendamm process and , as major economic powers in Latin America , they are members of the G20 .
In today 's complex and interconnected world - I am just finishing - with all its global challenges and threats , including climate change , cooperating in a spirit of shared responsibility with players as significant as Mexico and Brazil is highly beneficial for the European Union and also , of course , for the whole international community .
Mr President , on 15 July 2008 the European Commission adopted a communication to the Council and Parliament recommending that a strategic partnership be established between the European Union and Mexico .
For its part , on 13 October 2008 the European General Affairs and External Relations Council recognised Mexico as a strategic partner , pending Parliament 's opinion on the matter .
I would recall that , at the seventh meeting of the EU-Mexico Joint Parliamentary Committee held at the end of October last year , we said that a strategic partnership between Mexico and the European Union would provide the impetus needed to strengthen and develop the true potential of our bilateral relations .
This is a good time in the relations between the two sides and the results of the current global agreement are good .
We stress the need for our respective executive powers to strengthen collaboration in the political , economic and cooperation spheres , particularly in view of the new challenges of all kinds resulting from the financial and economic crisis that is causing havoc in our continents .
Mexico is a great country with which we share values and goals , such as the development of democratic forms of government , a commitment to gender equality , consolidation of the rule of law , fair and sustainable development and respect for human rights .
We advocate closer cooperation in the fight against organised crime , terrorism and drug trafficking , based on the principles of shared responsibility and strict adherence to international law .
Consequently , we shall support the proposal for a recommendation on the EU-Mexico Strategic Partnership to be put before Parliament this morning .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , it is already widely acknowledged that Brazil has become an increasingly significant regional and global player .
The crucial role Brazil played in the establishment of UNASUR is just one more confirmation of the country 's reputation and deserves clear recognition , as does Brazil 's endeavour to support and influence the democratic evolution of some countries in Latin America .
I agree with the rapporteur that Brazil and the European Union share the same values regarding democracy , the rule of law and the promotion of human rights , and share the same principles on market economy .
Therefore it is clear why Brazil is a key partner for the European Union .
For several years , Brazil has enjoyed an economic growth which I hope will not be too badly affected by the current ravaging economic crisis .
Unfortunately , however , the economic development and accumulation of wealth in Brazil did not translate into the eradication of poverty .
As the report notes , Brazil still has a high number of poor people and it is a sad reality that the concentration of wealth is based on cultural and racial grounds .
It should be emphasised that 65 % of the poorest Brazilians are black or of a mixed ethnicity , while 86 % of the most privileged are white .
I appreciated President Lula 's idea that his government should not fight wealth but poverty .
I am convinced that EU support and assistance would be beneficial in trying to put an end to this polarisation between the very poor and the very rich .
But , in order to do this , we need the financial assistance available under the development cooperation instrument for Brazil to be used to support the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals and for sustainable development purposes .
At the same time , the European Union needs to continue to focus on the topic of combating deforestation .
This is a key issue , as Brazil has a rich but fragile environment .
We need not only to develop strong partnerships , but also to coordinate with other donors and have projects that should put words into action as far as the protection of the environment is concerned .
Our strategic partnership should also support the development of a strong Brazilian civil society , encouraging contacts between European and Brazilian NGOs , entrepreneurs and businesspeople fora , and should promote exchanges on an educational and cultural level .
Cooperation on higher education under the Erasmus Mundus programme or other biregional schemes should be viewed as an investment in what is the most precious capital of a country , its human resources .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , dialogue and political and commercial collaboration with Brazil is an important goal for Europe ; a goal to be developed and strengthened , beginning with the fight against poverty , particularly among children , and moving towards strong commercial agreements to build up trade and investment .
However , this strategic partnership cannot avoid certain immovable points .
Firstly , the need for greater cooperation in the fight against corruption , organised crime , cross-border crime , drug trafficking , money laundering and international terrorism .
Secondly , the need for close collaboration in legal matters , notably with regard to collaboration in extradition procedures and the mutual recognition of judicial rulings .
Mr President , I think it is obvious that we cannot ignore the context in which we are discussing this agreement .
In Europe the current crisis is above all affecting the sectors more oriented towards exports , while in Mexico it is very specifically affecting those actors that suffer most from the consequences of the economic slowdown .
An agreement of this kind should be beneficial to both parties , but the experience we have at the moment is that that is not always the case .
For Europe it is very beneficial .
I think that is obvious , and we can see it clearly when we look at the results of the last eight years , during which the trade balance has been strongly in the EU 's favour .
There has been an 80 % rise in the trade deficit , which means that Mexico is now highly dependent on Europe .
There are other risks , however , which we must not forget .
The fact is that most of the investments that the EU has made will later have positive consequences for Europe as well .
I mean that many of the exports that are made are basically in-house , within companies .
I am not saying that that is necessarily a bad thing , but I am saying that we must be careful and remain very aware that it may have highly negative consequences .
Above all , however , the most worrying factor is the liberalising obsession shown by certain governments , which is embedded in certain attitudes in this context .
Banking , for example , is one of the most important sectors and one that has proved to be essential in tackling this crisis but , in Mexico , 90 % of this sector is currently in foreign hands , with 50 % of that in European hands .
I do not think that that is the best way to approach an agreement of this kind .
An agreement should correct , or at least not fuel , some of these risks , and that is what we propose with some of our amendments .
Mr President , with regard to the partnership with Brazil , the report undoubtedly has some highly positive aspects .
The call for multilateralism , especially in the international forums of the United Nations ; cooperation in the areas of the environment , sustainable development , forest and water resource management and education ; as well as cooperation relating to renewable energy and technology are , in our view , highly appropriate and positive .
As for the focus on immigration , despite the shameful directive , I believe that in this specific case it is talking about human rights and the rights of migrants , which is why I think it is very appropriate .
Another important point is cooperation to achieve the Millennium Development Goals , as well as social cohesion in relation to the important leadership shown by Brazil in its policy to reduce poverty through the ' Bolsa Família ' or ' family fund ' .
A further undoubtedly important aspect of the partnership is Brazil 's role as one of the leaders in the process of regional integration through Unasur .
In other words , there is a whole range of important points which also suggest that civil society itself should be involved in these negotiations .
On the other hand , there are aspects of the report that we do not like , which is why we are going to abstain .
Firstly , it recommends putting an end to economic protectionism in Brazil .
I think this text was drafted before the crisis ; as I see it , protectionism is a reality today .
The winds of change that are blowing to end or mitigate the crisis are undoubtedly pointing towards public intervention in the economy by governments .
I think the free market is over , and it has left behind a crisis of unforeseeable consequences for humankind .
Another very important point that we do not like is that the report calls for joint participation in nuclear research projects , especially the ITER thermonuclear reactor project .
I do not think that is right for us , as we are not in favour of nuclear energy .
With greater efficiency in energy consumption and more renewable energy , I think we can do without a form of energy that is highly damaging to humankind .
That , despite the positive points , leads us to abstain .
The Mexico report is a very different matter , since the partnership with Brazil is yet to take off .
Mexico has been working within our strategic association agreement since 1997 , and we therefore already have results that enable us to judge whether it is going well - whether it is going as well as we would like or not .
We are going to abstain on this report as well , for a number of reasons .
Firstly , we believe that the report ignores negative consequences in economic terms .
It is true that there has been progress if we look at aspects where the country has a poor human rights record , in relation to the murder of women .
Amendments have been tabled that I think clarify and improve the text , but there is a part that we do not see as being positive , and that is everything concerning the Treaty on Free Trade and the consequences it is having for small producers in Mexico .
This is not a good time for Mexico , as for any other country in the world in the current crisis .
Foreign investment in Mexico is certainly concentrated in just a few sectors and is not helping to expand the domestic economy .
Our group , the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , is therefore going to abstain in the vote on this report .
Mr President , in recent years there has been a growing trend in the Union to conclude strategic partnerships with third countries .
In itself , this does not trouble me much .
It can be useful to give more shape to bilateral relations through such a partnership , but there are at least two risks involved in this structure .
Firstly , Europe cannot declare every country a strategic partner .
To do so , in my view , would lead to a devaluation of the term ' strategic ' .
I therefore argue that only the bilateral relationships with crucial partners should be brought under this banner .
As far as I am concerned , this actually applies more to Brazil than to Mexico , the subject of our debate this morning .
Secondly , I sometimes get an indefinable feeling that these strategic partnerships are largely symbolic .
It is a chance to call another summit and then things remain largely as they were .
These partnerships often function solely as a forum .
The question of tangible results is frequently left unanswered .
I have the same sense , to some extent , in relation to Parliament 's draft recommendation to the Council in relation to Brazil , which we shall be discussing tomorrow .
Here , too , I feel that there is not enough mention given to specific problems .
Mr President , I should like to illustrate this concern using three elements of the draft recommendation .
Firstly , the recommendation notes , somewhat misleadingly , that this partnership is not to be at the expense of the Union 's relations with Mercosur .
How is it possible that the European Union , which always puts itself forward as a promoter of regional cooperation , could allow its bilateral relations with Brazil to take preference over its regional cooperation with Mercosur ?
The Union is choosing the wrong priorities here .
On the strength of our involvement with the region , the European Union must , in fact , indicate to Brazil the importance of a strong Mercosur and must encourage the country to itself invest strongly in this cooperation agreement .
Instead , the Union will be sitting down with Brazil at the bilateral level and , in so doing , will be signalling that Mercosur is of secondary importance as far as we are concerned .
In the field of trade , too , it seems to me the draft recommendation has not been worded strictly enough .
There is a call for us to work together for the smooth conclusion of the Doha round .
This is , of course , a fine aim , but would it not be better to first specify the key points of difference between the Union and Brazil ?
The subject of market access is a salient issue for both camps .
I believe that the Doha round has more chance of succeeding if this matter is resolved at the bilateral level .
I am not saying that that would be easy , but I do believe this to be a better way forward than making rhetorically appealing declarations .
I have also looked at the draft recommendation from the perspective of my geopolitical interest .
From that perspective , it occurs to me that the recommendation fails to call on Brazil to take up a leadership role in the region .
With this point , I shall wind up my speech .
Brazil must gauge political developments in the region well and can do so primarily from the ambition of its neighbour Venezuela to dominate the continent .
That is a situation that is in the interests neither of the continent itself , nor of the European Union .
The controversial Venezuelan referendum on amending the constitution illustrates well enough that there will then be little left of European values such as democracy .

- ( FR ) Mr President , it is fine to have a strategic partnership to begin with , to have the Volkswagen factory in Puebla and to have joint parliamentary committees with Chile and with Mexico , but it has been 30 years , as Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra said in his report , of being realistic , of cooperating , of setting a climate , a little discussion on agriculture , drugs , women , water and so on .
We have to go further .
More ambition is needed , both for Europe and for Latin America .
We have to set a target : for example , 2025 .
In a generation , in the next 20 years , we must create an alliance of civilisations between Europe and Latin America , and why not even integration !
To do this , there is the EuroLat framework , the parliament which brings together Europe and Latin America .
In this framework , a manifesto is needed , a resolution which will be the equivalent of what 8 May 1950 meant for Europe .
Let us pool our peoples , our resources , our intelligence , old and young from both sides and create , without delay , an area of free movement for students , researchers , intellectuals and intelligence .
That would mean an automatic cultural visa .
Malinche needed no visa to go and teach Quechua or Mayan to Cortés .
It is the first step on the road to creating a block with a billion Latin Americans , a billion Christians in the match of nations .
I know full well that this may appear unrealistic to the economic realists , but if the dream you are chasing is not big enough , you are going to lose sight of it even as you chase it .
( RO ) I wish to express my support for Mr Salafranca 's report .
I believe that once the Global Agreement has been implemented , we must move to a higher historic level in the strategic partnership between the European Union and Mexico .
This partnership has become necessary , bearing in mind not only Mexico 's important role on the global political and economic stage , but also its very close economic ties with the European Union .
Mexico has a population of more than 100 million , is the tenth-largest economic power in the world and is a member of the G20 Group .
Against the backdrop of global challenges such as the economic crisis and global warming , cooperation with Mexico will prove to be beneficial .
It goes without saying that we want the new partnership to formalise annual summits between the European Union and Mexico , based on the model used for high-level meetings featuring in the European Union 's relations with other strategic partners .
We must also support the parliamentary dimension of this partnership through the EU-Mexico Joint Parliamentary Committee and the EuroLat Assembly , which have played a particularly beneficial role in recent years .
Given that it is the European Year of Creativity and Innovation , I think that we must focus greater attention on cooperation between the European Union and Mexico in the fields of research , culture and education , as well as scientific and student mobility .
Mexicans are the largest Spanish-speaking population in the world and share common cultural values with Europeans , which includes close ties with Romania 's cultural heritage , based on their Latin legacy .
For example , an exhibition staged in July 2005 at the Romanian Peasant Museum in Bucharest demonstrated the astounding similarity between Mexican popular art and numerous creative works of Romanian popular art .
I feel that the European Union 's institutions should tap to a greater extent and on a constant basis the potential which culture , education and art offer in terms of bringing peoples closer together .
Last but not least , I think that this strategic partnership 's contribution should also include guaranteeing the safety of European citizens who travel to Mexico .
Mexico offers exceptional tourism potential , has magnificent historical cultural treasures and is also a favourite destination of many Europeans .
However , they must not be put in danger because of the crime and corruption which are evident in certain regions of the country .
The battle against crime may become more effective through trilateral cooperation between Mexico , the European Union and the United States .
( RO ) I feel that the cooperation agreements between the European Union and Mexico and the European Union and Brazil are of paramount importance .
These cooperation agreements must be based on respect for the values of democracy , the rule of law and respect for human rights .
I would like to emphasise the need to step up the efforts between the European Union and these two countries in promoting scientific and technological transfer , with a view to consolidating real cooperation in fighting climate change and improving environmental protection .
The Integral Support Programme for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises will make a fundamental contribution to the economic and social development of these countries .
Especially during the current global economic crisis , it is important to create and preserve jobs and continue the efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals .
As rapporteur for the Agreement between the European Community and the United Mexican States with regard to certain aspects of air services , I want to stress the importance of this agreement .
It promotes free competition in the area of air services .
Mexico can impose , if applicable , in a non-discriminatory manner levies , taxes , charges , duties or dues on fuel supplied on its own territory for the aircraft of the air carrier appointed by a Member State of the European Community , operating on a route between a point located on Mexican territory and another point located on the territory of another state on the American continent .
I would like to mention that this matter is extremely important , particularly in view of the implementation of the system for trading greenhouse gas emission certificates .
Furthermore , these two countries , Brazil and Mexico , have a particularly important role to play in concluding the future post-Kyoto agreement , which we hope will be signed in Copenhagen in December .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance will vote against the report on the Brazil partnership and will abstain on the issue of partnership with Mexico .
We do not take great pleasure in this , but we feel that this vote clearly demonstrates our dissatisfaction with practices that we have been denouncing for some time .
As regards Brazil for example , the subject of partnership is being settled with more Mercosur dumping .
It focuses on what we believe to be the wrong priorities - Mrs FerreroWaldner has for instance referred to biofuels , but in the resolution there is a whole series of considerations about nuclear power and CCS , and therefore carbon .
A country like Brazil , however , should instead work with us to develop renewable technologies and energy savings : that is the way forward for that country .
Then , as regards Mexico , Mr President , we have tabled some amendments - the rapporteur , moreover , has been fairly open with certain matters mainly concerning human rights .
However , a strategic partnership and parliamentary dialogue should , in our opinion , focus on current political concerns .
Top of the political agenda today is the great economic crisis that the country is experiencing , the problem of returning migrants and , of course , violence and organised crime .
I think that the partnership must concentrate much , much more explicitly on this rather than on matters that we surely consider to be less important .
One word more , Mr President , concerning the issue of interparliamentary dialogue , to which we all , of course , attach great importance : I believe and hope that the next EuroLat meeting will be able to find a way out of that somewhat formal and , frankly , unhelpful framework that has characterised many of our meetings , and I sincerely hope that it will also have an impact on national debate in those countries .
( PT ) The changes taking place in Latin America should encourage the European Union to establish new cooperation relations with the countries of Latin America .
Greater attention should be paid to social and cultural aspects and to support for development in a framework of mutual respect for the different levels of development and different political choices of the people .
Unfortunately , these are minor aspects in the proposals put forward by the European Union .
Generally speaking , their main interest is economic , aimed at safeguarding the business of large European economic and financial groups .
This situation has been highlighted by social organisations , particularly in Brazil , as we discovered during the last trip to Brazil by the Delegation for relations with Mercosur .
At a time when , for example , most of the population in Mexico is suffering from the consequences of the serious economic recession and when the overwhelming majority of the Mexican banking sector is controlled by foreign companies , particularly European banks , it is regrettable that the European Union is still using its agreement with Mexico more as a point of entry to the United States than to support local development .
As a result , it is contributing to the destruction of Mexico 's small and medium-sized enterprises and its productive fabric , particularly the industrial fabric , due to the insistence on free trade , liberalisation of strategic sectors and commercialisation of essential goods such as water .
We therefore need to radically overhaul the EU 's policies on partnership agreements , so as to give priority to cooperation and to economic and social development .
In this way we can help to create jobs with rights , ensure social progress , promote the rights of indigenous peoples , defend the forests and biodiversity , and also recognise the sovereign right of Latin American countries to high-quality public services , control of strategic sectors within their economies and respect for the decisions of the institutions chosen by their people .

( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would argue , as I have on other occasions , that a strengthened relationship of cooperation with Latin America is a strategic move for the EU because , as in the case of the Salafranca report , the establishment of a closer relationship is explained not only by historical and cultural ties and shared values - as the rapporteur rightly states - but it also provides multi-sector , inter-regional and intra-regional development opportunities for both sides .
While I therefore welcome the proposed initiatives to increase trade and investments between the Union and Brazil , I do however wonder what improvement is possible as regards legal and environmental collaboration , the recognition of human rights and protection against organised crime often exported to the Union - these areas are just as important .
The subject of migration and emigrant remittances must also be examined , as there is no doubt that profits acquired through clandestine work and other illegal activities are illegally exported .
As regards migration , I would question what guarantees we can receive from a nation that protects criminals and swindlers like Cesare Battisti and the ' wizard ' Mário Pacheco do Nascimiento .
This example alone explains my total opposition to opening negotiations on a visa waiver agreement between the European Union and Brazil .
Mr President , as the Czech Presidency is not in the House , I shall speak in English because I believe the message will get through quicker .
I draw your attention to paragraph 1 ( l ) of the proposal for a recommendation on the partnership with Brazil and also to the communication from the Commission of September 2008 on multilingualism .
The fact is that to establish and to develop a strategic partnership with Brazil we speak in Portuguese .
When we go to the USA or Australia , we speak English ; when we go to Mexico or Colombia , we speak Spanish ; when we go to Brazil or Angola , we speak Portuguese ; when we go to Senegal or Côte d 'Ivoire , we speak in French .
This is key to communication ; this is key to doing business .

This draws attention to what I called a few years ago the ' European world ' languages : linguas europeias globais in Portuguese .
I mean that some European languages have the ability to establish a very intimate and close connection with various parts of the world , and these are : English , Spanish , Portuguese , French and , to a lesser extent and on different grounds , German and Italian .
The Commission fully understood this and put it in the communication , but , unfortunately , there were misunderstandings in the Council - mainly on the part of the Germans , I believe - and the Council passed a much weaker line in this matter .
I have to clarify that this does not affect , by any means , the equal value of official languages in the Union .
This has to do with the internal vision of multilingualism , and we all agree that every citizen has the right to speak , to read and to be answered in his own language .
However , this adds another dimension in the broad field of the external value of multilingualism .
To have those European world languages in today 's globalised world , in today 's globalised economy , in this global village , which is cultural , economic , social and political , is a most valuable asset for the entire EU , which we must take full account of and full benefit from .
That is why I ask that these languages be properly introduced and managed inside the youth external services and also taught in our schools , as a common asset , as second , third or fourth languages , because these languages , as our relations with Brazil clearly show , increase our EU capacity to relate closely worldwide : to mingle more , to really share , to be part of the same club .
This is my appeal to the Council and I greet and thank the rapporteur for her support .

( BG ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to congratulate Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra on the excellent report in such an important area as global cooperation with our strategic partners .
Globalisation not only brings us benefits , but it also makes us more vulnerable to global crises and threats .
That is why identifying strategic partners and strengthening cooperation at global level will enable us to cope with current and future challenges .
We highlight in the report that Europe is Mexico 's second biggest partner after the United States .
It must be emphasised that Europe regards Mexico as an important partner for supplying raw materials .
The security of raw material supplies is specifically one of the key factors supporting Europe 's sustainable development .
For its part , Europe plays a leading role in protecting the environment and in adopting green industrial solutions .
The strategic partnership with Mexico will strengthen bilateral relations , with the specific aim of achieving more efficient trade in technology and raw materials , and provide a good foundation for bilateral cooperation in the area of environmental protection .
To achieve these aims , we must develop and improve the sector-related programmes on which the mechanisms and measures for science and technology transfer are based , because only specific measures will make this cooperation real .
In addition , this science and technology transfer is inconceivable without establishing an educational exchange and creating a joint network of scientific research centres .
I am therefore calling for the expansion of bilateral cooperation in the field of education and innovation as well . Thank you for your attention .
( DE ) Mr President , fortunately the time when Latin America was regarded as the backyard of the United States is long since past .
Today we view this area quite differently , and there are a considerable number of areas of common ground and common interest between Europe and Latin America in particular , which justify our extending our strategic partnerships into this area also .
The issues of climate change , energy policy , the financial crisis , drug trafficking and so on have been mentioned .
In this regard , we have a lot of common ground and common interests .
It is good that we are cooperating on a multilateral basis with this area .
It is good that we are also concluding bilateral agreements .
However , it is important for us to achieve a balanced relationship between both partners in each case .
Therefore , if we achieve visa-free travel , we should also consider how we will handle deportations , extradition agreements and similar issues , in order that ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to point out that , this morning , we spoke about the partnership between the European Union and countries such as Brazil and Mexico .
We also discussed the Eastern Partnership this morning .
I would like to stress as strongly as possible , and this is particularly addressed to Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , that when we discuss the European Union 's foreign , or external , policies , such as the EU 's relations with Brazil , Mexico or with North African countries , our debates are , to a certain extent , removed from reality .
On the other hand , when we discuss our relations with the East , then we are dealing with fundamental matters affecting the EU .
Similarly , when we discuss our partnership with Turkey , and that country 's EU membership prospects , these are also fundamental matters .
When we discuss our relations with Belarus , Ukraine and Russia , in terms of gas supplies , or the issue of Georgia , then we are discussing matters of fundamental importance to the EU , and ones which could plunge the European Union into a serious crisis .
( PL ) Mr President , Brazil 's role on both the international and the regional stage is growing every year .
As a result , this country has become one of the European Union 's most important and significant partners .
Historical , cultural and economic ties should provide the basis for action within the scope of the strategic partnership between the EU and Brazil .
Key issues , on which political dialogue should focus , should include promoting joint strategies to meet global challenges , in areas such as security , human rights , the financial crisis and , perhaps most importantly , the fight against poverty .
We should also aim to diversify our efforts to prevent regional conflict in South America .
Our priority should be to strengthen bilateral cooperation in the field of trade and cooperation to protect Brazil 's forests - which are , after all , the lungs of the world .
A strategic partnership should facilitate the creation of a permanent platform for dialogue between the European Union and Brazil .
Mr President , as a Member of EuroLat I welcome the EU Strategic Partnership with Brazil and Mexico , both thriving democracies .
The word ' BRIC ' - for Brazil , Russia , India and China - is very much in the vocabulary of foreign-policy specialists , and Brazil is indeed an emerging global player .
President Lula has demonstrated moderation in government and has been a stabilising force against the rise of populist demagogues like Chávez in Venezuela and Morales in Bolivia .
Brazil will be hit now by the credit crunch and the fall in commodity prices .
Mexico will also be affected by the dramatic fall in oil prices .
These two countries have enjoyed stability .
I also commend the work of President Calderón in Mexico and he also deserves our support in his struggle against the drug cartels .
The two countries , being embedded respectively in NAFTA and Mercosur , are big players in the region and they are key to our relations with Latin America .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , ten seconds .
A while ago , I attended a convention on the subject of pensions , pension payments and how long pensioners draw their pensions before going to a better place .
At this convention a league table of states was published in which countries were ranked according to the average number of years for which pensions were paid out .
Mexico was considered a shining example to be followed .
Why ?
Because its pensioners , having received their pension and enjoying this benefit , lived for an average of six months , and that was the record , that is to say it was the state held up as the best ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , I fully endorse paragraph 1 ( e ) of this report , which talks about the need for a partnership tackling the major issues of climate change , energy security and the fight against poverty and exclusion .
I have some concerns regarding the WTO agreements - or potential agreements - from the perspective of EU farmers and food producers .
As you know , there was a major battle about food production standards , and the Commission finally conceded that it could not allow Brazilian beef into the European Union until it met our production standards .
I applaud that decision and I think that we need to do this for every commodity .
We cannot expect our producers to meet standards that third countries are not meeting .
We will not get the cooperation of our producers for a WTO agreement if that continues to happen .
Mr President , I occasionally indulge in a little multilingualism , and so I am going to try to speak Spanish now .
First of all , I would like to explain to Mr Belder why we have opted for a strategic partnership .
I think it is very important to realise , first , that the countries themselves are very interested in it .
Naturally , it is a political decision based on certain criteria .
For example , Mexico is a very important bridge between north and south and is a stabilising factor , even though it has problems within the country itself .
Secondly , it is currently a member of the G20 and I hope of course , to answer Mrs Mann , that it will continue to be one in the future .
Thirdly , both Mexico and Brazil are strongly committed to global issues that we can only , in fact , tackle jointly .
These include particularly the question of climate change and the financial crisis .
That is why I think the idea of strategic partnerships is valid : not with the whole world , of course , but with the major players in the world .
In addition , there are many minor or particular , sectoral issues , some of which I would like to mention .
The fact is that we talk to these countries about many difficult issues , such as drugs , corruption , terrorism and organised crime .
We hold meetings at senior official level and also at ministerial level , for example , at which we see what can be done to help these countries and where we also exchange experience .
We have set up a forum with Mexico on public security issues , especially in relation to the problem of corruption , and we are exploring cooperation in a number of areas , such as police training , policies on how to work in prisons , and policies to combat people trafficking , drugs , arms trafficking , cybercrime and money laundering .
I think it is very important to carry on with these special dialogues .
Regarding the question on when we can have more meetings , I can say that we will try to have a meeting at the highest level this year , but it also depends on the Presidency and whether it includes this topic on its agenda .
I hope it will happen in the latter part of the year .
In any event we will have a ministerial meeting in Prague on the Mercosur issues , Mercosur and the strategic partnership with Mexico or Brazil .
Neither one is ruled out , because we have tried to work very hard in favour of the agreement with Mercosur , but you all know that neither we nor the Mercosur countries , especially Brazil and Argentina , are yet willing to sign an agreement at a time when we do not know which way Doha will go .
It has always gone in parallel with Doha .
Of course , we are going to have another ministerial meeting in Prague in May , and again we are going to try and force a possible conclusion , but I think we are still going to find ourselves facing this challenge .
The subject of migration is also extremely important , and I think we have a balanced , non-confrontational dialogue with Mexico , for example , especially on the Return Directive .
We greatly appreciate the fact that Mexico has responded very positively and with understanding in an area that is very complicated , as we all know , and in which , in fact , we have to both respect human rights , of course , and also consider the sensitivities of all our countries .
I believe this has been taken into account .
I would also like to say that it is the major issues that are always on our table .
In December last year , for example , President Sarkozy , President Lula and President Barroso talked especially about the issue of the financial crisis and how to tackle it together , but they also talked about the issue of renewable energy , on which we are already working with Brazil to develop second-generation biofuels .
We are also going to hold a dialogue on human rights for the first time in 2009 , in which the rights of indigenous peoples will be discussed , as that is also one of the priorities of the Human Rights Council .
I think I will stop here , Madam President , because there were so many points that I cannot address every one of them .
Madam President , to conclude this debate I should simply like to say that the decision to grant Mexico and Brazil the status of strategic partners is the right decision and one that will mean a qualitative leap in our relations , due to the political , economic , strategic and demographic importance of those countries .
It will see them playing in the premier division of EU relations , together with other global partners such as the United States , China and Russia .
Madam President , the difference between Mexico and Brazil at the moment , as the Commissioner has just reminded us , is that Mexico has an association agreement linking it to the European Union , which is something that Brazil does not yet have .
I disagree with the assessments that have been made of the results of this association agreement .
The EU-Mexico Association Agreement has a history of success - as Mrs Mann , who chairs the Joint Parliamentary Committee , has acknowledged .
That is because the European Union concludes these agreements in such a way that our partners , in this case Mexico or the Mexicans , represent not merely a market but a particular way of viewing things , based on principles , values , representative democracy , respect for human rights , and the rule of law .
I believe we should realise , therefore , that the agreement has resulted in a boost to our relations , which must now be endorsed by the nature of this biregional strategic partnership .
The Commissioner said that the next encounter now will be the Rio Group meeting , which will take place during the Prague meeting under the Czech Presidency of the Union in May this year .
Latin America and our partners need opportunities from us , rather than handouts , and such opportunities are represented today by association agreements .
I am perfectly aware of the limitations that the Commissioner pointed out , because concluding an association agreement , in this case with Mercosur , requires political will on both sides .
I realise that the WTO Doha Round and the path of the bilateral association run absolutely in parallel , and the examples of Mexico and Chile fully demonstrate that .
Therefore , Commissioner , we for our part must make every effort to consolidate this strategic association between the European Union and Latin America , which these partnerships with Mexico and Brazil will stimulate and move forward a long way .
rapporteur . - ( EL ) Madam President , I wish to thank Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner and all my fellow Members for their comments on the two reports which we are debating today .
I agree with Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra that Latin America is extremely interesting and important for the European Union and we must send out clear messages about cooperation via these reports , especially in these critical times .
We need a substantial framework which can cover all issues and provide clear answers .
I should just like to mention a few points in connection with what has been said .
First of all , I want to emphasise that under no circumstances is the enhanced relationship intended to undermine Mercosur .
On the contrary , we consider that the strategic partnership with Brazil , with the biggest and perhaps most important country in Latin America , could give new momentum to Mercosur .
We also need to be perfectly clear about the financial framework within which relations with Brazil will be determined .
I would add that Brazil has been increasingly active in cooperation with the Portuguese-speaking countries of the South and in Africa and could therefore cooperate actively in this sector with the European Union .
We must take care to maintain the balance between the development of biofuels and food security , especially in these critical times .
Mrs Weber raised the question of inequality .
I think that the Lula Government has taken important steps in this direction .
A lot still needs to be done , but I think the way has been paved .
Finally , I should like to mention that we need to seriously examine the possibility of creating a joint EU-Brazil parliamentary committee , because it is the only BRIC country with which we have enhanced relations which have not been institutionalised .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
( PL ) Madam President , yesterday , at a school in Winnenden , in southern Germany , a teenage madman named Tim Kretschner shot 15 people , mostly children .
One of the teachers was killed whilst trying to shield a pupil with her own body .
I would like to ask the President to announce a minute 's silence before the voting , in order to honour the victims of this tragedy .
I feel that the EU-Brazil Strategic Partnership is beneficial for both sides .
In my view , the European Union is a pillar of democracy ; indeed , Europe is the cradle of our civilisation .
As a strategic partner , Brazil is a bastion of balance and stability in Latin America .
Strengthening EU-Brazil ties may create a common framework which will facilitate the development of these two entities , thereby contributing to an increase in cooperation between the two regions .
The EU-Brazil strategic agreement may be , not only in my view but in the rapporteur 's view as well , an instrument which will help promote democracy and human rights .
In addition , this partnership may contribute to the promotion of good governance at global level , as well as good cooperation within the framework of the UN .
I support the proposal for a European Parliament recommendation to the Council on an EU-Brazil Strategic Partnership and I would like to congratulate the rapporteur .
50th anniversary of the Tibetan uprising and dialogue between the Dalai Lama and the Chinese Government ( debate )
The next item is the oral question to the Commission on the 50th anniversary of the Tibetan uprising and dialogue between the Dalai Lama and the Chinese Government , by Marco Cappato , Marco Pannella and Janusz Onyszkiewicz , on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , and Monica Frassoni and Eva Lichtenberger , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance - B6-0012 / 2009 ) .
I should like to make a brief personal comment : I truly believe that our debate can contribute to the freedom of all Tibetan citizens and not to the domination of either a state or a religion .
Madam President , I share your hope .
Unfortunately we cannot hope that the President-in-Office of the Council will take advantage of this debate and this discussion to help advance the position of the European Union .
In fact the Czech Presidency evidently considers a common European policy to be a barrier to the great national foreign policies of our national states .
China is grateful for this , Russia is grateful , that is to say repressive and anti-democratic countries all over the world give thanks for this absence of Europe that is so well illustrated by the absence of the Presidency in this House .
I would like to point out to Mrs FerreroWaldner , as we tackle this point together , what is in my view the ultimate issue : it is not just a question of law and order - in other words looking at how many monks have been arrested and how many Tibetans have been killed recently due to brutal Chinese repression , hoping that the count will be lower than it was a year ago .
What I would have liked to say to the Council and will now say to the Commission is that it must give an opinion on the fundamental political point , that is on the talks between the People 's Republic of China and the envoys of the Dalai Lama , the aim of these talks and the reason why they were suspended - we could now say they have failed - unless we can revive them .
There are two opposing positions : on one side , the position of the Chinese regime , which says the Dalai Lama is a violent man at the head of a violent people , and that the Dalai Lama and the Tibetan government in exile want independence for a national Tibetan state , which runs counter to Chinese territorial unity .
That is the line taken by Beijing .
On the other side , there is the Dalai Lama , the exiled Tibetan government and the Dalai Lama 's envoys , who say they seek something else , that their means of fighting is through non-violence and that they simply want true autonomy , meaning autonomy to retain their culture , tradition , language and religion , or their cultures and religions .
This is the message of the memorandum that the Dalai Lama 's Tibetan envoys presented to the Chinese regime .
This memorandum has been published and contains their demands .
At this point the European Union is being asked to choose , to take sides .
There are two conflicting positions : one of the parties is lying .
The EU can be decisive in the search for the truth .
As the Radical Party we propose satyagraha , the search for truth , as a collective global political initiative .
The European Union should make use of its diplomatic tools - Mrs FerreroWaldner , please say this to President Barroso - we must meet with the Dalai Lama and do him the honour of allowing him to speak , in order to find the truth .
Is Beijing right in saying that the Tibetans are violent terrorists favouring independence , or is the Dalai Lama right in saying that they want a decent and dignified autonomous state ?
Europe cannot stand still and remain silent in the face of this conflict .
Madam President , 50 years ago , the Chinese army delivered the final blow to Tibetan resistance .
Since then , Tibetans have fled , with an inordinate amount of effort , over the Himalayas and across the borders into other states .
Up to now , several thousand people a year - all of whom are refugees - have made this supreme effort to cross 5000 m high passes .
If , as China has always claimed , the situation of the Tibetans is so wonderful , there would be neither grounds for flight nor justification for the fact that journalists , people from the West and observers have been prevented for months from visiting this country at all or only under close escort .
Female journalists are even followed to the toilet by female intelligence service observers to ensure that nothing forbidden can be done .
I therefore ask myself : what is our task as the European Union ?
We need somehow to bring about the resumption of the Sino-Tibetan dialogue .
However , it must take place on a different basis .
Up to now all that has happened is that China has repeated the same accusations and demands , without trying in the slightest to understand the Tibetan representatives ' explanation that it is not a matter of leaving China and becoming an independent state ; it is about achieving autonomy .
Commissioner , how do we deal with the fact that the monitoring of the Internet in Tibet is stricter than anywhere else in China and that it was European companies that supplied the tools to make this monitoring so efficient ?
We need to act .
We are being called on at home to enter into dialogue .

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I am very pleased that this discussion is taking place today , on an issue which has preoccupied many of us for a long time and especially since the sad events a year ago in Tibet .
Therefore I think that it is very good that we are having this open discussion to again see what can be done .
Before I come to the many issues you raised in the tabled joint resolution , let me also have a quick word on our bilateral relations with China .
The EU policy vis-à-vis China is one of engagement .
Our strategic partnership is strong , and this permits us to tackle all issues , including the most sensitive ones .
We have constructed an impressive framework of high-level interaction where we regularly address all the global changes that our citizens are facing , without neglecting the issues where we may disagree .
Tibet is one of them .
Let me be very clear - we do not see eye to eye with China on Tibet , and we still have a very real and legitimate concern about the human rights situation in Tibet , as you have both just outlined ; about the fact that Tibet has remained largely closed for the international media , for diplomats and for humanitarian organisations for almost a year now ; and about the stalemate in talks between the representatives of the Dalai Lama and the Chinese authorities , despite the three rounds of talks last year .
These issues were also at the top of the agenda for several EU leaders in bilateral meetings held with the Chinese leadership last year .
We have endeavoured to find common understanding with China on this delicate subject , and we have been very clear whenever we have addressed the situation in Tibet with them .
Let me again mention the EU 's position , which does not leave any room for misinterpretation .
Firstly , we support the sovereignty and territorial integrity of China , including Tibet .
Secondly , we have always supported a peaceful reconciliation through dialogue between the Chinese authorities and the Dalai Lama 's representatives .
I remember , when I went there with the Commission , President Barroso and other colleagues , I had specific dialogues with many of my interlocutors on this issue .
We have always maintained that there should be a reconciliation dialogue and that the dialogue should go on .
This dialogue has to be constructive and substantive , and of course we therefore regret that , up to now , this dialogue has not brought really substantive results .
We have always said that the dialogues should address the core issues , such as the preservation of Tibet 's unique culture , religion and traditions as well as the need to achieve a system of meaningful autonomy for Tibet within a Chinese constitution .
We have always said that this dialogue should address the participation of all Tibetans in decision-making .
Therefore we would welcome it if these issues were to be addressed in China 's future national human rights action plan .
For us , Tibet is a human rights issue and has therefore invariably been approached as such .
We have also consistently passed this message to our Chinese counterparts and listened very carefully to their views .
We have made every effort to understand the position in a spirit of mutual respect , but human rights are universal , and the situation in Tibet is therefore - rightly - of international legitimate concern to the whole international community , particularly the European Union .
This fact is , of course , emphasised by the existence of instruments of international law for the protection of human rights over half a century .
In your resolution you stipulate the future of a Sino-Tibetan dialogue .
As you all know , at the last round of talks , following the request of the Chinese Government , the Tibetan side submitted a memorandum on genuine autonomy for the future of Tibet .
In my opinion the paper contains some elements that could provide the basis for future talks .
I am thinking of a paragraph on culture , education and religion .
I am also encouraged by the fact that , for the first time in a written document , the Tibetan side has expressed its firm commitment not to seek separation or independence .
I think this is important in order to bring this dialogue further .
I am also pleased that the Dalai reaffirmed before this House last December his devotion to the middle-way approach and to dialogue as the only means for achieving a mutually acceptable and lasting solution .
Let me conclude by sharing with you a personal conviction .
Throughout my political and personal career , I have always strongly believed that , through engagement and dialogue , even the most difficult issues can be addressed and hopefully , when the time is right , can also be solved .
Therefore I wish to appeal to China and to the Dalai Lama 's representative to resume this dialogue at the earliest possible opportunity with an open spirit and a view to achieving a durable solution in Tibet .
I can guarantee , from our side , our wholehearted support for such a process .
This is our position and this is the position that we bring to the Chinese side .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , the EU 's motto is ' Unity in diversity ' .
It is a principle that has served us well .
Unfortunately , such an idea does not resonate at all well with the authoritarian Communist dictatorship in the People 's Republic of China .
Diversity is suppressed , rather than embraced .
Minorities wishing to express themselves in any way other than the mainstream Party-sanctioned way are routinely marginalised and persecuted .
This trend can be seen in the treatment of many religious minorities , including Christians , Muslims and Falun Gong practitioners , and most notably in the PRC 's attitude to Tibet .
In 1950 , Communist forces invaded Tibet , leading to the exile of the Dalai Lama 50 years ago .
Ever since then , Tibet has been under the control of Beijing .
The traditional Tibetan culture , which was isolated for hundreds of years , has now been heavily diluted by the actions of the Government , which has been at pains to prevent any sense of Tibetan nationalism from resurfacing .
In fact , the systematic and sometimes brutal suppression of Tibetan culture has kindled the fire of Tibetan identity and awakened the world 's conscience to the plight of the people of Tibet .
The inspirational leadership of the Dalai Lama has ensured that Tibet 's future remains very much at the forefront of public debate , notwithstanding the huge efforts made by the PRC to admonish those like the former President-in-Office of the Council , Nicolas Sarkozy , who dared to question Beijing 's point of view .
We in this Parliament have always taken a strong line in defence of the autonomous rights of the people of Tibet , which does not automatically mean the right to self-determination or independence .
In doing this , we do not seek to provoke or antagonise China .
However , we recognise that our commitment to certain values - human rights , democracy , the rule of law and freedom of conscience - cannot be seen separately from the undoubtedly important strategic economic partnership that the EU is developing with China .
Pro-China voices on the other side of the House will have their say in this debate , but for too long the people of Tibet have been denied their voice , and we must speak for them .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , the Socialist Group is concerned about the human rights situation in China .
While we recognise that the situation has improved significantly over the last 10 years , there are still many areas where human rights are still not properly or adequately protected .
There may be a degree of freedom of thought , but there is not freedom of action .
We would certainly highlight the failure to allow free trade unions to operate within China .
We are concerned about the plight of the 100 million migrant workers who have moved from country to city and who have the most limited access to health and education .
We are concerned about the plight of religious and ethnic minorities across the whole of China .
Nevertheless , the Socialist Group was opposed to this debate and resolution .
The reason was proportionality .
It is right to criticise China for its human rights record , as we criticise the United States for its use of the death penalty , Guantánamo and extraordinary rendition , but we do not have to do it every part-session .
Frankly , it is becoming counterproductive .
At one time , the Chinese authorities paid heed to our resolutions , but no more .
As some individuals and groups in their desperate attention-seeking continue to up the ante with today a demand , I think for the first time , that Member States should abrogate the one-China policy and recognise the Tibetan government-in-exile .
The Dalai Lama was here only in December , speaking on behalf of Tibet in the plenary .
Why is it necessary to revisit the issue again ?
There is nothing new in the resolution .
I , along with Elmar Brok , Philippe Morillon and other Members of this Parliament , had the opportunity last summer to visit Lhasa .
We were the first international group to travel there after the troubles in March and spoke both to the authorities and those who were sympathetic to the Tibetan protesters .
As I wrote afterwards , the reality was that peaceful protests - and we support peaceful protest - turned into race riots , when shops , homes and Han Chinese were attacked and burned , with dozens of deaths .
Schools suffered arson attacks and hospitals and mosques of the Muslim minority were attacked .
The Dalai Lama himself recognised the reality of the situation when he threatened at the time to step down as a living god .
China has done an enormous amount for Tibet in terms of providing infrastructure , like the new Qinghai-Lhasa railway , and higher levels of social provision than elsewhere in rural China .
The problem is it is beginning to be resented elsewhere within China .
( Protests )
But the problem is , to quote the Beatles : ' Money can 't buy you love ' .
Tibetans still want a degree of cultural and political autonomy far beyond that which China is prepared to grant .
As I said at the time , China needs a dialogue with representatives of Tibet to find a solution that grants that autonomy , while protecting minority rights of ethnic and religious groups in the province .
The alternative is that impatient , young Tibetans will turn to violence and terrorism .
As a result of the article I wrote at the time , I was asked to discuss the matter with Dalai Lama 's representative in London , which I did at some length .
I agree with the Commissioner : it is through dialogue and engagement that we will find a way forward , not through shrill , endlessly repetitive , rehashed resolutions , such as the one we have here today .
Madam President , during the last few decades , democratic countries have called , on numerous occasions , for human rights to be respected in non-democratic countries .
These efforts have been effective only when countries and international organisations have been consistent in their actions and demands .
Unfortunately , the case of Tibet or , more broadly speaking , the issue of human rights in China , has generally often been pushed to the sidelines , with trade relations taking priority .
If it were not for the Olympics in Beijing , and the decisive stance taken by many social and non-governmental organisations , the world would still know very little about the situation in Tibet .
Our role , as the European Parliament , is to ensure that democratic countries react strongly and decisively to the actions of the Chinese authorities , such as the ' Strike Hard ' campaign which was implemented some time ago .
However , this can only be achieved if we consistently and decisively condemn all human rights violations perpetrated by the Communist authorities in China .
It is worth remembering that , in its resolution of 6 July 2000 , the European Parliament called on Member States to recognise the Tibetan Government in exile if , within the space of three years , no agreement had been reached between the Chinese authorities and the Dalai Lama 's administration .
As we know , Beijing still refuses to engage in talks with the indisputable leader of the Tibetan people .
Let us also not forget the Eleventh Panchen Lama , the youngest political prisoner , who has been in Chinese custody for 14 years .
He will be 20 this year .
I would , therefore , like to once again call on Parliament to be consistent in its actions and to treat its declarations seriously .
If we do not show that we mean what we say , it will be difficult to expect others to keep their promises and fulfil their obligations .
Madam President , I have been following the case of Tibet for years .
I have visited the region and have spoken to many people inside and outside the country .
I consider the Tibetan people 's claims to be legitimate and to a certain extent logical .
I especially find their current fears more than justified in view of the Chinese Government 's policy of severe repression towards them , which has now lasted more than 50 years , apart from a brief and , I would say , false truce during the Olympic Games .
I have known few people more clearly willing to talk and reach an agreement than the Tibetan people .
That is why I fail to understand this obsession by the Chinese Government both to twist reality and to insist on blocking the round of talks again and again .
A country is not made great by its military strength or its size or its economic wealth .
What makes it great is the magnanimity of its acts and its generosity .
The European Union can and must help to resolve this situation , while of course respecting the sovereignties involved , but it must do so firmly .
The way to do this is to support the Tibetan request to restart the Chinese-Tibetan talks and to recognise that , if anyone has spent years giving way to and being pressurised by the Chinese authorities , then in this case it is the Tibetan people .
This is not a conflict between equals in terms of either capacity or motives .
The European Union must be respectful towards both parties , but it cannot remain neutral towards the oppression , indiscriminate detentions , torture , murders or the religious , linguistic and cultural genocide .
The memorandum for genuine autonomy for the Tibetan people , now rejected by China as a working document , shows that the Tibetan people have already made a genuine effort and given up an enormous amount of what , I emphasise , are their legitimate aspirations .
China now has the opportunity to show the world its generosity and its desire for peace and harmony and , above all , the European Union has the opportunity to help it act in accordance with its greatness .
( DE ) Madam President , on 10 March 1959 , the Tibetan people were subjected to unspeakable suffering at the hands of the Chinese .
Sixty thousand people lost their lives and hundreds of thousands were arrested , taken away and tortured in the months that followed .
A year ago , the violence escalated once again .
More than 200 Tibetans died , some as a result of deliberate fatal shots , and now - shortly after the 50th anniversary - monasteries are closed to the outside world , access roads are controlled and soldiers and security men stand in readiness to nip demonstrations in the bud .
We still have no news of possible rioting .
What is the response to this show of power ?
Silence in the media .
The Dalai Lama has urged his people to maintain the path of non-violence .
His call for dialogue has had no positive response in Beijing .
When an envoy of the Dalai Lama presented specific steps for autonomy in a memorandum , they were rejected by President Hu Jintao .
He said , ' we must build a Great Wall against separatism ' .
This idea , which is pure provocation , was topped by the planned forced introduction of a holiday for Tibetans : 28 March is to be Serfs ' Emancipation Day .
This is the bitter reality .
Two days ago , the European Parliament displayed flags .
In plenary , an impressive number of us placed the Tibetan flag on our tables and showed our solidarity with the suffering Tibetans .
There were peaceful protests in all parts of the EU .

Our fellow Members - Mr Cappato , Mrs Lichtenberger , Mr Tannock and Mr Romeva i Rueda - are absolutely right : today 's resolution speaks loud and clear .
The memorandum must form the basis for further negotiations .
It is a document for true autonomy within the framework of the Chinese constitution .
The isolation of Tibet must stop - for the inhabitants , for tourists , for journalists .
We must have an answer to 600 imprisoned Tibetans .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this Parliament cannot allow the recent cry of pain from the Dalai Lama to go unheard .
Only a few months ago we listened to him speak in Brussels ; we all know him to be a gentle man , a peace-maker , a spokesman for Tibetan culture , that is to say the culture of harmony and fraternity par excellence .
It is in the name of these values , speaking of his ' Chinese brothers ' , that the Dalai Lama has asked - forcefully , however - for legitimate and tangible autonomy for Tibet , recalling the torture and terrible suffering of his people and his land .
This is a request that Parliament should be proud to support .
It is our political and institutional duty , in the name of democracy , human rights and the values of freedom .
The Tibetans look to Europe , perhaps , as their only hope ; we really must not disappoint them .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , without a doubt we Christian Democrats recognise the sovereignty of the People 's Republic of China over its territory , including Tibet .
However , at the same time we reject China 's view that any statement from the European Union regarding human rights in China constitutes impermissible interference in China 's internal affairs .
According to a modern understanding of human rights and international law - which hopefully China will also soon share - the international community is required express concern about human rights in all parts of the world , particularly in very blatant cases .
How else could an International Criminal Tribunal take action against the crimes against humanity in the countries of the former Yugoslavia and pass judgment if it did not have the right to intervene for the sake of human rights ?
The People 's Republic of China and its government should therefore recognise that the discussion of human rights such as the freedom of assembly , the freedom of an independent press , religious freedom and the rights of cultural minorities in Tibet and in other parts of China does not constitute impermissible interference .
It must face up to this discussion .
Our main concern today , however , is simply the plea - and I cannot therefore understand Mr Ford in this regard , although he has always been more on the side of the Chinese government - for the People 's Republic of China and its government to resume talks with the Dalai Lama as leader of a large proportion of the Tibetan people .
To be honest - as my fellow Member has already said -the government did hold these talks last year , but broke them off after the Olympic Games .
We are forced to suspect then that these talks were only conducted during the Olympic Games to divert our attention .
However , Mr Ford , we will not allow our attention to be diverted .
We will place this matter on the agenda time and again and we call on the Chinese Government to enter into real and serious talks with the Dalai Lama , as human rights are still being violated in Tibet and we must ensure that this situation changes .
( PL ) Madam President , if we are discussing the fate of persecuted Tibetans today , then we must be aware that their prospects will improve only if the whole international community exerts political pressure on China .
Therefore , I must also stress that , in this regard , all the efforts made by Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , and by those in a position to influence global politics , may very well bear fruit .
I must also stress that it was with the greatest regret that I listened to the speech made by the representative of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , who claimed that China 's crimes were justified by the construction of a railway line to Tibet .
This reminds me of a time when , in Europe , the construction of motorways was used to justify the construction of concentration camps .
We cannot allow railway lines and motorways to be built on the pain and suffering of persecuted people .
( NL ) Madam President , I stood here one year ago , when we were discussing the unrest in Tibet .
We implored China to give the media and international organisations access to the area and I am glad to say that we , as Parliament , called at that point for a serious dialogue between China and the Dalai Lama .
Last year , China showed the whole world , through its organisation and holding of the Olympic Games , that it is a country capable of transformation and of astonishing the world .
In the run-up to the Games , China gave foreign journalists some space .
I appreciate that this temporary granting of some freedom of the press was for foreign journalists .
Sadly , it was short-lived .
Last Tuesday , journalists were unable to get into Tibet in order to report on the situation there .
I deeply regret the fact that the Chinese Government no longer guarantees the freedom of the press .
At the same time , there is absolutely no freedom of the press for journalists in China .
Chinese journalists apply a system of self-censorship that requires them to adopt the government 's position .
In this case , too , there is a world of difference between the law - which is sound and guarantees the freedom of the press - and the reality on the ground , where journalists have to impose restrictions on themselves .
All the media have to submit to the censorship diktats of the parties .
What is more , the government also blocks websites .
Internet users inform one another quickly of political developments as they happen .
For the dialogue between the Tibetans and the Chinese - the population , the people - it is crucial that they have accurate information .
Negotiations can only be held on the basis of facts , and the freedom of the press in China is an important precondition for that to happen .
There must be freedom to write , to enable journalists to inform the rest of the Chinese people about what is going on in Tibet .
Let us , Europe , bang our fist on the table and stand up for human rights in China .
This is a necessary step in order to get the dialogue between China and Tibet going again .
Let China take this one step in the right direction and pave the way for dialogue , or , in the words of the Chinese philosopher Lao Tzu , ' a journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step ' .
- ( SK ) I was in China at the time of the sad events of March 2008 in Tibet and I was able to follow the events only on the Internet because we were not allowed into Tibet .
I saw then how much the inhabitants of Tibet need help .
I firmly believe that , through this resolution , the European Parliament must convey to the Chinese Government the words of His Holiness the Dalai Lama about how Tibet does not have separatist tendencies and is striving only for the recognition of Tibetan cultural autonomy within the framework of China .
I understand that the EU is trying to establish good economic relations with China , and we communicated this in our discussions with the Chinese Government and MPs in Beijing within the framework of the IMCO delegation visit in March 2008 .
However , we cannot remain indifferent to the situation in Tibet or to the constant violations of human rights , the reprisals , the suffering and the violence .
On the occasion of the 50th anniversary of the departure of the Dalai Lama into exile in India , I expect the Chinese authorities to allow independent observers and foreign media unrestricted access to Tibet in order to assess the situation on the ground .
( RO ) Commissioner , I would like to thank you for the balanced position which you have presented once again today during Parliament 's plenary .
The European Union 's relations with China are of strategic importance to all Members of the European Parliament and they do and will have major global repercussions .
I would have expected us to discuss the European Union 's cooperation with China in reforming the global financial system , bearing in mind China 's balanced and constructive position , especially now , before the G20 summit in London .
It could have been the right time to put Africa on a common agenda , bearing in mind the major role which China plays there , and I could continue .
In spite of these obvious issues , in spite of the European Commission 's agenda with China and unlike the 27 Member States ' much more consistent and balanced agenda with China , I note with regret that we , in the European Parliament , are turning this strategic relationship into an issue and pawn in the political groups ' electoral campaign .
Human rights are and must be the main priority , but they cannot be the only one .
( PL ) Madam President , in the early 1950s , the Chinese Government forced Tibetan representatives to sign an agreement in which it guaranteed Tibet far-reaching autonomy .
These guarantees came to nothing .
As a result of public pressure and the fear of a boycott of the Olympic Games , the Chinese Government began talks with the representatives of the Dalai Lama .
However , these talks were held at a gallingly low level and , moreover , the dialogue was akin to communication between two televisions , set to different channels .
We do not want dialogue , we want negotiations .
We want the Chinese to negotiate with the representatives of the Dalai Lama , on the basis of the proposed memorandum .
If the Chinese Government thinks that this memorandum is not a good basis , let it justify its opinion , rather than hiding behind the blanket statement that it is nothing more than a memorandum proposing Tibetan independence , which is absolutely not the case .
Madam President , I fully support what has been said by the Commissioner , that dialogue and engagement are of crucial importance .
At the same time , we have to admit that what we see today is a clear lack of political will on the Chinese side to have serious and result-oriented dialogue with the representatives of the Dalai Lama .
For many of us the case of Tibet - its autonomy - is a litmus test for the Chinese authorities .
Tibet is a reflection of the human rights situation in China , as well as the situation of human rights defenders like Hu Jia , Sakharov Laureate 2008 .
I do not see Mr Ford in the Chamber now , but I would like to assure him that human rights always have been and always will be at the top of our political agenda .
Madam President , the Chinese Government has termed the anniversary of the occupation of Tibet the ' liberation of serfs ' .
Sadly , this is Orwellian Newspeak still being practised : slavery is freedom ; lies are truth .
But it shows that the Chinese Communist leaders have become long-term prisoners of their own bad conscience .
Achieving genuine autonomy for Tibet is closely related to realising the message of another date : soon , 20 years of Tiananmen student democracy .
Achieving real democracy in China is key to a solution in Tibet , but time is running short , and much will depend on our own moral determination .
I also call on the Council Presidency to make a similar statement to our resolution on this occasion and also in June on the occasion of the Tiananmen Square massacre .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , this debate has briefly but clearly shown once again our great concern at the situation in Tibet .
The interventions have underlined that this concern remains as real and legitimate 50 years after the Tibetan uprising of 10 March 1959 .
Moreover , I think our discussion has also underlined the necessity for both parties to resume dialogue promptly .
I say ' dialogue ' because dialogue is always the first important step before moving on to negotiations .
It is also the best way to avoid frustration and violence among young Tibetans .
I think this is a very resonant reason .
That is why a more substantial dialogue is in the interests of both sides .
The Dalai Lama is a respected religious leader and , amongst other things , a Nobel Peace Prize Laureate .
While individual European leaders have met with him in various , but usually religious , contexts , meetings in a political context are not our policy .
Having said that , we have frequent exchanges with his envoys , especially on progress with the dialogue process , and this is how we will continue .
The debate is closed .
I too hope that the Tibetan people can have their freedom , but also that they will not have to live under the control of either a state or a religion .
I have received five motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 108 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
For 50 years , Tibetan refugees have been calling for their fundamental rights to be respected .
I am convinced that respecting these rights and reopening the process of dialogue with the people of Tibet is clearly in China 's interest .
In today 's world , a country 's image is an important part of the way it operates within the global economy , and in terms of international cooperation .
China 's refusal to engage in dialogue with the Dalai Lama 's representatives , and its rejection of the extremely moderate demands of the Tibetans , is harmful to its image .
Engaging in talks on rights which are in accordance with the principles of the Chinese constitution would not pose any significant risk for China .
In fact , quite the opposite is the case .
Great countries and great nations should be magnanimous .
Such behaviour may provide proof of their greatness .
Engaging in a dialogue with Tibet provides China with an opportunity to show its good , positive , side .
Showing solidarity with Tibet and the Tibetan people is not anti-Chinese .
It is an expression of concern for human rights , religious and linguistic freedom , cultural diversity and the right to maintain one 's national identity and autonomy .
Therefore , we are not interfering in China 's internal affairs , but merely trying to defend standards and values which are important to us everywhere - in Europe , Asia and throughout the world .
China has not been singled out in any way .
We defend the rights of small nations even when this proves to be bothersome or uncomfortable .
This is because we believe that it is the right approach to take .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.55 a.m. and resumed at 12.05 p.m. )

1 .
Better careers and more mobility : a European partnership for researchers (
2. on the protection of consumers , in particular minors , in respect of the use of video games (
3 . Developing a Common Aviation Area with Israel (
4 .
Multi-annual recovery plan for bluefin tuna in the Eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean ( vote )
5 .
Sri Lanka ( vote )
6 .
Deterioration of agricultural land in the EU (
7 .
Employee participation in companies with a European Statute ( vote )
8 .
Children of Migrants ( vote )
- Before the vote on paragraph 7 :
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , paragraph 7 - the final paragraph - instructs you to forward this resolution to the Commission , the Council and those other illustrious bodies , including the Committee of the Regions and the European Economic and Social Committee , and the social partners but , unusually , does not instruct you to send it to the parliaments of Member States .
So I would like to repair that omission and propose the very simple oral amendment : ' and the parliaments of the Member States ' .
9 .
Croatia : progress report 2008 ( vote )
- Before the vote on Amendment 13 :
Thank you , Mr President .
There have been a lot of discussions between the groups over the last few days , right down to the last minute in fact .
The following amendment now seems to me to be the one that has the broadest agreement in this House and also , according to direct information which I have received , was voted on with the agreement of both Croatia and Slovenia .
The amendment reads as follows in English :
' Recalls the informal agreement reached on 26 August 2007 by the Prime Ministers of Croatia and Slovenia on the submission of their border dispute to an international body ; welcomes the readiness of Croatia and Slovenia to accept the mediation offer made by the Commission and takes the view that this mediation should be based on international law ; in this context , looks forward to a rapid advancement of the accession negotiations ; ' .
10 .
Turkey : progress report 2008 ( vote )
- Before the vote on paragraph 4 :
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , in paragraph , please insert the adjective ' secular ' , so that the phrase would be : ' stable , democratic , pluralist , secular and prosperous society ' .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , after yesterday 's debate and after consultation with the rapporteur , I would like to add one word to the amendment .
The word would be ' transitional ' , and the amendment would then read as follows : ' except for temporary , transitional derogations ' .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , after yesterday 's debate , I would like to propose replacing the word ' involve ' with ' consult ' .
11 .
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia : progress report 2008 ( vote )
- Before the vote :
author . - Mr President , before we vote on the resolution I tabled on the accession process for the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , I wish to make three technical remarks so that everybody can decide on the correct texts .
First remark : where it speaks about the Macedonian negotiator in paragraph 12 , the text should be ' the negotiator of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ' .
This is entirely in line with what we decided on when voting on my reports of 2007 and 2008 .
Second remark : in paragraph 18 , the Macedonian Orthodox Church is the official name of the biggest religious community in the country .
This is mentioned in order to distinguish it from the Serbian Orthodox group .
This use of the word ' Macedonian ' cannot be replaced by any reference to any state name .
As it is the official name of an institution , I propose surrounding the name with inverted commas .
Third remark : as regards the translation of the word ' pending ' in paragraph 10 in the phrase ' pending full implementation of the key priorities of the Accession Partnership ' , the French and Italian versions - at least - differ from the texts in English , German and Dutch .
For all final translations I propose using the original English version .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( EL ) Mr President , in paragraph 12 we had Amendment 1 by Mr Swoboda , on which a roll-call vote was requested and , as you know , Mr Swoboda withdrew Amendment 1 today .
I would therefore ask that a roll-call vote be taken on the second part of paragraph 12 .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , I should like to propose a deletion of one part of the text , so the new text of the second part of paragraph 13 should read : ' in view of the new round of negotiations announced under the " Nimetz process ” , expresses the hope that all governments in the neighbourhood will support the integration of this country in the EU , thus contributing to the stability and prosperity of the region ; ' .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I would like to say first of all that I do not think it is fair that , when I withdrew my amendment , you rejected part of my original text .
That is not a fair procedure .
However , with regard to what Mrs Ibrisagic has just said , I would like to say that we are able to accept this wording .
I would then also withdraw my Amendment 3 and I hope for fair treatment from the other side .
12 .
The mandate of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (
- Before the vote on paragraph 1 ( h ) :
Mr President , with the agreement of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament and the rapporteur , I would like to propose the following regarding paragraph 1 ( h ) :
' stresses that the key documents vital for the prosecution of General Ante Gotovina , Mladen Markać and Ivan Čermak should be handed over by the responsible authorities ; ' .
The rest is the same .
13 .
5th World Water Forum in Istanbul , 16-22 March 2009 ( vote )
- After the vote on Amendment 5 :
Mr President , the Zaragoza 2008 International Expo closed on 14 September 2008 .
It was the first exhibition devoted exclusively to water and sustainable development , and the first exhibition in which the European Parliament took part on an equal footing with the Commission .
The three months of constant debates , with more than 2 000 experts and NGOs , resulted in the Zaragoza Charter , which precisely reflects the state of the debate between Mexico 2006 and Istanbul .
Hence we propose the following recital , which I shall read in English :
' having regard to the Zaragoza Charter of 2008 " A New Comprehensive Vision of Water ” and the recommendations of the Water Tribune adopted on 14 September 2008 , the closing day of the 2008 Zaragoza International Exhibition , and forwarded to the Secretary-General of the United Nations , ' .
14 .
EC Development Assistance to Health Services in Sub-Saharan Africa ( vote )
15 .
Implementation of the Single Euro Payments Area ( SEPA ) ( vote )
16 .
EU-Brazil Strategic Partnership (
17 .
Mexico Strategic Partnership (
Before the last vote , which is always unruly , I would like to say something .
This is the last plenary sitting in which our Secretary-General , Harald Rømer , will participate .
I expressed the thanks of the European Parliament at length on your behalf at the reception two days ago .
I would also like to do that here in plenary by way of conclusion : thank you very much Harald Rømer for your service to the European Parliament , which spans several decades .
( Loud applause )
( Protests )
Anyone who has worked for the European Parliament for 36 years deserves well of the European Parliament .
Our warmest thanks , Harald Rømer .
( Protests )
To those who are heckling now , I would like to say that I hope that your parents do not discover how you are behaving here .
( Applause )
18 .
50th anniversary of the Tibetan uprising and dialogue between His Holiness the Dalai Lama and the Chinese Government ( vote )
- Before the vote :
Mr President , I would like to request that the separate votes proposed for paragraphs 1 , 2 and 3 be taken by roll call .
- Before the vote on recital E :
I also request roll-call voting for the final vote .
Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For the outcome and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
Mr President , I just wish to say on this report that I am pleased that our group 's Amendment 1 was accepted and , therefore , I welcome this development .
There is a challenge to protect soils in the European Union , but it is a Member State competence and does not require an EU approach , or EU directives or regulations .
Therefore , I welcome the outcome of this vote .

( DE ) Mr President , I am very pleased with this and would also like to thank Mr Swoboda very much because this important report has been adopted with a very large consensus .
I would like to take the opportunity to urge our Slovene Members , for whom and for whose country I have the greatest sympathy , to find a way once again of continuing Slovenia 's great achievements towards European integration .
This country was the first new Member State to introduce the euro and was the first to implement Schengen .
Slovenia is a pioneer of European unification .
I would like to see Slovenia , in its national interest , also act as a pioneer in connection with the accession of Croatia to the EU .
( NL ) Mr President , in principle I support the accession of Croatia to the European Union , but I did not vote in favour of this report .
I abstained because there are still a number of problems in Croatia , one example being the problem of corruption .
Experience has now taught us that corruption has actually increased in a number of countries that have acceded to the European Union before they were actually completely ready to do so .
The problem with this report is that it states that the conclusion of the negotiations could perhaps be reached in 2009 , which is to say this year , while , in my opinion , it is , in fact , unwise to tie ourselves down to a given date .
Croatia should be allowed to accede when it is completely ready .
At this moment in time , that is absolutely not the case .
( SL ) It is my sincere wish that Croatia becomes a member of the European Union as soon as possible and this is a wish that is shared by Slovenia .
If our wishes are to become a reality , we need to assist and cooperate with Croatia .
We can resolve disputes by listening carefully to all of the parties involved .
However , there is nothing in this report , which was endorsed by the European Parliament today , which suggests that we have struck the right balance in voting on the so-called Croatian-Slovenian border dispute .
In order to avoid bias , we should also include the principle of equity as a minimum requirement .
In conclusion , I would like to point out that , if we really want to solve this problem , we should ensure that both Slovenia and Croatia observe the outcome of the relevant international body .
This is why the parliaments of both countries should ratify that outcome beforehand .
( BG ) Thank you , Mr President .
I supported the Turkey progress report .
The negotiations with Turkey on accession to the European Union pose a serious challenge to all Member States of political and economic significance , as well as in terms of the issue of security .
It is particularly important for the country to meet the accession criteria and show consistency , sufficient precision and transparency towards the citizens of the European Union .
I feel that it is especially important for the process to progress via good cooperation with neighbouring countries .
In this respect , I think that we must note certain progress between Bulgaria and Turkey with the agreement which has been reached on initiating negotiations on matters which remain unresolved so far , specifically on resolving the property issues of the Thracian refugees , which is happening thanks to the efforts of the European Parliament .
We will monitor this process particularly closely as it concerns the rights of thousands of people , which must be respected across the territory of the European Union .
The Thracian question is also just as important as relations between Turkey and the other neighbouring countries . Thank you .
- ( SK ) We know what a testing time our friends in the Balkans have had .
This applies both to Slovenia and Croatia , when they were attacked by Serbia and our sympathies lay on both sides .
I must say that it was generous of the EU to accept Slovenia into the EU before all of the disputes between Slovenia and Croatia had been resolved and I believe that we should adopt a similar approach now towards Croatia .
I am sorry that some politicians in Slovenia would now like to block the accession of Croatia , but this is what I am told by Mrs Jordan Cizelj , who has a sensible and , I would say , balanced approach to this political question .
I trust that the informal agreement to be discussed further between Croatia and Slovenia under the auspices of the Commission will end in success .
Ladies and gentlemen , allow me to explain a point in our Rules of Procedure .
To speak during the explanations of vote , you must make a request to the services before the start of these explanations .
Of course , I am very flexible and I allow the Members present to speak .
But we are not using the ' catch the eye ' procedure .
You have to put your name down beforehand , prior to the explanations of vote .
( BG ) Mr President , I supported the report which was drafted on Turkey 's progress as I believe that it is an objective report which offers both Turkey and the European Union the opportunity to forge ahead together with Turkey 's preparation for membership .
At the same time , I would like to express a certain dissatisfaction that the Chamber rejected the Socialist Group 's proposal for it to be noted that Turkey 's membership of the European Union is a goal shared by Turkey and the European Union .
I believe that if we want more rapid progress from Turkey on the problems we see with its development , we must also be sufficiently open and not leave our partners in any doubt that the goal of this process is still actually Turkey 's admission to the European Union .
Turkey 's role will grow and it is in the European Union 's interest to have a non-Christian country among its Member States because this will give us a number of opportunities to conduct policies which are not possible at the moment . Thank you .
( BG ) Ladies and gentlemen , the Attack Group is voting against the Turkey progress report because we do not see any progress .
In fact , no progress could be achieved anyway .
Turkey does not consider anything else other than its own interests , which do not include respect for human rights and the other European and Christian values .
For more than 80 years Turkey has not fulfilled the Treaty of Ankara , according to which it owes Bulgaria USD 10 billion .
Just imagine how it will comply with European regulations .
Yesterday Mr Wiersma mentioned that failure to acknowledge the 1915-1916 Armenian genocide is a problem .
What should we say then about the acts of genocide against the Bulgarians which went on for 500 years , such as the massacres in Stara Zagora , Batak and Perushtitsa , described by the International European Commission in 1876 ?
Mr Wiersma also said that there is no place in the EU for an Islamist Turkey ; however , 20 years ago Turkish Islamists blew up coaches in Bulgaria , carrying women and children .
Indeed , Turkey paid for monuments to be erected for these terrorists .
This is modern Turkey , governed by a fundamentalist , Islamist party .
These are its values and we think that they are not appropriate for Europe .
( FR ) Mr President , ' to err is human , to persist is diabolical ' .
Never has this saying been more appropriate than in the lamentable saga of the accession negotiations with Turkey .
Since 2005 , you have been giving us the same negative reports on human rights , respect for minorities and the commitments made to the Union , whilst keeping the objective of accession intact .
Now , in reality , that is not the problem .
The underlying issue lies in the wish of Europeans no longer to accept the consequences of the freedom of establishment which would necessarily result from accession .
It also lies in the fact that Turkey belongs geographically , culturally , linguistically and spiritually to an area which is not Europe .
Consequently , we must abandon this fiction ; we must abandon this masquerade of accession and immediately begin practical discussions , in other words aim for a partnership built on our mutual and reciprocal interests .
This accession procedure must be abandoned .
( DE ) Mr President , in the crucial areas - human rights , the rights of minorities , religious freedom , freedom of expression - Turkey has made next to no progress , and in the last few days has even taken steps backwards .
However , irrespective of this , the Commission claims that we are nevertheless obliged to take a positive position , as this is an important strategic partner .
That is true , but that is a foreign policy matter .
The fact that we need strategic partnerships is not a criterion for accession .
However , I have nevertheless quite clearly voted in favour of the report , because the Socialist call to focus the report on accession was rejected .
This report is a great success and a breakthrough for us , because it expressly avoids setting accession as a goal and because it talks about a long-lasting , open-ended process , the outcome of which is still unclear .
We would have preferred a ' no ' to full membership , but this wording nevertheless comes close to that and is therefore a great success for those of us who are happy to say ' yes ' to partnership with Turkey as part of our foreign policy , but say ' no ' to accession .
( NL ) Mr President , I abstained from the vote on the report about Turkey because , while this report contained a complete catalogue of criticisms relating to the number of major wrongs that are still ongoing in Turkey , I believe that the only possible conclusion to this report surely had to have been that the negotiations must be stopped , and indeed on a permanent basis , because , after three years , there has still been no appreciable improvement in the situation in Turkey .
I am , in any case , of the opinion that the European Union must remain a European project and that , therefore , there should be no place within the European Union for a country like Turkey , which is not a European country .
Yesterday , a Member from the Socialist Group in the European Parliament said that he would never accept Turkey being further Islamicised .
Well , I hope that he and his group will also come out against the Islamicisation of Europe , although I shall not hold my breath .
Mr President , this report sets out Turkey 's progress towards eventual membership of the EU .
That is an eventual aim that I support .
However , I do have some concerns about Turkey 's progress towards membership .
One of my concerns is the gradual erosion of the secular republican ideal and the growth of religion in politics .
I am also worried about some of the human rights abuses in Turkey that have been documented and some of the actions that have been taken against minority communities .
We need to see action over some of those areas before we can consider Turkish membership .
However , it is also important for us to be honest with Turkey , and to say clearly and unambiguously that , if it fulfils all the conditions that other Member States have fulfilled , then it has the right to join .
It is not right for individual heads of Member States to put unfair and unbalanced obstacles in the path of Turkish membership .
If Turkey fulfils the conditions , then it has the right to join , and should be permitted to do so .
We need an EU which is wider and not deeper .
( EL ) Mr President , I voted in favour of the report on Turkey due to the positive elements for Cyprus in paragraphs 32 and 40 , even though I disagree with the content of Amendments 9 and 10 .
Amendment 9 introduces an unacceptable position on - albeit temporary - derogations from the principles on which the European Union is founded , including the four fundamental freedoms .
This has been done at a time when negotiations are being held between the leaders of the two communities in Cyprus , who are the only people who can decide on the matter .
Amendment 10 contradicts the fact that the CFSP is part of the Community aquis for the EU and the Member States , and third countries cannot be given carte blanche to participate in planning and decision-making procedures .
( HU ) For the last three years , Macedonia has been a candidate country for EU membership .
In spite of this , accession negotiations have not yet begun .
Unless the European Union promptly takes decisive steps , the resulting loss of credibility could have destabilising consequences for the region .
Macedonia has progressed a great deal in the last few years , achieving good economic results , moving closer to a functioning market economy and showing success in the field of lawmaking .
Consensus has been reached among government and the opposition , civil society and public opinion in order to fulfil the Copenhagen criteria as soon as possible .
Coexistence between national and ethnic communities has also been well organised .
Greece 's stubborn obstruction of the start of negotiations for accession is beyond comprehension .
The naming of the country must not be an obstacle !
Bilateral talks about the name can be held simultaneously .
I support the report because it is an important message to the Macedonian people and will give a decisive impetus to starting genuine negotiations before the end of this year . Thank you very much .
( DE ) Mr President , this report sends an important signal to a country that is playing a stabilising role , has exemplary legislation on minorities , has a broad government majority in which all nationalities are represented and has taken a clear European course under the leadership of Prime Minister Gruevski .
I therefore gladly voted in favour of this report , and I believe that we should emphasise two points in particular : firstly , we want the Council and the Commission to tell us this year when accession negotiations are to begin and , secondly , we will not tolerate any bilateral troublemaking , and definitely not with regard to this bizarre name issue .
The country is called Macedonia , whether that suits some people or not , and we must finally start to smooth this country 's way towards Europe .

( NL ) Mr President , I voted against Mr Meijer 's report because I , and my party , are of the opinion that enlargement must be brought to a halt for an indeterminate period after the accession of Croatia .
European citizens want nothing to do with any further enlargement in the short or medium term , and certainly nothing to do with an enlargement to include Turkey , of course .
Yet it is time that this Parliament listened , for once , to those it is supposed to represent .
That being the case , I also oppose the commencement of accession negotiations with the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , which this Parliament is calling for , as well as the granting of a European perspective to the entire Western Balkans .
Some of these countries or entities are Islamic through and through and , as far as I am concerned , should not be allowed to join the European Union .
Mr President , I was very pleased with the vote today .
I visited Macedonia very recently , on behalf of the Westminster Foundation for Democracy , set up by Margaret Thatcher when she was Prime Minister of my country , and saw a country with vibrant political parties and a fascinating tax policy , with flat taxes on both corporation and income tax , and a growing economy .
It is a country that this coming month is going to have free , fair and honest elections - probably better than the ones we recently had in the UK , with postal votes .
Such a country should be allowed to join the European Union , should it choose to , based on its own self-determination - which is why my previous colleagues should possibly reflect on this matter .
Today we have seen a significant change because , up until this point , Greek Members of this House have been making themselves look completely absurd , and have been placed in a position of ridicule because of their arguments about the name of this country , which is the Republic of Macedonia .

Mr President , the problem with speaking after Mr Heaton Harris is that he has made many of the same points I wanted to make on this issue .
It seems to me blatantly absurd that Greece should continue to pursue this long-standing and , frankly , ridiculous tirade against the name of Macedonia .
I have some beautiful counties in my constituency - Durham , Northumberland - and it really does not bother me too much if another Member State wishes to give itself the names of those fantastic counties .
For the accession negotiations to be held up not because of an ethnic dispute or a democratic dispute or a human rights dispute but purely because the country decides to name itself Macedonia , is patently ridiculous .
I hope that the Greek Members will see the sense of this .
I hope that Macedonia will be judged on free criteria that apply to everybody else and , if they fulfil those criteria , if they are a democratic , secular state , if they pursue the right human rights policies then , like all other Member States , they should have the right to join and not be subject to a ridiculous veto by Greece purely on the grounds of the name .
Mr President , the Tamil Tigers have been designated a terrorist group by the EU and by the United States , but thankfully it looks as though their bloodthirsty campaign for an independent Tamil homeland may now be coming to an end .
Sri Lanka deserves to live in peace , as we in Europe do .
Like other colleagues in this House , I support a unitary state for Sri Lanka .
I think it is also appropriate to place on record that I also think it is probably a good idea , within that unitary state , to grant the Tamils a degree of autonomy .
I do not support the Tigers ' campaign of violence , and I consider it actually essential that the Sri Lankan army be permitted to continue their military campaign against the Tamil Tigers .
However , it is also appropriate to recognise that there is a humanitarian crisis in Sri Lanka at the moment , and the aid agencies should be allowed access .
So perhaps it is appropriate to ask for a cessation of the fighting , whilst aid agencies can get access and whilst civilians are allowed to leave the disputed areas .
But after that we have to allow the army to continue their campaign .
Mr President , the growth of a corpus of international jurisprudence not anchored in any elected national legislature is one of the most alarming developments of our age .
We are reversing not just 300 years of legal understanding of territorial responsibility , that is , that a crime is the responsibility of the territory where it is committed ; we are also going back to the pre-modern idea that people who decide on laws should not be accountable to the people who live under them , but rather only to their own consciences .
It might seem very reasonable that , if a man like Milošević or a man like Karadžić is not receiving justice in his own country , we need to do something about it .
But the objection to authoritarians like Milošević is precisely that they vitiated the democracy of their country and set themselves up as being above the law .
If we replicate that problem internationally , we drag ourselves down to his level , as we did with the farce of a trial we had in The Hague , where for six years we had 27 changes of legal procedure , imposition of counsel and , ultimately , no conviction .
I am not in favour of Mr Milošević : he was a baleful and wicked Communist .
But bad men deserve justice - bad men , especially , deserve justice - and when they do not get it , it is the rest of us who are diminished .
Mr President , we all know how important water is and in the developing world in particular , where access to water is very difficult , it is young girls and women who suffer the most .
Their educational prospects are hugely diminished because they are the water-bearers , if you like .
I saw this in India on a delegation visit and it is very important that we invest more in water management and make sure that it does not become an impediment to the educational progress of young girls and women .
I particularly welcome the vote on paragraph 2 , which declares that water is assumed as a public good and should be under public control regardless of how it is managed .
It is a precious resource and it is there for the good of the public , not for individual control or profit .
Mr President , I , too , am very supportive of our motion on the resolution of water and welcome our vote on paragraph 2 , where we strongly declared that water is a public good and should be under public control .
I personally strongly oppose the privatisation of water .
We have seen in recent times how the relentless pursuit of profit has brought the global economy to its knees .
We certainly do not want to see the same thing happening where water is concerned .
In order to ensure water quality and ongoing improvements in the distribution system , there needs to be continued investment in the transition system .
There is no incentive for those in the private sector to do this because , of course , the temptation is simply to increase the price to the consumer , rather than invest in upgrading the transmission system .
I have seen this happen in my own county of Sligo , where certain sectors of the community will end up paying more for their water than their fair share because there is simply a lack of investment by the private sector in the transmission system .
Mr President , I voted in favour of this resolution and report , but I have some concerns .
This morning , the Commission acknowledged that we do not know where the WTO is heading at this point , and therefore how it knits in with the strategic partnership .
We cannot allow a situation where either the strategic partnership arrangement - or indeed a world trade agreement - has a negative impact on Europe 's food security concerns .
I reiterate the issue around food production standards , which are higher in the European Union .
We penalise our producers where they do not meet those standards .
We cannot allow a situation where we bring in food from third countries - Brazil or elsewhere - which does not meet our production standards and which results in very unfair competition for producers of food and agricultural commodities within the European Union .
( NL ) Mr President , of course a strategic partnership between the European Union and Mexico , and also , in fact , countries like Brazil , is a good thing and something that is in the interests of the EU .
The report itself is framed in a largely balanced way , but what I would say is not in the interests of Europe - and this is something that will also give rise to a whole range of questions amongst the general public - is the provision in the report that calls for the conclusion of a mutual agreement on an immigration policy .
This does not bode well and it is also the reason why I chose to abstain in the vote on this report .
- ( SK ) I have also voted for the resolution on the situation in Tibet on the 50th anniversary of the Tibetan uprising because the Chinese authorities have tightened the security in Tibet recently and have forbidden journalists and foreigners from entering the region .
Today 's debate in the European Parliament broadcasts the message that we are extremely concerned about the situation in Tibet , particularly the suffering and reprisals against innocent inhabitants .
I call on the Council to set up a Truth Committee in accordance with the resolution , with the aim of finding out what really happened in the negotiations between the People 's Republic of China and the representatives of His Holiness the Dalai Lama .
I call on the Chinese Government to release immediately all persons who have been arrested merely for participating in a peaceful protest .



( IT ) Mr President , I take the floor to express my satisfaction at the widespread support the Assembly has given to the motion that we have put forward with Mr Pannella and Mr Onyskiewicz , The motion does something different from what we heard from Mrs FerreroWaldner today ; that is , it takes sides : the side of the search for truth , for the real reasons why talks broke down between the Chinese and the Tibetans , rather than looking at this from a neutral standpoint , as the Commission and the Council unfortunately continue to do , as if it were enough for us to simply hope for dialogue between two parties .
I would like to stress that the behaviour of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament seems to me to be particularly hard to understand ; first they were opposed to the debate , then they were opposed to my tabling a resolution , and then they actually voted against it , with Mr Ford offering a political explanation that we are passing too many resolutions on Tibet .

Well , perhaps the party and Mr Ford do not understand - or else they understand all too well - that much more is at stake here ; the freedom and democracy of more than a billion Chinese citizens as well as the Tibetan people .
( NL ) Mr President , it goes without saying that I voted in favour of this resolution ; although , of course , we cannot allow ourselves to think that this ultimately innocuous resolution will make much impression on the totalitarian communist regime in China , with whom we nonetheless are so happy to trade .
We would make more impact on the regime if this Parliament and the Council had the courage to state that the occupation and subsequent annexation of Tibet were contraventions of international law and , as such , cannot be recognised by the European Union .
We must keep ramming home the message that Tibet must be an independent state and not an autonomous province of China and that a genocide and an ethnocide have been and are being carried out in Tibet .
Communication of Council common positions : see Minutes
Explanations of vote ( continuation )
Mr President , Tibetans , like all nations , have the aspiration to live under their own laws and their own people , and , in denying their national aspirations , the Chinese Government uses a series of arguments about abolishing feudalism and overcoming serfdom and superstition .
Ultimately , it is all a version of what Engels called ' false consciousness ' : they believe that the Tibetans do not really understand the issue and , therefore , should not be allowed full democracy .
I would just appeal to Members of this House to consider the irony of the similarity between that argument and the one that was trotted out in the aftermath of the French , Dutch and Irish ' no ' votes .
In this Chamber again , we kept on hearing that people had not properly understood the question , that they had really been voting on something else - against Mr Chirac , or against Turkish accession , or against Anglo-Saxon liberalism - and that they had not understood the issue and that they needed better information .
I believe that people , whether in Tibet or in the nations of the European Union , do have an understanding of their wishes and desires , and they should be allowed to express that through the ballot box .
I know I am getting as tedious as Cato the Elder , but he was eventually listened to , and I will repeat , as I have in every speech , that we should have a referendum on the Lisbon Treaty .
Pactio Olisipiensis censenda est !
Written explanations of vote
Mr President , Italy is suffering a real brain drain .
This exodus of researchers , year on year , is becoming a definite trend .
The Nobel Prize winner for medicine , Renato Dulbecco , said that those who want to carry out research are leaving as they have done in the past , and for the same reasons .
They leave because there are no career prospects , suitable salaries or funds for research , and the doors to research centres are barred because , as well as lacking funds , they lack the organisation to receive new groups and develop new ideas .
Italian researchers are leaving due to the absence of infrastructure , above all in the field of science and technology , the lack of funding , the laughable salaries and a selection system that discourages the best candidates and rewards recommendations .
They are leaving and they are complaining , because the basic preparation provided by our universities is excellent .
All the rest is lacking , however .
I agree that Member States need to ensure open , transparent , competition-based recruitment of researchers based on scientific merit .
Merit should be measured in terms of scientific excellence and scientific production ( publications ) .
However , other important aspects should also count as merits in a researcher 's career : innovation capacity , research management skills , training and supervision skills and collaboration with industry .
I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution because I agree with the idea that Europe needs more researchers .
This report is very important because , amongst other things , it urges Member States to improve existing career opportunities for young researchers , for example , through better funding and promotion based on achievements , such as innovation capacity , training periods in companies etc . , rather than on seniority .
in writing . - Deputy Locatelli 's report is part of the review of the Lisbon Strategy to make Europe 's economy the most competitive in the world by 2010 , and central to this is the position of researchers in Europe .
Four priority areas were identified where progress is essential namely
Open Recruitment and Portability of Grants ,
Social Security and Pensions ,
Attractive Employment and Working Conditions and
Training and Skills of researchers ;
These areas deal with mobility , transparency , publicity and support to researchers and potential researchers .
Tying education , innovation and research into a coherent supportive policy is a vital part of a functioning knowledge economy .
Our efforts to combat ' brain drain ' and establish a ' brain network ' will be enhanced by proposals which minimise bureaucratic obstacles and increase social security support for researchers .
As Rapporteur on EU ETS I am only too well aware of the critical role of research and the need to nurture the talent and minds available to solve the considerable climate challenges with which we are faced .
I am pleased to acknowledge the introduction of an Innovation Alliance between UCD and TCD in Ireland , which is a fine example of investing in researchers at the beginning of their careers .
Despite current events clearly showing that the neoliberal Lisbon Strategy is one of the instruments responsible for the worsening economic and social situation in the European Union , the report insists on its application , with which we disagree .
However , there are positive aspects in the report , which we support , particularly with regard to meeting the needs of researchers , their rights in terms of working and social security conditions , reunification of families , rights of female researchers and access for young researchers , and the call for increased funding for research and the involvement of a greater number of researchers .
However , it is not clear how the proposed European research strategy will guarantee equal rights in all Member States and universal access for researchers , particularly young researchers , to the European Partnership for Researchers , especially in countries such as Portugal , which is not at the heart of political decision-making in a European Union that is increasingly being managed by the major powers .
That is why we abstained from voting on the report .
Mr President , does an academic career depend on mobility ?
To a certain extent , it does .
One could say that mobility , especially in the case of young researchers , can have a significant influence on their future achievements .
That is because it facilitates access to new information and allows them to overcome the limitations of the environment in which they have been educated .
However , that is not all .
An academic career begins earlier , in secondary school , where youngsters build the basis of their general knowledge , especially in maths and science .
The next stage involves higher education and graduate and doctoral studies .
It is , and here I speak on the basis of my own experience , at the initial stage of a young person 's academic career , that mobility , easy access to research facilities and an interesting and promising topic pursued under the supervision of outstanding researchers is most important to these young people , more so than their future retirement pension .
Thus , the most important step towards obtaining scientific research staff involves preparing the right conditions for this kind of study , within the framework of the European Technological Institute or the European Research Infrastructure , for example , including the support provided by PhD grants that are open to EU students and students from third countries , and which are widely publicised .
The conditions we provide , in terms of family and professional stability , will determine whether young people , once they obtain their doctorates , go into industry or academic institutions , and whether they go back to their home countries or travel further .
When a student is looking towards a career in research , physical mobility must be promoted as an educational experience which cannot be replaced by virtual mobility .
We must ensure that the most brilliant minds receive sufficient finances and human resources to support them .
For some , this might mean having access to resources beyond the borders of their country of origin .
The benefits ( for example , value added ) associated with the mobility of students , lecturers and researchers must be promoted and publicised .
Administrative and structural barriers must be removed .
Scholarships and loans should be available to students and researchers , along with other incentive measures for both individuals and institutions .

The globalisation policy must take into account the following factors : the vital importance of researchers with international experience ; real linguistic opportunities ; the need to offer all students going to be future researchers the chance to obtain a number of foreign language credits , irrespective of their specialist field ; good quality ; and information telling them about the opportunities for study and research abroad .


in writing . - ( EL ) The report on a European partnership for researchers seeks to strengthen the competitiveness of the EU in relation to the other imperialist centres , limit the ' drain ' of researchers and attract researchers from developing countries .
It promotes the free movement of researchers between states , the public and private sectors , companies , research centres and universities , greater cohesion between the private and public sectors in the field of research , the absolute subjugation of science to the market 's temporary technological requirements and the orientation of researchers towards applied research , recognising previous experience as a corporate researcher as a formal qualification .
The introduction of ' research forms ' in order to select researchers from a scientific institution or university in another Member State and the mobility of researchers and senior company executives will help big business to select the crème de la crème of researchers and staff its companies on terms which will boost its profitability ( flexible terms of employment , unpaid work , exemption from insurance contributions ) .
These arrangements also encompass PhD students , who carry out the lion 's share of research activities .
We voted against the report , because researchers must work under stable terms of employment , in institutions which are not competing for ' predominance ' , but which cooperate in order to develop science and serve modern grassroots requirements , not the plutocracy and the profits of big business .
To help make up for the lack of research staff , it is necessary to facilitate the return of European scientists who work outside the European Union and also facilitate the entry of scientists from third countries who want to work in the EU .
Women continue to be under-represented in most areas of science and technology and in positions of responsibility .
It is therefore important , in my view , to call on the Member States to ensure a better gender balance in the bodies responsible for hiring and promoting research staff .
It is essential to make the selection and promotion processes open and transparent .
To create a single employment market for researchers , it is also important to define and establish a single European career model in the field of research , and also to introduce an integrated system for information on offers of employment and trainee contracts in the field of research throughout the EU .
With regard to improving mobility , I would like to point out that , to facilitate exchanges with men and women scientists from third countries , including those with which there is already substantial scientific cooperation , as may be the case with certain Latin American countries , it is crucial to introduce a special , faster and less bureaucratic visa policy .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , I voted in favour of Mrs Locatelli 's report on a European partnership for researchers .
As a university lecturer , I understand that Europe needs more researchers in order to improve its productivity and competitiveness , especially in light of competition from other large economies at world level such as the United States and Japan , as well as other developing economies like India and China .
For this reason , therefore , I agree with the rapporteur 's call for Member States to ensure open , transparent , competition-based recruitment of researchers based on scientific merit .
Mr President , I voted in favour .
New technologies have now transformed our lives , and leisure activities are by no means excluded from this process .
Video games are now the favourite recreational activity of young people in Europe and beyond .
Many video games are in fact aimed at adults , with content that is in many cases unsuitable for children .
Taking account , therefore , of the Commission Communication of 22 April 2008 on the protection of consumers , in particular minors , in respect of the use of video games , there is an urgent need to regulate labelling and use measures such as providing a ' red button ' or the PEGI online system , included in the European Safer Internet programme .
It is also important for Member States to continue to work in close collaboration to promote the protection of children and to help the industry to develop systems that serve this purpose .
We must not overlook the fact that to achieve this objective we also need to gain the support of manufacturers and above all parents , who are the primary instruments of control within the family .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the Manders report on the protection of consumers , in particular minors , in respect of the use of video games .
I did so with some slight reluctance .
The danger is that a justifiable concern in some cases turns into a ' moral panic ' that is wilfully disproportionate to the extent of the problem .
I am not necessarily committed to moving further than we have done so already .

in writing . - ( SV ) This report contains a whole series of requirements on what Member States are to do to limit the harmful use of video games : schools should inform children and parents of the advantages and disadvantages of video games ; parents should take measures to avoid negative consequences when their children play video games ; Member States should explore the merit of introducing a ' red button ' to install on game devices and computers to block access to certain games ; national information campaigns for consumers should be conducted ; owners of Internet cafes should prevent children from playing games that are intended for adults ; a special pan-European code of conduct for retailers and producers of video games should be introduced ; and Member States should introduce civil and criminal legislation on the retailing of violent television , video and computer games .




Video games for minors are associated with many disturbing cultural and social problems .
However , it is precisely for this reason that Member States need to arrive at solutions that suit their own culture and values in order for them to have a democratic basis within the Member States ' own populations .
Lectures from EU institutions have almost the opposite effect .
Member States ' ability to find different ways forward with regard to this issue is also important in order to broaden our experience and knowledge in this field .
For these reasons , I voted against this report in the final vote .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to talk about the video games industry , which has annual revenues of almost EUR 7.3 billion .
As video games are becoming more popular both with children and adults , it is important to have a political debate about their regulatory framework .
There are some video games which help to develop dexterity and to obtain knowledge essential to life in the 21st century .
However , I would like to point out that video games with violent features which are intended for adults can have negative effects , particularly on children .
It is therefore our duty to protect consumers , especially children .
Children should not be able to purchase video games that are not intended for their age group .
The introduction of the Pan-European Information System on Games , which classifies age , has helped to increase transparency in the purchasing of games for children , but retailers still do not have enough information on the harmful effects of video games on children .
At this point it is essential to raise awareness of these negative effects on children and it is necessary to have the cooperation of producers , retailers , consumer organisations , schools and families .
Member States must introduce measures that will prevent children from buying video games intended for older age groups .
At the same time I welcome the proposal of the European Commission and the Council concerning rules for labelling video games and the creation of a voluntary code of practice for interactive video games that are intended for children .
I voted in favour of Mr Manders 's own-initiative report , which focuses particular attention on the topic of video games .
The video games market is a fast-growing global market .
However , video games are no longer targeted only at children as an ever-increasing number of them are designed specially for adults .
This is precisely why the content of many games is unsuitable and may even be harmful to our children .
It is true that video games can be used for educational purposes , but only on the condition that they are used according to their intended purpose for each age group .
For this reason , we must pay particular attention to the PEGI system for rating games .
The PEGI online version provides assistance to parents and minors , offering both tips on how to protect minors and miscellaneous information about online games .
The report also emphasises the need for Member States to ensure that adequate control measures are implemented with regard to online purchases of video games , thereby preventing minors from accessing games with content which is not appropriate for their age , intended for adults or another age group .
The rapporteur also suggests developing a ' red button ' which offers parents the opportunity to disable a game with content not appropriate for the child 's age or restrict minors ' access between certain hours .
Despite warnings from experts , parents underestimate the effect of computer games on the development of their children 's personalities .
Meanwhile children and young people are exposed for hours at a time to the effects of aggressive or sexual content in computer games .
Children imitate the games which can lead to tragic results .
The street criminals of the future will be just one outcome of the influence of aggressive games on behaviour , psychology and late-manifesting habits .
I am therefore promoting the creation of a code of ethics for retailers and producers of video games .
In contrast to the rapporteur , of course , I believe that we need not only voluntary but also binding common rules in the EU .
Therefore , with this reservation , I have voted for the report .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , I voted in favour of the Manders report on the protection of consumers , in particular minors , in respect of the use of video games .
I believe that playing video games is very important for educational reasons .
There is , nonetheless , a huge amount of software that is aimed at adults and is characterised by an almost gratuitous use of violence .
For this reason we must provide adequate protection for children , including by preventing them from gaining access to potentially harmful content that is aimed at a different age group .
Lastly , I believe that standardising the labelling of video games will lead to a better understanding of labelling systems , while at the same time promoting the effective operation of the internal market .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , I voted in favour .
Israel is an important partner for the European Union in the Middle East and in the context of the European Neighbourhood Policy .
A Community-level aviation agreement would establish a level playing field for all Community and Israeli air carriers and would allow passengers in all Member States to benefit from similar conditions and increased competition between air carriers .
That may lead to more , cheaper and better air services between the EU and Israel .
It is for the EU to ensure the implementation of common standards compatible with European legislation in its relations with the Mediterranean partners .
This is only possible through a comprehensive agreement negotiated at Community level which provides for regulatory cooperation or , as a minimum , mutual recognition of aviation standards and procedures .
I therefore regard the comprehensive negotiation with Israel as a fundamental step towards further development of EU-Israeli aviation relations and the extension of the Common Aviation Area in the Euromed Area .
The conclusion of the agreement will result in increasing opportunities of economic and social development for the air carriers and passengers as well .
in writing . - I do not understand how a Parliament that has called for the lifting of Israel 's economic blockade of Gaza can today have voted in favour of a report intended to increase our cooperation with that country .
Last Tuesday was a fairly typical day at the Gaza crossings .
Israel allowed through a limited amount of food , some hygiene products , some cooking oil , and some heavy diesel fuel , in all a total of 110 truckloads - although UNRWA tells us that the Gaza Strip needs 500 truckloads of supplies each day .
No writing paper for the schools was allowed through , no clothing , no furniture , no electrical equipment , and no materials for reconstruction .
Gaza has been bombed to bits and Israel is not allowing it to be rebuilt .
The misery continues .
Our President has visited , Javier Solana has visited , national MPs have visited , MEPs have visited , even Tony Blair has visited .
All have called for an end to the suffering , yet Israel has changed nothing .
This was not the time for us to give our support to this report .
in writing . - I abstained on the final vote on the EC-Israel aviation agreement as a mark of protest with regard to the ongoing crisis in Palestine .
I believe that it is inappropriate to upgrade relations with Israel until such time as it displays concerted efforts to alleviate the suffering of Palestinian residents and engages in sustained political dialogue to reach a two-state solution to the region 's problems .
in writing . - ( EL ) We consider it unacceptable to debate and for the European Parliament to propose agreement with Israel on the creation of a Common Aviation Area between the EU and Israel while the slaughter of the Palestinian people in the murderous war unleashed against it by the Israeli Government in the Gaza Strip is still fresh .
The proposal for such an agreement confirms the criminal responsibility of the EU which , with its hypocritical stance of sitting on the fence , is basically rewarding and strengthening Israel and the new war which it has unleashed and which has caused a huge humanitarian disaster among the Palestinian people , the death of more than 1 300 Palestinians , the overwhelming majority of whom were civilians , children and women , injury to over 5 000 people and the total destruction of civil infrastructures in Gaza , including schools and the UN premises .
It also supports Israel 's intention to flatten dozens of houses in East Jerusalem , uprooting more than 1 000 Palestinians in yet another bid to evict the Palestinian people from Jerusalem and making it even harder to find a solution to the Middle East .
Actions such as this give overall support to the imperialist policy in the area , which forms part of the imperialist designs of the EU , the United States and NATO in the Middle East in general .
However , the people are strengthening their solidarity and their fight at the side of the Palestinian people for an independent , territorially united Palestinian state within the 1967 borders , with its capital in East Jerusalem .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , I have voted in favour of my report on developing a Common Aviation Area with Israel .
It would be superfluous for me to repeat here the reasons that led to my vote of approval .
It goes without saying that these reasons are to be found in the report itself .
in writing . - I voted against because due to the precarious nature of the stocks there should be a ban on the fishing of bluefin tuna until the stocks recover .
in writing . - I strongly support this Resolution which calls for an immediate ceasefire by the Sri Lankan army and the LTTE in order to allow the civilian population to leave the combat zone .
It condemns all acts of violence and intimidation which are preventing civilians from leaving the conflict area .
It further condemns the attacks on civilians as documented by the International Crisis Group .
Both sides must respect international humanitarian law and protect and assist the civilian population in the combat zone , as well as in the safe zone .
The European Parliament is also concerned about reports of serious overcrowding and poor conditions in the refugee camps established by the Sri Lankan Government .
We have demanded that international and national humanitarian organisations , as well as journalists , be granted full and unhindered access to the combat zone and to the refugee camps and we call on the Sri Lankan Government to cooperate with countries and aid organisations that are willing and able to evacuate civilians .
in writing . - I welcome today 's resolution on Sri Lanka .
What is happening in the north of the country is a tragedy , largely hidden from the eyes of the world , as humanitarian organisations and journalists have not been freely allowed in to see what is happening but have to rely largely on partisan information .
Even before the Government 's military action , it has been impossible for there to be an open debate , due to press and political harassment .
There can be no long-term military solution to the conflict but only a political solution which recognises the rights of all people on the island .
There must be an immediate ceasefire on both sides to relieve the enormous human suffering .
If the interests of the Tamil people come first , as both sides claim , why is this continuing suffering necessary ?
What purpose does it serve in finding a long-term solution ?
Peace talks must involve all parties .
The channels will be open for dialogue , if that is what both parties want .
But there must be an end to violence and oppression and active implementation of human rights instruments and the rule of law if people are to have any confidence in the outcome .
The international community stands ready to assist , both in the relief of the immediate suffering and in the long term .
On 9 September 2006 , 5 February 2009 and last night we held debates in this House about the permanent and hopeless conflict between the Tamils and the Sinhalese on the island of Sri Lanka .
I participated in all these debates .
In so doing , I have always called for us not to take sides in this conflict but for us , instead , to play our part in getting both sides to agree a peace treaty .
Under all circumstances such a treaty must deliver a self-governing Tamil region in the north-east of the country .
Last night , Mr Tannock and Mr Van Orden argued for the complete opposite .
They make reference to atrocities by the Tamil resistance movement and want to offer all possible support to the Sinhalese Government .
This attitude overlooks the fact that both sides make use of unacceptable violence and that it was the government that broke off the peace process established by the Norwegians .
I am pleased that a resolution has been adopted today incorporating most of the amendments tabled by Mr Evans and calling for humanitarian aid , mediation and a peaceful resolution to the conflict .
in writing . - ( DE ) The Sri Lankan army is acting with the most brutal severity in its war against the Liberation Tamil Tigers of Ealam ( LTTE ) with absolutely no regard for civilians .
Civilians are constantly being killed or wounded in attacks by this army .
Hundreds of thousands are confined and many have no access to humanitarian aid .
The International Committee of the Red Cross has described it as one of the most catastrophic situations they have ever experienced .
An immediate cessation of all fighting on both sides , that of the Sri Lankan army and that of the LTTE , is needed .
All international organisations and governments should demand this .
In the Committee on Foreign Affairs , the British Conservative Mr Tannock , representing the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , gained acceptance for his demand for a ' temporary ceasefire ' .
This would have supported the brutal war policy of the Sri Lankan government and given clearance for attacks on civilians .
I voted in favour of the resolution , because , thankfully , the majority of the European Parliament , including the PPE-DE Group , did not ultimately follow the inhumane policy of Mr Tannock and the British Conservatives and voted in favour of the demand for an immediate ceasefire .
By placing the LTTE on the EU list of terrorist organisations , the EU positioned itself on one side and gave the LTTE de facto clearance for carrying on the shootings .
As a result , the negotiations under way at the time under Norwegian mediation were blown out of the water and could only be continued with great difficulty outside the EU .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , I agree with the motion for a resolution on the deteriorating humanitarian situation in Sri Lanka , and therefore voted in favour of its adoption .
In my opinion , given the emergency situation of an estimated 170 000 civilians who are trapped in the battle zone between the Sri Lankan army and the forces of the Liberation Tamil Tigers of Ealam ( LTTE ) without access to the most basic aid , an immediate temporary ceasefire by the Sri Lankan army and the LTTE is needed , in order to allow the civilian population to leave the combat zone .
I also believe that national and international humanitarian organisations should be granted access to the combat zone .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , I voted in favour .
As the old Indian proverb says , we do not inherit the earth from our parents ; we borrow it from our children .
The agricultural lands of southern Europe are crying out in warning .
They are suffering increasing environmental pressure with negative consequences such as disruption of the hydrogeological balance , rising sea levels and consequent soil salinisation , agricultural land loss , a reduction in biodiversity and greater vulnerability to fire , plant disease and animal disease .
It is thus clear that one of the priorities for agriculture must be to draw up a common plan of action , mainly through programmes aimed at preventing the deterioration of and protecting agricultural land .
Approaches to combating soil degradation must include a strategy for soil conservation by focusing greater attention on the maintenance of hydraulic systems used in agriculture and on afforestation programmes .
Dryland farming techniques , crop rotation , the use of appropriate genotypes and controlling evapotranspiration are also particularly important .
We must also provide training and refresher programmes for those working in the sector and the general public , with the dual aim of seeking specific solutions and raising user awareness of the need for a more sustainable use of natural resources and the land .
Soil deterioration is a problem which cannot be ignored .
I am therefore pleased with the initiative of drafting a report specially devoted to combating this problem .
Agriculture offers the best method for halting this phenomenon as long , however , as the pedoclimatic features are respected in the process .
However , as I have also highlighted through the amendments tabled and accepted by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , I believe that this report must be applicable throughout the whole of the European Union .
Unfortunately , climate change and soil deterioration are no longer isolated phenomena and our approach , therefore , must be consistent throughout the whole of the EU , based on the principle of solidarity .
As the rapporteur also emphasises , we not only need to recognise this problem of soil deterioration , but we also have to allocate the necessary financial resources to combat its adverse effects .
I am pleased that through the European Economic Recovery Plan EUR 500 million are being earmarked for actions involving adaptation to the new challenges of climate change .
However , these are short-term actions .
I think that the European Union needs an integrated , financially supported action strategy to prevent and combat the effects of climate change , especially soil deterioration .
I voted in favour of the motion for a European Parliament resolution on the challenge of deterioration of agricultural land in southern Europe , because I believe that the common agricultural policy guidelines must include instruments aimed at combating the effects of climate change and protecting the soil .
I must stress the importance of creating a European observatory on drought and reinforcing the EU 's coordinated reaction to fires .
The approach taken by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats of rejecting various proposals in this report in order to get its alternative proposal accepted , which we reject , is regrettable .
Despite various inadequacies , we agree with many aspects contained in the tabled report , in particular that agriculture is the best means of preventing soil deterioration and requires a reasoned strategy to maintain this activity .
We also regard as vital the contribution made by the agricultural population to combating desertification and the pivotal role played by producers in preserving plant cover in regions affected by persistent drought .
We also agree with the statement on the negative contribution of intensive agriculture , promoted to a large extent by agro-industry , to soil erosion , rendering it non-productive .
However , we believe that the report should have gone further in attributing responsibility to the EU 's agricultural policies and governments , such as those in Portugal , because it is these policies that have encouraged over-exploitation of soil and water and caused environmental damage .
We still believe that these problems can be overcome by breaking with these agricultural policies .
We support the coupling of agricultural aid to production , allowing the agri-foodstuffs production of countries such as Portugal to grow and , in general , allowing its primary sector to modernise .
in writing . - ( SV ) This report , which does not form part of any legislative process , recommends , among other things , an EU forestry policy , a specific EU fund to finance preventive actions in connection with climate change and an EU-funded observatory for drought and the like .
We believe that the environmental responsibility for agricultural land must rest , first and foremost , with the Member States .
There is no reason to declare the Member States to be incapacitated in this way in this area .
As usual , the June List observes that , in this situation , it is fortunate that the European Parliament does not have powers of codecision in respect of the EU 's agricultural policy .
Otherwise , the EU would fall into the trap of protectionism and of increasing subsidies to various special interests within agriculture .
I have voted against this report .
Climate change is accelerating the processes of soil deterioration and desertification , especially in the Member States in south-east Europe , including Romania .
This is the reason why these phenomena must be dealt with in a coordinated manner , through consistently reviewing agricultural policies and exchanging experiences and good practice between Member States , under the coordination of the European Commission .
I firmly believe that there are numerous examples showing effective management of soil and water and the use of resistant crops which can regenerate the soil .
There are specialist research institutes in this field , including one actually located in the county which I represent in Romania , Dolj .
Sharing these experiences and extending their application to the areas affected by desertification can result in damaged lands being restored to agricultural use and , consequently , in stimulating production .
The pilot project proposed for the 2009 Community budget is , in fact , an opportunity to do this .
I support the rapporteur 's proposal to set up a European Centre for Drought Monitoring .
I call on the European Commission to deal with this issue with the utmost responsibility as part of the CAP reform and to provide Member States with an effective set of financial instruments which support the fight against desertification in order to ensure sustainable agriculture and food security for Europe 's citizens .
I welcome the report from our fellow Member , dealing with a subject which is extremely important from a social and economic perspective .
Soil deterioration not only affects the lives of people living in the relevant regions , but also the potential for economic development .
In Romania we have seen in recent years the damage which can be caused by this phenomenon : ruined houses and people left without the basic necessities to ensure their subsistence , a fall in agricultural production of up to 30-40 % and a southern region at risk of desertification .
The economic impact of this phenomenon is indisputable : a fall in the incomes of citizens who live in the affected regions , along with a rise in food prices .
This is the reason why the European Union has the obligation , based on the principle of solidarity , to contribute to the fight against this phenomenon and to supporting those affected by it .
As I also suggested in written declaration 0021 / 2009 , which I tabled with colleagues of mine , the EU needs a special financial mechanism to prevent and combat the effects of climate change .
This must be a flexible financial mechanism to help release funds in the shortest time possible , supported by a medium- and long-term strategy and action plans which take account of the varied impact of climate change on the EU 's regions .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , I welcome Mr Aita 's report on the challenge of deterioration of agricultural land in the EU and the response through EU agricultural policy instruments .
Indeed , I approve of the report 's aim , which is to set out pointers , ideas and practical proposals for consideration in due course with a view to formulating a common strategy for the recovery , conservation and improvement of agricultural soils .
Given the current crisis , it should be pointed out that soil protection is a means of safeguarding our production potential , which is of political and strategic importance , of maintaining an import-export balance and of ensuring a degree of autonomy and negotiating leeway in multilateral forums .
in writing . - It is important in this time of financial and economic crisis that we maintain and strengthen workers ' rights to ensure that the costs of the crisis do not fall on those least able to bear it .
It would be all too easy for this to happen unless we ensure that the balance of forces is not allowed to shift to favour employers over employees .
I therefore support this resolution .
I only wish it were stronger .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on employees ' participation in companies with a European statute .
We also need to facilitate constructive dialogue between institutions and employees in light of the recent rulings of the European Court of Justice .
Furthermore , I agree with the point expressing the need for the Commission to assess crossborder problems with regard to corporate governance , tax law and employees ' financial participation in shareholding programmes related to this consultation .
I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution because I support this initiative which calls on Member States to devise cooperation mechanisms aimed at preventing the detrimental effects on families , especially children , of living apart from their parents and of the distances between them .
in writing . - ( FR ) This text on migrant children left behind in the country of origin describes a poignant situation of children left to their own devices or with more or less well-intentioned third parties , threatened with ill-treatment or subject to psychological problems or problems with their education , socialisation and so on .
This proves that immigration is a human drama which creates inhuman situations .
Everything must be done to put this right , to promote the unity of families in familiar cultural and social environments .
In a word , and this is the only solution , everything must be done to reverse the immigration flows , to dissuade those who are tempted to leave their country , to promote development and ensure that families are reunited only in the countries of origin .
This is how you should use the resources that you have dedicated to ' importing ' or acclimatising to Europe the people who are attracted by the mirages that you maintain .
in writing . - ( FR ) It is a known fact that Europe wants to take care of everything and be everywhere .
With this resolution on migrant children left behind in the country of origin , the European Parliament has reached the height of madness with proposals which are not only demagogic , but also aim at turning the Member States into the guilty parties .
We are told that the Union has paid insufficient attention to the phenomenon of children left behind in their countries when their parents migrate .
The Member States should implement measures aimed at improving the situation of these children left behind and guarantee them normal development , in terms of their education and social life .
It is like being in a dream !
After the measures encouraging the reuniting of families in the receiving countries and right of abode for the families themselves , now it is time for measures for the children who do not migrate .
The problem of immigration will not be solved like this .
The logic is wrong .
It is not the children who stay behind who should be helped ; it is the families and the entire populations from these countries who should be helped and encouraged to stay at home .
in writing . - ( SV ) As the barriers across borders within the EU disappear , the opportunities to seek work in an EU Member State other than one 's own increase .
This is a very positive development , which gives people the chance to do something themselves to improve their own lives and those of their families .
The rapporteur admits this , but nevertheless chooses stubbornly to concentrate on the negative aspects that the absence of a parent seeking an income abroad can entail .
I feel that it is unreasonable for the European Parliament to direct the individual Member States ' social and education policy in the intrusive way proposed .
We need to show our respect for , and trust in , the Member States and their democratically elected assemblies to look after their people and their people 's welfare by themselves .
I have therefore voted against this resolution .
I voted in favour of this European Parliament resolution to improve the situation of children left behind in the country of origin by their parents who have gone to work abroad .
However , I would like to emphasise that it is not enough to make a commitment in this respect .
We need concrete measures to ensure these children 's normal development in terms of health , education and social life , and guarantee their successful integration into society and , later on , into the labour market .
For example , national authorities must develop a series of educational programs specifically to deal with this problem .
Not only children should benefit from programmes of this type , but their migrant parents too .
The latter must also be involved in information and empowerment programmes which tell them about the adverse effects that going to work abroad has on family life , especially on their children .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , following Mr Andersson 's oral question , I will vote in favour of the motion for a resolution on migrant children .
Indeed , labour migration has steadily increased over the past decades , and most of the world 's migrants - 64 million - reside in Europe .
Furthermore , I believe that migration can have a positive impact on households in the sending country , because through remittances and other channels it reduces poverty and increases investment in human capital .
I therefore agree that we must ask Member States to take steps to improve the situation of the children left by their parents in the country of origin and ensure their normal development in terms of education and social life .
I voted in favour of the motion for a European Parliament resolution on migrant children left behind in the country of origin as I feel that the situation of these children must be significantly improved .
Every child has the right to a complete family and an education so that they can develop harmoniously .
I feel that we must support these children as they represent the future of Europe and the European Union .
in writing . - We have to do all we can to help children of immigrants fulfil their potential and flourish in their new environment .
in writing . - ( SV ) The June List is very positively disposed towards future enlargements of the European Union .
However , it is of the utmost importance that the candidate countries de facto meet the requirements laid down and are thereby fully democratic states governed by the rule of law on accession .
The Copenhagen criteria must be met , the legislation that we agree on must not only be introduced but also upheld in practice and legal certainty must be guaranteed .
The three countries that we have discussed today certainly have the potential to be Member States in the future , but it is important that we do not ease up on the requirements .
Experience shows that progress is most rapid before membership negotiations are initiated and goes more slowly during the negotiations , particularly if these negotiations are perceived to be heading towards a successful outcome .
I voted for the resolution on the Croatia progress report for 2008 and I am delighted that this resolution has been adopted in the EP by a large majority .
The resolution praises the fine results achieved by Croatia in 2008 in passing laws and carrying out the reforms necessary for obtaining EU membership .
These results must be constantly reinforced through the adoption and implementation of reforms .
I believe that the border dispute between Slovenia and Croatia will be successfully resolved thanks to the personal involvement of Commissioner Rehn , to the satisfaction of both sides , so that rapid progress can be made in the negotiation procedure for accession .
Of course , for a successful result it is necessary to have a consensus and in particular the good will of the Governments of Slovenia and Croatia to find a satisfying and sustainable solution .
And we must not consider only Croatia in this resolution .
We must not forget the pioneering role of Slovenia which to a significant extent started the pro-European process in the Balkans .
Slovenia was the first Balkan country to join the EU and the Schengen area , it has become a member of the Eurozone and it is an example and an inspiration to other Balkan countries .
I believe that the accession talks with Croatia will be completed by the end of 2009 .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , I do not agree with the motion for a resolution on the progress made by Croatia , and have therefore voted against it .
As I have said many times before this House , I do not believe that Croatia has made sufficient progress .
Let them give back what they stole from our Istrian and Dalmatian refugees from 1947 onwards .
Then , and only then , will we be able to discuss Croatia 's accession to the European Union .
The dispute over the property of those expelled from Istria , Rijeka and Dalmatia , if not definitively settled , will in fact make dialogue between the two peoples impossible .
I value all efforts , including action taken by both Croatia itself and by the European Union , to strengthen existing relations between the two partners .
I would encourage further cooperation and the joint resolution of existing problems , particularly in view of the fact that the Croatian Government wants to address both the internal and bilateral problems it currently faces .
In the spirit of European solidarity , without any differences or barriers , we should assist them in this endeavour .
I voted in favour of the motion for a European Parliament resolution on Turkey 's progress report 2008 .
Given the slowdown in Turkey 's reform process , the Turkish Government must prove its political will to continue the reform process to which it committed itself in 2005 , towards a more democratic and pluralistic society .
in writing . - We favour the accession of Turkey to the European Union given that the country fulfils the Copenhagen criteria and that accession is supported by the Turkish population .
We regret , however , that we were not able to vote in favour of the progress report on Turkey voted today .
The report unfortunately comprises both serious lacks and misdirected demands .
For example , in paragraph 20 unreasonable demands are made of a democratic party .
In paragraph 29 , Turkey is encouraged to cooperate closely with the IMF , and in paragraph 31 the country is said to be obliged to conclude FTAs with third countries .
The report does not make sufficient reference to breaches of human rights or to the critical situation of national minorities , in particular the Kurds .
The Armenian genocide is not mentioned at all , which differentiates this report from earlier resolutions from Parliament .
in writing . - ( FR ) Once again , Parliament , completely hypocritically , has passed a resolution asking the Turkish Government to show its political will to pursue its reforms .
The truth is that you want , at any price , and against the wishes of the peoples of Europe , to continue the negotiations for Turkey 's accession to the European Union , despite Turkey 's continuing refusal to recognise Cyprus and despite the fact that the democratic reforms are at a standstill .
You should have offered Turkey a privileged partnership , but to do so you would have had to admit that Turkey is not a European state and , thus , has no place in the European Union .
It was high time to respect the opinion of the peoples of Europe , most of whom are strongly opposed to your fateful project and to give up the accession negotiations with Turkey once and for all .
I solemnly remind you that , at a time when the European nations are fighting fundamentalist networks and when , in France , our principle of secularism is challenged by the rise of militant Islamism on our soil , it is particularly dangerous to continue accession negotiations with a nation which is , without doubt , respectable but whose government defends a radical Islam .
in writing . - ( FR ) Like the previous reports on Turkey , the one by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten does not question the Euro-Brussels dogma that ' Turkey must accede to the European Union ' .
Thus Mr Sarkozy , once again betraying his election promises , opened two chapters of the accession negotiations while he was presiding over the European institutions .
However , our peoples reject the inclusion of this Asian country with a population that has become 99 % Muslim since the Armenian genocide and the disappearance of the other Christian communities .
This country is led by an Islamist party and its army is occupying the territory of the Republic of Cyprus , a member of the European Union .
They also remember that , over the centuries , the Turks have been the main threat to Europe .
It was only in the 19th century that the Greeks , Romanians , Bulgarians and Serbs cast off the Ottoman yoke .
The stubbornness of the Eurocrats in trying to give Turkey entry to Europe , as with their stubbornness in imposing the Treaty of Lisbon , shows the anti-democratic and anti-European nature of the Europe of Brussels .
On 7 June , our peoples will have the chance to express their will to build a new Europe : a Europe of European nations , free and sovereign .
Within this Parliament there are three points of view about the future accession of Turkey to the EU .
The first view , advocated by the former US president George W. Bush , is that accession is very desirable as Turkey can supply a lot of cheap labour and soldiers and is a loyal NATO member .
The second view is that the accession of Turkey will always be undesirable as the country is viewed as Asian , Islamic , too large and too dangerous .
We , and our group , have always supported a third view , which is that Turkey must be able to join the Union if desired .
This is important for the many Europeans of Turkish origin .
Before we get to that stage , the country must become a complete democracy , without political prisoners , without a prohibited media and without proscribed political parties .
The Kurdish language must be given equal rights in administration , education and the media , the high election threshold for the parliament of 10 % must be abolished and the Kurdish south-east must be given autonomy in a decentralised state .
The genocide of the Armenians in 1915 must no longer be denied , no more than the Germans can acceptably deny the genocide of the Jews between 1938 and 1945 .
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's report is much too weak in this regard .
For that reason , we are sad to say that we feel we must vote ' no ' .
Paragraph 45 of Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's report contends that the EU 's accession negotiations with Turkey should be expanded .
The Dutch People 's Party for Freedom and Democracy ( VVD ) has major objections to this .
In the VVD 's view , Turkey has made too little progress in recent years and there is therefore no reason to speed up negotiations .
The VVD believes , in fact , that Turkey must first adhere to a number of firm commitments .
If Turkey has not complied with these by the end of this year , the VVD is of the opinion that the accession negotiations must be put on hold .
It is our belief that this is not the time to be sending Turkey positive signals .
Instead , it is time for Turkey to send positive signals to the EU .
Despite our major opposition to paragraph 45 , the VVD delegation has decided to vote ' yes ' on the report as a whole , given that we do agree with the rest of the text .
in writing . - ( EL ) I voted in favour of Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's report as a whole .
However , I would like to expressly state that I disagree with and I am not bound by and therefore voted against Amendment 9 to paragraph 40 of the text , which was tabled initially by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and supplemented by the rapporteur .
The amendment is worded as follows : ' except for temporary transitional derogations ' ( referring to temporary transitional derogations from the four fundamental freedoms of the EU ) and is attached to the final text .
In explaining my vote , I would clarify that it is in no way binding on me and , as such , I do not endorse the amendment in question , because I consider that it is disrupting to the process of finding a democratic and European solution to the Cyprus problem .
I have supported this report , which describes in detail Turkey 's relations with the EU and the process required to obtain membership status .
Both I and those I represent strongly support Turkey 's candidature for the EU and not only because of the good relations between our countries .
We sincerely believe that the EU has a tremendous potential to effect change .
As citizens from East European Member States can confirm , acquiring a definite European perspective triggers a radical change in both internal public debate and in a country 's foreign policy options .
I strongly believe that once Turkey 's membership status becomes a question of ' when ' rather than ' if ' , it may be easier to resolve the tensions which are fuelling the current social polarisation .
This is precisely why the EU must give Turkey a clear signal regarding the completion of its accession procedure within a reasonable timeframe , which will provide the fillip required for the reform process and for cooperation on matters of common interest .
On the other hand , this reality does not alter the fact that , until then , the EU expects the Turkish authorities to assume continuously and without hesitation the role of partner and future EU member , including in its relations with relevant players in the Middle East and Eurasia .
As a social democrat , I voted in favour of this report in order to support Turkey in the accession process .
I urge the EU Commission and Council to accelerate the negotiation process , which includes opening an Energy chapter , especially in the current climate of the economic crisis and bearing in mind the important role which Turkey can play through its contribution to Europe 's energy security .
I also welcome the adoption in May 2008 by the Turkish parliament of the package of employment measures intended to promote employment opportunities for women , young people and the disabled .
However , I would like to express concern about the unfavourable state of the labour market , which offers jobs to only 43 % of the working population and , especially , about the fall in the general employment rate among women .
I support the requests made to the Turkish Government to continue to implement tangible measures aimed at consolidating the role of women in the political , economic and financial sectors , for example , through using temporary measures to ensure their active involvement in politics .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , I have voted against the 2008 progress report on Turkey .
The fact is that there are too many unresolved issues for us to claim that significant progress has been made on the accession negotiations , which began almost four years ago .
I refer to the situation of the Kurdish population , to capital punishment , which is still in force in Turkey , and to the cultural and religious issues that need to be addressed .
Under no circumstances can these be dealt with superficially or lightly .
I welcome the clear majority in favour of the resolution on Turkey .
We need to make it clear to the Turkish Government that the standstill in the reform process that has lasted for years has consequences .
Freedom of expression and freedom of the press , in particular , have suffered severe setbacks .
This is especially evident in the current behaviour of the Turkish Government towards the Doğan Media Group .
The ruinous fines being demanded on account of alleged tax evasion are disproportionate and are tantamount to censorship of the media .
No progress has been made with regard to religious freedom , despite the new Law on Foundations .
Religious minorities continue to be discriminated against and harassed .
I am pleased that my proposal to call on Turkey to retract its plans for the expropriation of the Monastery of St. Gabriel in Tur Abdin has been included in the motion for a resolution .
We are also demanding that Turkey complies with the EU 's ecological and environmental standards and respects the rights of the people affected in connection with the dams in the South-East Anatolia Project .
Rather than being on its way to meeting the Copenhagen criteria , Turkey is moving ever further away from our fundamental values .
Does the Turkish Government really want to set the Republic on a new democratic foundation ?
The court procedure against the AK Party and the mysterious Ergenekon proceedings present a picture of a deeply divided society that is neither willing nor able to meet the challenges presented by the European Union .
It is therefore time we finally started talking specifically about a privileged partnership between the EU and Turkey .
in writing . - While I support the main thrust of this report , I oppose the lack of balance on the particular question of Cyprus .
I strongly oppose Amendments 14 and 15 , which are directed exclusively against Turkey on several questions , including the fulfilment of international obligations , and make no equivalent calls for action or engagement on the part of the Greek or Greek Cypriot authorities .
During the Committee stage , my amendment rejecting the idea that resolution of the Cyprus question is to be achieved through unilateral action by Turkey was not accepted .
I called on the Council - as a preliminary step - to give practical effect to its commitment of 26 April 2004 to end the isolation of the Turkish Cypriot community .
Nevertheless , without abandoning my reservations , I voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( EL ) The Greek Communist Party voted against the motion for a resolution on the FYROM .
It has repeatedly voted against the integration of the FYROM and other countries into the EU for the same reasons that it is opposed to the integration of Greece .
The motion for a resolution calls for the integration of the FYROM into the EU to be speeded up so that it can be turned from a US / NATO protectorate into a Euro / US / NATO protectorate and quickly annexed to the EU .
The New Democracy , PASOK , SYRIZA and LAOS parties agree with this general line , focusing their ' differences ' on the question of the name of the FYROM , and have voted on this count against the report , which really is negative as far as the Greek positions are concerned , as it calls on them not to obstruct the integration of the FYROM into the EU .
The Greek Communist Party has voted against all the relevant reports , because it considers that the question of the name comes under the more general imperialist interventions in the Balkans and infighting between the imperialist powers .
That is why it has taken a stand on the inviolability of borders and the fact that there are no unredeemed or other claims .
There is no Macedonian ethnic minority .
The word Macedonia is a geographical term .
The New Democracy , PASOK , SYRIZA and LAOS parties , subscribing to the philosophy of the European one-way street , are concealing from the peoples of the Balkans the political expediencies of the EU , which deals with minorities on the basis of its interests .
The Greek Communist Party supports the united , anti-imperialist fight of the peoples of the Balkans and opposition to the US / NATO / EU policy .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , I have voted against the motion for a resolution on the progress made by the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia in 2008 .
We have come to the point at which we must decide whether to create a large common market , for which we must of course establish clear rules , or whether we want to create a Europe that is an expression of a single strong and sovereign identity .
For this reason , on the basis of the elements listed in the motion for a resolution , which I believe to be insufficient , I oppose the report .
I think that the EU institutions must continue to support the International Criminal Court in The Hague .
This court has tried many war criminals but , at the same time , we must also bear in mind the broader significance of its decisions , such as its contribution to the process of reconciliation between the peoples of the Western Balkans .
I want to draw your attention to the fact that some of the indictments or verdicts issued by the ICC in The Hague have been regarded as controversial in different regions of the Western Balkans .
Lessons can be drawn from these reactions , which form part of the ICC 's legacy .
These reactions highlight at the same time the need for an Appeals Chamber as well as an outreach programme .
Let us not forget , however , that many other war criminals have not yet been tried .
The EU institutions must support the investigations conducted at national level in the Western Balkan states .
The EU Council must set out clear norms for evaluating the performance of the judiciary in the countries in the region after the International Court 's term comes to an end .
Those responsible must be duly tried and punished , individually , based on their actions .
Justice must be applied in the same way for everyone .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report which will ensure that all those who committed War Crimes in the former Yugoslavia will not escape justice .
I support this report because it will extend the temporary ICTY which prosecutes those who committed war crimes in the former Yugoslavia by two years , ensuring enough time for the completion of ongoing trials .
I voted in favour of the European Parliament resolution on water in the light of the Fifth World Water Forum as I believe that we urgently need to devise global policies on water supply and management in order to achieve the Millennium Development Goals ( MDG ) .
These provide for the halving by 2015 of the proportion of people without access to safe drinking water .
However , the global financial crisis means that the Member States need to step up their support for the least developed countries , through public development aid and cooperation in adapting to and mitigating the effects of climate change .
Not even water can escape the privatising and liberalising zeal of the majority of the European Parliament .
The resolution is right when it says , albeit in the conditional , that ' water is a shared resource of mankind and that access to water should constitute a fundamental and universal right ' and that ' water is assumed as a public good and should be under public control ' .
However , what follows is serious and unacceptable .
It declares that , while water may be under public control , its management can be handed over ' partly or totally ' to the private sector .
This means keeping under public control the role of investment in collection and supply infrastructures , while giving the private sector the profitable role , namely the charging of consumers .
These experiments have already been conducted in several countries , particularly in Latin America , where prices have grown exponentially and quality has deteriorated .
We also do not agree with agriculture being held responsible , with agro-industry and small farmers being treated equally so that the latter suffer from high water prices .
As the capitalist crisis grows , water seems to be a tempting asset which can generate the profit that capital so greatly needs .
We continue to believe that water must be kept exclusively as a public good , in terms of both collection and supply .
in writing . - ( FI ) Mr President , I voted in favour of Mr Berman 's resolution for the Fifth World Water Forum .
The World Water Forum meets every three years and takes place next week in Istanbul .
It is an opportunity to discuss global policy solutions for managing water and water resources and preparing the groundwork for them .
Two years ago , I myself drafted a report on water management in the developing countries for the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly .
As is evident from Mr Berman 's resolution too , poor management is largely the reason why the world 's water situation is bad .
Support is needed , mainly to increase regional decision making and cooperation .
It is also obvious that the public sector cannot alone come up with the World Bank 's estimated USD 49 billion a year ( up until 2015 ) to develop water infrastructures .
To address the problems of water supply , a solution could be found to establish the funds needed by means of a partnership agreement between the public and private sectors , especially as state-owned companies are suffering from a dearth of funds and there is no chance of privatisation .
Nor should the importance of research be underestimated in finding a solution to water problems .
Adequate monitoring of , and investment in , subterranean water resources are also vital .
Like energy , water is becoming more and more a political issue , and there is going to be a massive struggle to ensure access to it .
There is an obvious need to make it a political priority before it is too late .
I voted against this resolution in the final vote .
I did so not because the report , overall , is not good , but because one element in it was so important , in my view , that I just could not bring myself to vote ' yes ' .
Water is not a tradable commodity ; it is a basic necessity of life , and something that everyone has a right to .
The use of water is not a choice for human beings , it is essential in order to stay alive and , for that reason alone , it is not appropriate to regard it as a commercial or economic commodity .
The provision of water must be , and remain , in public hands .
Past positions taken by the European Parliament have already made it clear that water is a right , and the wording of this report would weaken that stance .
in writing . - ( SV ) Water is a prerequisite for all life on Earth .
However , the responsibility for safeguarding access to this necessity does not rest on the EU 's shoulders .
It is through international cooperation within the framework of UN cooperation that the countries of the world should seek solutions to the problem of how to improve access to water .
Since the rapporteur 's proposal leads in a completely different direction , I have chosen to vote against the resolution .
Sustainable development cannot be imagined without the protection and proper management of the vital resource of WATER .
I wholeheartedly back points 15 and 16 of the resolution aimed at supporting local public authorities in their efforts to implement a democratic water management policy that is efficient , transparent , regulated and respectful of sustainable development objectives in order to meet the needs of the population .
I would like to join with the requests submitted to the Commission and Council to recognise the fundamental role played by local authorities in the protection and management of water , in order to make them accountable with regard to managing the water sector .
I regret the fact that the competences of local authorities are not utilised more by European cofinancing programmes .
In the case of Romania , which has been granted a transition period in this area until 2018 , it is vital that investments are speeded up , especially now when poor populations are the most vulnerable to climate change , as well as the least able to adapt to it .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , I have voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on the Fifth World Water Forum , to be held in Istanbul .
I firmly believe that water is one of humanity 's common resources and that it should be regarded as a fundamental and universal right .
Furthermore , I would argue that water should be proclaimed public property and placed under public control , regardless of the fact that it is managed wholly or partly by the private sector .
Lastly , I hope that systems of general water distribution subsidies , which undermine incentives for efficient water management by creating overuse , will be scrapped in order to free up funds for targeted subsidies in particular for poor and rural populations , aiming at affordable access for all .
in writing . - Water is a precious resource , and access to clean drinking water across the world has to be a key priority .
Too many people , in 2009 , in the developing world have no access to clean drinking water .
We have to focus our efforts in helping countries and communities in the poorest parts of the world have access to this resource .
in writing . - History is littered with wars over access to land and oil , but I fear they will pale into insignificance when compared to likely future conflicts over access to water .
Water is the most vital of all resources : life is impossible without it .
Yet even in developed countries we are seeing serious water shortages .
The consequences for less developed countries are catastrophic .
The international community must take access to water much more seriously before it is too late .
As we have seen in Copenhagen this week , climate change is accelerating at an alarming rate , which will further exacerbate water shortages .
Access to clean water is a basic human right , so let us make it a major campaign .
in writing . - I support this Resolution which brings forward specific recommendations for the European Commission to strengthen its support for health services in sub-Saharan Africa and to review the balance of the European Community funding with a view to prioritising health system support .
Half the population of sub-Saharan Africa is still living in poverty .
Indeed , Africa is the only continent that is not progressing towards the Millennium Development Goals ( MDGs ) , especially the three health-related MDGs - on infant mortality , maternal mortality and the fight against HIV / AIDS , tuberculosis and malaria - which are crucial to addressing poverty but at current progress are the least likely to be achieved by 2015 .
Basic healthcare infrastructure needs stable , long-term financial support if the health-related MDGs are to be delivered .
Indeed , this must include access to sexual and reproductive health services .
I voted to adopt the Resolution on an approach to health services in sub-Saharan Africa .
This part of Africa will not be able to develop without a real improvement in the health of its population .
The list of threats to health in this region is exceptionally long and well known , and the fact that these threats are real is most emphatically confirmed by the estimated life expectancy of the population .
Often , the average life expectancy in individual countries is similar to that in medieval Europe .
This fact is painful , regrettable and frustrating , but it should also motivate developed and wealthy countries to provide more intensive and more effective aid .
It is a good thing to be involved in projects that aim to save lives .
There is nothing more human and , at the same time , European .
Let us save those whose lives are threatened .
That is the least we can do .
in writing . - ( SV ) The rapporteur 's depiction of human suffering throughout sub-Saharan Africa is a terrible reminder of how important it is to continue , and to intensify , the fight against poverty .
The proposals presented by the rapporteur , however , are based entirely on the idea that the EU should play a leading role in the Member States ' aid policy .
We in the June List are opposed to this .
The EU must not carry out aid operations , nor should it try to influence the Member States ' activity in this area .
Aid is an area in which , unfortunately , our experiences are quite depressing .
It is therefore important to be able to experiment with new forms of aid .
Our own country , Sweden , is currently looking for new and interesting paths .
At this historic time , to repeatedly take away the Member States ' opportunities to think in new ways and to reform aid policy is utterly wrong .
The responsibility for aid is , and should remain , a matter for the Member States .
International cooperation with a view to finding solutions for improving health care in sub-Saharan Africa should , first and foremost , be sought within the framework of the United Nations , not the EU .
I have therefore voted against this resolution .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , I have voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on EC Development Assistance to Health Services in Sub-Saharan Africa .
EC aid to the health sector has not risen since 2000 in proportion to overall development assistance , despite the commitments made by the Commission on the Millennium Development Goals and the health crisis in sub-Saharan Africa .
For this reason , I believe it is right and necessary to make a joint commitment in order to see better results on health and to meet the health development targets agreed at international level .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , I have voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on implementation of the Single Euro Payments Area ( SEPA ) .
I think it is extremely important to support the creation of the SEPA , which is subject to effective competition and where there is no distinction between cross-border and national payments in euro .
Finally , I believe that the Commission , as stated in the proposal , should be called on to set a clear , appropriate and binding end-date , which date should not be later than 31 December 2012 , for migrating to SEPA products , after which date all payments in euro would have to be made using the SEPA standards .
in writing . - The EPLP wishes to see the Single European Payment area a success .
That is why we cannot support the amendments to this report which extend the life of the MIF ( multilateral interchange fee ) .
This fee is uncompetitive and raises costs for consumers .
This would undermine the thrust of the report 's objective of making sure the single market breaks down barriers and reduces costs .
We could not support this resolution in the final vote because these amendments were accepted .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , I voted in favour .
I support Mrs Koppa 's report on the importance of the EU-Brazil Strategic Partnership , since the partners share the same world view on the basis of their historical , cultural and economic ties .
Together they can encourage change and solutions at global level , for example by working closely to promote and implement the Development Goals in order to tackle poverty and economic and social inequalities at global level , by strengthening cooperation in the area of development aid , including triangular cooperation , and at the same time by working together to combat international terrorism , drug trafficking and crime .
Taking into account the central role played by Brazil in Latin American integration processes and the EU 's interest in reinforcing dialogue with that region , and that the EU welcomes the initiatives taken by Brazil to promote political and economic integration between Latin American countries , we agree that Brazil deserves recognition as a main promoter of the recently established Union of South American Nations ( UNASUR ) .
We must also acknowledge Brazil 's role as mediator in the resolution of regional conflicts in Latin America and the Caribbean , on the basis of respect for the principles of national sovereignty , non-interference and neutrality , with a positive effect on political stability in the region .
I voted in favour of this report .
Brazil was the last BRIC country to engage in a summit with the EU , which took place in July 2007 during the Portuguese Presidency .
It was therefore a natural reflection of the relations that Portugal has always maintained with Brazil .
As was said in this House in September 2007 , Brazil is a country whose 200 million inhabitants speak one of the most common European languages in the world , Portuguese , and whose historical , civilising and cultural traditions have a close relationship with European traditions .
This is proven by the various political agreements throughout history to the present day .
This relationship will help to build other bridges with Latin America .
Given Brazil 's recognised potential and its current economic and political performance at regional and global level , this Strategic Partnership must not be regarded as a future hindrance to other partnerships with Mercosur .
It should in fact be acclaimed as an example , in which the EU has obtained the necessary consensus on the common commercial and political interests .
It should be noted that both sides regard multilateral action as essential , based on the United Nations system and within the framework of the World Trade Organization .
Finally , I must say that I am somewhat curious about the future scope to be given to the cooperation protocols on education and culture .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , I have voted in favour of Mrs Koppa 's report on the European Union-Brazil Strategic Partnership .
The role of the partnership is of prime importance ; it should provide fresh impetus for the conclusion of the EU-Mercosur Association Agreement , which is itself an EU strategic objective for deepening economic and trade relations , as well as expanding political dialogue and cooperation , between the two regions .
In addition , the strategic partnership should be a tool to promote democracy and human rights , the rule of law and good governance at global level .
I voted for the proposal for a European Parliament recommendation to the Council on the European Union-Brazil Strategic Partnership because I feel that this is beneficial to both sides and can contribute to the development of ties between these two entities with the aim of promoting the common good in both areas and throughout the whole world .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , I voted in favour .
Given the fact that Mexico and the EU have maintained cooperation relations since the 1970s , I share the hope that this strategic partnership will represent a tool with which to strengthen cooperation between the partners in international forums such as the World Bank , the International Monetary Fund , the OECD and the G20 , the G8 and the G5 , in order to seek solutions to the world financial crisis and to formulate a common response aimed at restoring confidence in financial institutions , in line with the San Salvador Declaration .
Mexico 's geographical location gives it a strategic position as a ' bridge ' between North and South America and between the Caribbean and the Pacific .
It is hoped that this strategic partnership can institutionalise annual EU-Mexico summits and give fresh impetus to the EU-Mexico Global Agreement in various political spheres including human rights , security , anti-drug trafficking , the environment and technical and cultural cooperation .
In light of the Council resolution of 11 October 2007 on the murder of women ( feminicide ) in Mexico and Central America and the role of the European Union in fighting this phenomenon , we hope for more dialogue , more cooperation and the exchange of best practices .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , I welcome the report by Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra on an EU-Mexico Strategic Partnership .
It is indeed crucial that this strategic partnership should mark a qualitative leap in EU-Mexico relations both multilaterally in terms of issues of world importance and in strengthening the development of bilateral relations .
For this reason I have every confidence that this agreement will lead to closer coordination of positions on crisis situations and issues of world importance , on the basis of shared interests and concerns .
Lastly , I hope that it will be seen as an opportunity to debate how better to implement the clause on human rights and democracy , which are essential values in all the agreements and for both parties , and to evaluate compliance with it , including development of its positive dimension .
in writing . - The EU needs to take a greater interest in the increasing violence in Mexico created by drug wars .
The doubling in murders related to drug violence is a worrying situation .
in writing . - ( FR ) The worthy sentiments propounded by the different political groups , with the notable exception of the Communists ( and with just cause ) , is merely an echo of the political correctness spouted by the hippies of international show business .
The cause of Tibet , the real liberation struggle , has been throttled by the stranglehold of trendy Europeans short on spirituality .
It is a prime example of what not to do in internal and international policy .
The Members wish to condemn with the utmost politeness the exactions of the Chinese Communists whilst declaring themselves in favour of autonomy for a region which is not the historic Tibet .
The idea of autonomy for Tibet , the ' Save Tibet ' path , is just waving a leash in front of an impotent elite and a people which has been slaughtered , both spiritually and physically .
Tibet , like other oppressed nations , shows what happens when a Communist dictatorship is installed and the weapon of invasive immigration is used to prevent any going back , be it on a political , ethnic , cultural or spiritual level .
Tibet has without a doubt missed its chance of regaining its sovereignty by not keeping up the armed struggle following the exile of its leader .
The road to follow now is one of a fight for independence , for ' Free Tibet ' , and not one of slavery perpetuated under the guise of a paper ' autonomy ' .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , I wholeheartedly support the motion for a resolution on the 50th anniversary of the Tibetan uprising and dialogue between the Dalai Lama and the Chinese Government .
The abuse of power , wherever it might take place , must be condemned .
On the other hand , it has to be said that the Chinese Government has a moral obligation , among others , to release immediately and unconditionally all those detained solely for engaging in peaceful protest and to account for all those who have been killed or have gone missing , and all those detained , indicating the nature of the charges against them .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
The Minutes for yesterday have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
( FR ) Madam President , I ask the Members to allow me to take up a few minutes of their time .
I would like to speak on the subject of China .
There was a motion for a resolution for today on China , on the case of Mr Gao Zhisheng , a well-known lawyer who is under arrest .
There are fears that he will be tortured ; his family has just been allowed entry to the United States and there are fears for his life .
Unfortunately , though , as only three subjects may be dealt with , the motion relating to Mr Gao Zhisheng could not be included .
We did intend to move it in the March II session .
Now , we have been told that there will be no urgent matters in March II because , according to the rules , when there are two plenary sessions in the same month , there can be no urgent matters in the second .
I question this interpretation .
In fact , this interpretation refers to the double sessions in September and , prior to that , in October , during which the budget was discussed .
The fact that there are two sessions in March is due to the elections ; it is a totally exceptional case .
This means that we can only deal with human rights issues at the end of April , which is too late .
I therefore ask the Presidency , first , to examine this question and , secondly , to express our immense concern about the case to the Chinese embassy - I can provide you with Mr Gao Zhisheng 's case for this purpose - as nobody really knows his whereabouts and there are fears that he may be tortured and his life put in danger .
1 .
Guinea Bissau
The next item is the debate on six motions for a resolution on the situation in Guinea Bissau .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , once again , sadly , we are discussing in this House the situation of Guinea-Bissau , which is a truly painful situation .
It is a country that has known chronic instability for many years and that tried to take the road towards democracy at the beginning of the 1990s .
Nothing went right , there was a coup d 'état and a minor civil war , and it has since been in a situation of major political and military instability , tensions and deep rivalries .
Recently there has also been a very worrying presence of drug trafficking interests , which have become increasingly evident to all observers .
We strongly condemn the recent attacks : the bomb attack that killed the Chief of Staff , General Tagme Na Waie , and also the particularly barbaric , if not savage , assassination of President Nino Vieira .
Regardless of their past , we express our solidarity with their families and with the people of Guinea-Bissau and we regret and strongly condemn these attacks .
We want to see a return to normality .
The lesson that I have learnt and that I wanted to stress in this resolution was that impunity is not an answer .
In the past , with regard to the assassination of Ansumane Mané and General Veríssimo Seabra , how could we have closed our eyes to the fact that the perpetrators were not found and brought to justice ?
It is clear that this is not the answer .
We must therefore impress upon the government of Guinea-Bissau that those responsible must be found .
The guilty parties must be brought to justice and we have to provide all the assistance that is needed .
Finally , I also want to draw attention to our concern at the presence of drug trafficking throughout the region , the risk that this also poses to the European Union and its shocking presence , which is clearly evident , in Guinea-Bissau .
I also want to call for a closer relationship in this context with Cape Verde .
We have established a special partnership with Cape Verde , which has very close relations with and extensive knowledge of Guinea-Bissau , but which is also very vulnerable .
This is therefore also essential for our own European security .
As a result , the intensification of this special partnership with Cape Verde is also very important in this context .
author . - ( LT ) The killings in Guinea Bissau are a major blow not just to democracy in a state impoverished by drug trafficking , but to the whole West African region .
The assassination of the President and the army chief of staff pushed the country ever deeper into a quagmire of failing institutions , increasingly fragile democracy , growing corruption and personality cults .
The state 's inhabitants live in chaos and there is a shortage of water , medicine and schools .
Drug trafficking knows no limits or borders and is becoming a threat to the entire region , even reaching European Union states .
Although until now the commanders of the armed forces have kept their promise not to interfere in the country 's internal affairs , recent events may completely overwhelm what remains of democracy in Guinea Bissau .
The new government must respect the constitutional order , deal with conflicts peacefully and thoroughly investigate the murders .
With the assistance of the European Union 's Security and Defence mission , we must reach a turning point in the country 's development , offering stability and a decent life .
We must hope that presidential elections will take place in a few months and that they will comply with international standards for organising elections .
We call on European Union states and the entire international community to give Guinea Bissau the financial and expert assistance required to organise democratic elections .
Guinea Bissau 's opposing political forces should seek common ground and compromises at this difficult time for the state and urgently adopt decisions on the country 's security , election procedures and public administration .
We call on them to fight corruption more effectively and to consult with civil society and other organisations on internal reconciliation in the state .
Madam President , on 2 March of this year , the President of Guinea-Bissau , João Bernardo Vieira , was shot dead in an attack carried out by soldiers loyal to the army 's Chief of Staff .
The previous day , General Batista Tagme Na Waie , the army 's Chief of Staff , died after being injured in an explosion .
Both deaths are linked to the political conflict in Guinea-Bissau , which has been going on for many years and has led to tragedy and a lack of stability in the country .
Although the elections held in 2008 were peaceful , an initial assassination attempt took place shortly afterwards .
The President survived that attack .
Guinea-Bissau , a former Portuguese colony , is one of the poorest countries in the world .
At the same time , a cocaine-smuggling route passes through the country .
We condemn attempts to resolve conflicts by means of a coup d 'etat ; we call for presidential elections to be held in Guinea-Bissau within two months ; and we call for these elections to meet democratic standards and for constitutional order to be restored .
When the political situation in Guinea-Bissau is analysed , we should not forget that the people of this young African country were the victims of Portuguese colonialism , against which they in fact fought a very courageous struggle .
With regard to what is happening there , which we regret , in particular the assassinations of the President and the Chief of Staff , we cannot forget that this is the result of all the difficulties and all the divisions that have existed for years , and that still exist , and that stem from its colonial past .
We should also bear in mind that it is still one of the poorest countries in Africa , which means that the European Union must pay greater attention to cooperation in the areas of public health and education , in order to improve the living conditions of its population and overcome the difficulties that a large part of the Guinea-Bissau population still has to face , particularly women , mothers and children .
It is vital that the European Union reinforces its sympathetic support of these people .
We also need to support education , the safe supply of drinking water and , in some cases , even agricultural production to ensure that the whole population has access to food .
However , this support must be provided without external interference and with full respect for the sovereignty and choices of the people .
author . - Madam President , this poverty-stricken ex-colony has suffered decades of political instability and crisis , resulting in profound and prolonged suffering for its citizens .
Its transition to democratic rule and better times for its people appeared a promising prospect after the 2008 legislative elections were carried out in an apparently fair and peaceful manner .
However , the dark clouds of divisive hate and violence appeared again over the country after the shooting of President Vieira by renegade soldiers on 2 March , the day after the killing of the chief of the army .
We condemn both those murders , and we can only hope that the rival parties in Guinea-Bissau will find the necessary will and power to resolve their disputes through dialogue at the negotiating table for the sake of their citizens ' well-being .
In addition , as Guinea-Bissau has in recent years evolved into an important drug-trafficking country , we urge not only the country 's authorities but also the international community to do their utmost in fighting effectively this deadly curse .
author . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance strongly condemns the assassination of the President of Guinea-Bissau , João Bernardo Vieira , and the head of the armed forces , General Tagme Na Waie , on 1 and 2 March 2009 .
We demand that a full investigation be carried out and that the perpetrators be prosecuted , and similarly for the killers of Generals Mané and Correia , killed in 2000 and 2004 , who remain unidentified to this day .
As one of the poorest of the poor and noted for its low life expectancy , Guinea-Bissau is today faced with drug trafficking .
As a bridgehead for the South American drug smugglers , Guinea-Bissau has become a country of transit for drugs which are destined for Europe , where we represent the biggest consumer .
We also know only too well that this is affecting the entire sub-region as , in Mauritania , for example , large quantities of drugs have been discovered , even at the airport .
The European Union must help this country to turn its back on this trade by fighting it both here and there and by a return to development based on that country 's own resources .
While the last elections were welcomed by the international community and the European Union has shown its support for the process of learning about and installing democracy in Guinea-Bissau , the events this country has just lived through can only reinforce this position of aid and assistance .
The army too , which did not intervene in the electoral process , must also continue with its strict observation of the constitutional order , as it has promised .
While the neighbouring West African countries have , after years of problems and chaos , rediscovered the road to democracy , respect for the institutions and human rights , Guinea-Bissau must not fall into the trap of reprehensible practices .
The European Union must be present and use its influence and its example to help this country to stay on the road to democracy .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , in addition to what has already been said today on the situation in Guinea-Bissau , I would like to comment on two issues .
Firstly , the assassinations of the President of Guinea-Bissau , João Bernardo Vieira , and the chief of the armed forces , General Tagme Na Waie , should be thoroughly investigated and those responsible should be brought to justice .
Secondly , in our resolution today , we express our hope that the presidential elections in the country will be held within 60 days .
We should today call upon EU Member States and the international community to make sure that Guinea-Bissau receives the financial and technical support which is needed to conduct credible elections .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , it is very easy for destabilisation , which has tragic consequences , to occur in poor African countries , such as Guinea-Bissau .
The assassinations of President João Bernardo Vieira and General Tagme Na Waie , the head of the armed forces , in March of this year , were certainly part of an attempt to destabilise the country , probably instigated by the drugs mafia .
The lack of an effective security force in this country has meant that various kinds of homicide go virtually unpunished .
We need to provide all the vital assistance that the government of this country needs , and this is an issue which the resolution addresses .
In addition to this , and in order to prevent these kinds of incidents , we need to declare a ruthless war on the drugs trade , which is a destabilising force in many poor countries in Africa , Asia and South America , supports terrorism and , through drug addiction , destroys the lives of hundreds of millions of people throughout the world .
If we cannot overcome this problem , we will pay an increasingly high price for our helplessness .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , let me first of all , on behalf of the European Commission , say that we deeply regret the assassination of His Excellency the President of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau , João Bernardo Vieira .
We condemn this assassination in the strongest possible terms and also the attacks that resulted in the deaths of the Chief of Staff of the armed forces , General Batista Tagme Na Waie and other soldiers .
I would like also to send condolences to their families .
The presence of drug-dealers and so much crime are more than worrying today .
Under the eighth EDF and other instruments , but in addition by contributing to EUR 2 million to the UN ODC , the Commission has signed up to a very ambitious plan in the counter narcotics field .
We think this is really very important , as has been shown by what has happened .
We urgently call for calm and restraint , and urge the national authorities of Guinea-Bissau to fully investigate these events and bring to justice those responsible .
There should be no impunity .
Unfortunately , these violent acts follow the successful legislative elections , which paved the way for enhanced EU and international support for the country 's peace-building efforts .
These attacks also come at a time of increased international engagement , intended to build a democratic and a stable Guinea-Bissau .
Under these extremely difficult circumstances , the Commission remains fully committed to continuing its strong support to the national authorities , aiming to bring back stability but also to sustain development .
I am thinking of education , the poorest of the poor , the necessity for basic needs and basic services , and also of economic growth in the country .
We are now starting to deploy the wide range of instruments at our disposal , thus aiming to help Guinea-Bissau achieve sustainable peace and , hopefully , consolidate its democratic process .
An ambitious country strategy paper for an amount of EUR 100 million , covering the period 2008-2013 , was approved last year .
This will focus on security sector reform - including the fight against drugs that I mentioned earlier - and the enhancement of the national sovereign institutions .
Last year the Council also decided to establish an EU mission supporting security sector reform in the framework of the European security and defence policy .
The forthcoming presidential elections - now expected 60 days after the nomination of the new President - will probably take place even before the summer break .
Taking into account this extremely tight schedule , the feasibility of the deployment of the electoral observation mission is being carefully considered by the Commission .
Nevertheless , the provision of post-electoral assistance to support the required reforms to the electoral framework , following the recommendations formulated by the EU-UN 2008 , and the support given to observation of the forthcoming elections by regional organisations remain , among other things , our key priorities .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debates .
2 .
Philippines
The next item is the debate on six motions for a resolution on the situation in the Philippines .
Madam President , Commissioner , I have followed the situation in the Philippines ever since the unfortunate Marcos couple ruled that country .
Since then , this great island republic has experienced a lot of ups and downs , the ups and downs of a dictatorship and of attempts to move towards freedom , of economic crises and of developments towards a market economy , which were then continually stifled in a quagmire of corruption , mismanagement and , unfortunately , constant authoritarian incursions .
If we look at the map we see that this island republic is of supreme strategic importance .
Like Indonesia , it controls certain maritime routes that are central and vital to our economy , but also to that of Asia .
Therefore , stability in the region matters a great deal , and that is why we need to make it clear to those in power that it is only through dialogue , only through the rule of law , only by strengthening democracy , infrastructure and small and medium-sized enterprises that this country will finally find long-term stability .
Otherwise , it will continually be under the threat of collapse , and separatist movements , movements in individual island groups , religious and cultural movements that oppose each other will threaten the unity of the country .
This is therefore an issue that is of central importance for the European Union .
Madam President , many states in other parts of the world came into being as a result of European intervention .
They are the successor states to the colonies of the European countries , areas that were conquered in centuries past in order to get hold of raw materials cheaply .
The mining of metals and the harvesting of tropical plants were the most important objective while , in some cases , human beings , too , were traded as slaves .
People with completely different languages and cultures thus found themselves living in one of these colonies and separated from those with whom they had much more in common linguistically and culturally .
The Philippines were seized from Spain in 1898 by the United States , which then proceeded to govern the islands as its own colony until 1946 .
As an independent state , the country has since developed a reputation for poor government .
The question is whether this is a coincidence .
States like this one are not a product of the will of the people .
They were not formed from the bottom up .
They were constructed from the top down and by outside influences .
States like this are not the best breeding ground for a democratic state under the rule of law and for the peaceful resolution of societal conflicts .
They are often held together by force , and the army 's power is great .
There is often a lot of scope for foreign companies to get involved , which then maltreat and exploit the environment and their employees to ruination .
They get the chance to behave badly by providing the rulers of these countries with privileges and wealth .
Abuses of this nature bring into being counter-movements .
If such movements are not regarded by the state as a legal opposition that can peacefully develop into a participant in government , the chances are that these movements will fall back on the use of force out of the need for self-preservation .
The government will then respond with more state-sponsored violence , perhaps without even admitting that this violence is being perpetrated by the state .
Since 2001 , hundreds of activists , trade unionists , journalists and religious leaders have been killed or abducted .
Opposition members freed by court order are then locked up again by the state , regardless .
Those guilty of murders and abductions are neither tracked down nor punished .
Foreign attempts at mediation have been repudiated and eventually ended .
The resolution rightly calls for greater efforts in respect of mediation , compromises and peaceful solutions .
Without the integration of opposition movements into the democratic state under the rule of law , the Philippines will remain a chaotic country where life is bad .
author . - Madam President , the situation in Mindanao is grave , with hundreds of thousands of internally displaced persons living in desperate conditions .
The long-standing insurgency is a factor in this sorry state of affairs , but so is the not-so-democratic status of successive Filipino governments with the latter being widely held responsible by international agencies , such as the UN Human Rights Council , for showing remarkable impunity from extrajudicial killings and the forced disappearances of hundreds of Filipino citizens whose activities were thought to have been in disagreement with official government policy .
Such impunity must be terminated .
In addition , the Government of the Philippines must urgently resume peace negotiations with the MILF and both sides must renounce violence and solve their differences at the negotiating table .
Madam President , the Philippines are a country with a rich , albeit unfortunate , history .
The country was conquered by the Spanish in 1521 , after they had overcome the strong resistance of the local population by force .
Following a rebellion against Spanish rule in 1916 , the United States took control of the Philippines .
The country gained full independence , following a period of temporary occupation by the Japanese , in 1946 , and was ruled as a dictatorship for many years by President Marcos .
In 1983 , Benigno Aquino , the leader of the democratic opposition , was assassinated .
In the Philippines , both the Moro Islamic Liberation Front and communist partisans are active .
Abu Sayyaf hit squads want to separate the southern part of the islands from the rest of the Philippines .
The country is plagued by corruption .
People are dying in droves , the death penalty is widely applied and those whose existence is viewed as awkward by certain groups are being secretly murdered .
Attempts to introduce and uphold human rights and democratic principles face serious obstacles in that country .
The economic development of the Philippines and its membership of the Association of South-East Asian Nations are positive signs .
The resolution , which I support , is the European Union 's contribution to taking specific measures to put an end to internal conflict in the Philippines , and to reintroduce the principles of the rule of law .
Madam President , the case of the Philippines indeed demonstrates that the peacemaking process sometimes requires us not to look in just one direction .
At the moment we are working on many fronts in the Philippines , and all of them need to be approached in a specific way in their context .
It is therefore important to understand the multiplicity of responses .
There is a humanitarian dimension in the Philippines case , but there is also a clearly political dimension , and they are both fundamental if we want to make progress in the frustrated peace talks .
I say they are frustrated because what seemed to be a good way forward this summer was blocked by several incidents , and particularly because the Supreme Court considered that the memorandum of understanding was clearly unconstitutional .
This essentially brought the whole negotiation process to a halt , and it requires a response from the international community , I insist , at two levels .
The first is the humanitarian level .
I think it is clear that the situation not just of the 300 000 displaced people but also , basically , of the now countless victims of disappearances , torture and even serial murders needs first to be investigated and then to receive a political response from the government , at the insistence of the international community .
Secondly , however , there is also a need for a political response .
Norway has for some time been negotiating and establishing various frameworks to be able to reach agreements to resolve the situation .
It is a kind of parallel diplomacy or silent diplomacy ; it is not the kind of diplomacy to which we are accustomed , in terms of high-level officials , but it is necessary .
It is sometimes absolutely essential that there are actors to perform the role that Norway is performing , and I believe the European Union should not only develop this kind of activity , but it should also , basically , support any initiative that might encourage dialogue and help resolve the differences between the various groups currently involved in disputes in the Philippines .
Madam President , the conflict between the Government of the Philippines and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front from Mindanao has been going on for decades .
It has been accompanied by terrorist attacks , carried out by the Abu Sayyaf organisation , as well as kidnappings and murders .
In 2004 , as many as 116 people died in an attack on a ferry in Manila Bay .
According to the government in Manila , Abu Sayyaf is collaborating with al-Qaida .
The kidnappings continue .
Peace talks were suspended in August of last year .
In the meantime , the separatist conflict has already claimed over 120 000 victims .
Human rights are violated on a regular basis .
We call on all parties to the conflict to begin negotiations aimed at achieving an agreement on economic , social and political matters .
We support all action which intends to achieve a fair and lasting peace .


Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the Philippines , as many honourable Members have just said , still faces very strong challenges : on the one hand , the question of minorities in Mindanao , and on the other hand , many extrajudicial killings .
We are well aware of that .
However , the Philippines has made considerable progress in its international obligations to ensure and to protect human rights , ratifying 12 international human rights treaties and abolishing the death penalty , largely thanks to the advocacy role played by the European Parliament , the Commission and the Member States .
So there is a mixed picture , but we have to see both the positive and the negative sides .
But the human rights situation remains very difficult and we use the opportunity of our regular , senior official meeting to raise these issues .
Human rights warrant particular attention for our relationship with the Philippines , also in the run-up to the presidential elections in 2010 , and we are already going in this direction .
I would , therefore , like to focus on the long-standing issue , as I have already said , of the extrajudicial killings .
These assassinations of journalists of human rights and land rights activists have certainly decreased significantly in number in the past two years .
But , from time to time , they have flared up and there has been a flare-up very recently .
Most unsettling is that the majority of the perpetrators remain at large .
It has become a very sensitive political issue and it has eroded confidence in the Government .
We are about to launch an ' EU-Philippines Justice Assistance Mission ' under the Instrument for Stability .
What we have in mind is capacity-building for the Philippine judicial authorities , including police and military personnel , to help them investigate cases of extrajudicial killings and to prosecute those guilty of murder .
We have also ongoing projects at local level to promote respect for human rights , funded by the EU Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights .
These include monitoring the implementation of international commitments in the field of human rights , actions to support the ratification of the Rome Statute of the ICC and electorate education .
We are currently in the process of reviewing our cooperation with all our partner countries in the framework of the Mid-Term Review and there are good reasons to step up our efforts in the area of good governance , justice and the rule of law in the Philippines .
As far as the Peace Process in Mindanao is concerned , the Government appears ready to re-launch talks and we encourage an early resumption of negotiations between the parties and , of course , every discreet mediation that might be there .
Meanwhile , the civilian population has once again borne the brunt of the long-lasting conflict , and ECHO has supplied significant assistance .
Finally , current priorities of our relationship with the Philippines include the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement ( PCA ) negotiations , which started last month in Manila .
In this framework too , we are looking for common ground on human rights .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debates .
3 .
Expulsions of NGOs from Darfur
The next item is the debate on six motions for a resolution on expulsions of NGOs from Darfur .
author . - Madam President , it was entirely predictable that President Omar Al-Bashir of Sudan would respond to his indictment by the ICC with a political gesture , but by expelling NGOs and aid agencies from his country he has reinforced the popular image of a brutal tyrant , without any concern for the plight of the long-suffering people he nominally governs .
A few people still argue that what has happened in Darfur is not genocide .
Fewer still support Bashir openly , although China - regrettably - has been a lone voice in his defence because of the heavy Chinese involvement in Sudan 's extractive industries .
Like most Members , I welcome the indictment of President Bashir by the ICC and the issue of an international arrest warrant .
It may not succeed , but it is an important gesture to show the world 's disgust at the horrors he has perpetrated in Darfur without any remorse .
I also think that the indictment strengthens the reputation of the ICC , which hitherto has been shunned by some , including the great powers such as the USA , for fear of politically motivated prosecutions .
Indeed it is fascinating that the United States , which is not a signatory to the Rome Statute , has nonetheless used its position on the UN Security Council to facilitate the ICC indictment of Bashir .
One possible way out of the impasse that now exists is for the Security Council to strike down the indictment , as it has a right to do under the Rome Statute , on condition that Bashir goes into exile and the killings and repression stop , and in partial recognition that Sudan was never a signatory to the Rome Statute .
While this might seem to some like an unjust response to the killings in Darfur and effectively grants some form of partial immunity , it would remove the main protagonist and spare the long-suffering people of Darfur more bloodshed and enable Sudan as a country to move on .
Of course , if Bashir refuses , then he should be prosecuted with the full force of international law .
The AU , Arab League and China should make this clear to President Bashir before it is too late for him and his brutal regime .
author . - Madam President , the situation in Darfur is desperate .
Can you imagine the human suffering behind the United Nations statistics ?
According to the UN , up to 4.7 million people - including 2.7 million internally displaced persons - are in need of assistance .
We cannot allow this situation to deteriorate even more , and I urge the Sudanese Government to step back from the decision to expel 13 leading non-governmental organisations from Darfur .
The aid agencies in Darfur run the largest humanitarian operation in the world .
Only today we have discovered , I believe , that three people who work for Médecins Sans Frontières are missing .
The departure of the NGOs could lead to even more loss of life , due to the break in medical services and outbreaks of infectious diseases such as diarrhoea and respiratory infections .
Children are greatly at risk .
The United Nations has said that kicking out the humanitarian groups puts more than one million lives at risk .
I stress the overriding humanitarian need to allow the agencies to continue with their lifesaving work .
As President Obama said , it is not acceptable to put that many people 's lives at risk .
We need to be able to get those humanitarian organisations back on the ground .
I urge colleagues to support this resolution .
Madam President , Sudan has been ruled for many years now by regimes founded on a combination of military force , Arab national pride and a conservative interpretation of Islam .
The primary objective of these regimes was and is to hold together the territory of this enormous state , which is inhabited by a range of completely different peoples .
These different peoples are made subject , by all possible means , to the authority of the capital , Khartoum .
That is why there has been conflict for many years against the separatist movement in the south of the country , the region that is predominantly non-Arab and non-Islamic .
It is still very far from certain whether the south will be allowed the freedom to actually utilise the right to secession that has been agreed for 2011 .
In the western region of Darfur , the government seeks to prevent such a secession by all means .
In that region there has always been a conflict of interests between nomadic herdsmen and settled farmers .
The government has now taken an interest in this conflict .
Depopulating the region by chasing the settled inhabitants to neighbouring Chad is an important tool in keeping the area under control .
In this dirty work , the government can do without foreign observers , aid workers and mediators .
Parliament 's Committee on Foreign Affairs called for European military intervention a number of years ago .
Comments like this are popular with certain sections of domestic public opinion and give the impression that a rich and powerful Europe is able to impose its solutions on the rest of the world .
In practice , that is not a solution that can be implemented .
What is more , there is little clarity about what the objective of such an intervention would be .
Would it be about temporary humanitarian aid or establishing an independent state of Darfur ?
Either way , it would be seen in Africa as a new showing of colonial strength from Europe , primarily out of European self-interest .
A less spectacular , but probably more effective , strategy is the issuing of an international arrest warrant for President Al-Bashir and the detection of war crimes .
From outside , you must always offer to contribute to humanitarian aid and bringing about peaceful solutions .
The affected population groups , who have largely fled , deserve our support in their struggle to survive .
author . - Madam President , this House is very concerned about the decision by the Sudanese Government to expel humanitarian organisations from Darfur , a move which could have catastrophic results for hundreds of thousands of innocent civilians .
We understand that Commissioner Michel , the EU Presidency , the UN Emergency Relief Coordinator , President Obama and many others have involved themselves in trying to affect a reversal of this decision .
Since this is a very sensitive matter requiring very delicate handling , we consider that , before any resolution is passed by this House , every possible chance of success must be given to these efforts .
Therefore , we will vote against this resolution , not because we disagree with its contents but because we must wait to see the outcome of the aforementioned efforts .
This we consider to be the most sensible and wise thing to do at this point in time and under the present circumstances .
Madam President , as a result of brutal ethnic cleansing in Darfur , around 300 000 people have died and 2.5 million have become refugees .
Humanitarian aid is needed by 4.7 million people .
More than 10 000 have taken refuge in Chad , where the peace mission includes a contingent of the Polish Army .
The population has been affected by one of the most serious humanitarian crises in the world .
The representatives of human rights and humanitarian aid organisations , such as Polska Akcja Humanitarna or Médecins Sans Frontières , have been expelled from Darfur .
The International Criminal Court in The Hague has accused the Sudanese President , Omar al-Bashir , who is responsible for this situation , of war crimes and crimes against humanity , and has issued a warrant for his arrest .
The court accuses him of authorising genocide , murder and displacements , as well as tolerating torture and rape .
I fully support the International Criminal Court 's decision .
We call for humanitarian organisations to be allowed to return to Darfur , so that they may bring aid to the population .
Madam President , I think this resolution has come at a crucial moment for two reasons .
The first is that - as has already been said , and I join in the congratulations and celebrations - the indictment of President Bashir demonstrates the importance of putting an end to this situation , especially in Darfur , although it relates to the whole context of Sudan .
It also shows that the international community can and must act when such situations reach the extremes that the Sudanese situation has reached .
Ideally , of course , President Bashir should be forced to resign and be handed directly to the International Criminal Court .
That is unlikely to happen , but the response by the international community has to be clearly along those lines , and there can be no misgivings about that kind of procedure .
Secondly , the humanitarian situation also requires us to adopt a clear position regarding what we have just learnt today , that three people working for Médecins Sans Frontières have been kidnapped and at the moment we do not know where they are or what condition they are in , and that 13 NGOs that have recently been providing basic assistance and addressing essential needs , amongst other things , have been expelled .
Their expulsion reveals that the response being given by the government is precisely the opposite of the kind of response that is needed and desirable and that should be acceptable to the European Union and , above all , the international community .
Not only is it unacceptable , but it requires a response ; a response has to be given to this situation .
That is why I believe this resolution is fundamental , and it is absolutely crucial that we adopt it today by the largest possible majority .
I also urge my fellow Members to do so to ensure that we are not left behind in such matters .
Lastly , I want to make a very specific request to the United Nations Human Rights Office : it should start investigations to find out whether this expulsion of NGOs can be added to the long list of war crimes for which the Sudanese authorities must , of course , be held answerable .
Madam President , Commissioner , we find ourselves in a very complicated situation .
What is going on in Sudan is neither so incomprehensible nor so surprising that we need to wait to see what happens .
A war against the people of southern Sudan has been going on there for decades .
This is a humanitarian disaster brought about by the genocidal policy of Mr al-Bashir .
Millions of people have been displaced and are struggling to survive and they have been in this situation for months or years rather than for weeks .
That is one side of the coin .
On the other side , it is true that we are involved in a situation in which we must not jeopardise the work of the humanitarian organisations .
We must take their concerns and needs seriously .
Which way should we go , then ?
We must be guided by the facts .
The facts are that Mr al-Bashir is quite deliberately exerting this pressure on the humanitarian organisations .
Anyone who has seen his demonstrative performance , his mocking dance in this action against the humanitarian organisations and in his demonstrations knows that he is quite intentionally being provocative .
We must not allow ourselves to be provoked .
However , neither must we simply shut up , as many fellow Members would like .
That would not impress the dictator either .
I therefore suggest that we remove the three paragraphs 2 , 5 and 6 from the resolution and adopt the remainder as proposed .
Madam President , I have here a letter , written by 28 women from Darfur who managed to escape from the conflict zone , which is addressed to the African Union and the League of Arab States .
The women of Darfur , in the letter dated 4 March 2009 , express their support for the warrant issued by the International Criminal Court for the arrest of the Sudanese leader Omar al-Bashir .
For the first time in the seven years that the Court has been in operation , a warrant has been issued for a sitting head of state .
In their letter , the women of Darfur describe the horrifying scenes of violence and rape which are part of daily life in the province , where rape is intentionally used as a weapon , in order to cause women suffering and to stigmatise them , as well as to destroy unity and demoralise the whole of society .
Omar al-Bashir responded to the international arrest warrant by expelling 13 foreign charitable organisations from Sudan .
This means that , in the coming weeks , over a million people living in refugee camps in Sudan will have no access to basic aid , such as clean water , food or medical care .
The shortage of clean water , which will begin to be felt in the coming days , will promote the spread of communicable diseases , especially in western Darfur .
Witnesses have reported cases of diarrhoea in the Zam-Zam camp and cases of meningitis in the Kalma camp .
The first , and the main , victims of the decision taken by the Sudanese Government will be the children .
Omar al-Bashir 's decision to expel charitable organisations from Darfur will result in further crimes .
The European Parliament resolution calls on the UN and the International Criminal Court to investigate whether the Sudanese President 's latest decision constitutes a war crime under international law .
Omar al-Bashir 's Government does not guarantee Sudanese citizens the right to protection , and must be held to account by the international community for violating this right .
Madam President , one of the greatest human tragedies in the contemporary world is taking place in Darfur .
The instigator is the Sudanese President Omar Hassan al-Bashir .
Nearly five million people need urgent humanitarian aid .
In the meantime , the Sudanese Government has decided to expel 13 of the leading non-governmental aid organisations from Darfur .
The spread of disease which will occur once medical and food aid are cut off will , in the 21st century , result in genocide on a large scale .
The resolution , which I support , does not go far enough , as in this case we should force the African Union and the UN to authorise a military intervention , in order to stop the genocide .
Madam President , the conflict in Sudan , which has racial , religious and economic roots , has been going on for over 50 years .
It has already claimed over 3 million victims , and forced over 4.7 million people in the region to leave their homes .
In spite of attempts to reach an agreement , and the UN peace missions , the conflict between the Arab and non-Arab inhabitants of Darfur has recently escalated .
The latest stage of the most serious humanitarian crisis in the world , which has once again come to the attention of the European Parliament , has involved the decision taken by the Sudanese Government , led by President al-Bashir , to expel 13 humanitarian organisations which are providing much-needed aid in the form of food , medication and medical care .
The photographs and films emerging from Darfur , which have moved viewers around the world , cannot truly reflect the crisis facing people in this region , who are trying to emigrate to nearby Chad , as well as to other countries and continents , including Egypt , Israel , the United States , Canada and Europe .
However , it is not only the President of Sudan , who has been accused of war crimes , who is responsible for allowing human rights violations , involving mass rape , kidnappings , displacement , hunger , epidemics and torture , to take place .
The blame also lies with the major world powers and their leaders , who are trying to lay the blame for supplying weapons or profiteering on each other .
Even the intervention of the public prosecutor of the International Criminal Court , who wanted to indict the Sudanese President and issue a warrant for his arrest , is to be a celebration marking the 10th anniversary of the Criminal Court .
According to some people , this could prove catastrophic for Darfur and put an end to the UN mission there .
This is not the first time that we have protested and expressed our outrage at the human rights violations taking place in that region .
However , the previous , comprehensive European Parliament resolution , which called on international bodies to impose sanctions and block the economic activities stoking the flames of the conflict , produced no results .
I am sure that , by fuelling the conflict , those responsible aim to unify the people of Darfur before the referendum on secession from Sudan , due to take place in 2011 .
Madam President , the truth is that we knew the order to expel the NGOs was coming , and that is why I reaffirm that my preference is for a firm and clear line that is also pragmatic .
It is very easy to play the hero in the coffee shop , miles and miles away .
Those of us who visited Darfur in July 2007 and went to al-Geneina and al-Fashir , to Nyala and Kapkabia and to many IDP camps around those cities , are fully aware of the suffering of the people of Darfur and the tremendous job that NGOs do there .
It is therefore essential to protect the remaining NGOs and to work by all means for them to stay , and also to fully support those that will continue , including religious charities .
I also support the exerting of more pressure on China , which , on the one hand , does not apply the needed pressure on the Khartoum authorities and , on the other hand , delays or blocks more effective measures at UN level .
I also support Mr Tannock 's idea that ' any way out is a good way out ' .
If President Al-Bashir goes away and his regime is put out of the way , that would be a tremendous relief and help for the people of Darfur and Sudan .
That is not impunity - impunity is to continue as you are for many years .
- ( PL ) Madam President , according to a variety of data , the war in Darfur has already claimed over 200 000 victims .
It has frequently been called the greatest humanitarian crisis in history and has been compared to the genocide which took place in Rwanda in 1994 .
According to the UN , almost 5 million Sudanese people currently need urgent aid .
The International Criminal Court has issued a warrant for the arrest of the current President , Omar Hassan al-Bashir , for alleged war crimes and crimes against humanity .
The Sudanese Government has responded by expelling 13 of the largest non-governmental organisations involved in the largest humanitarian aid effort in history .
This decision may have catastrophic consequences for the people of Darfur , who will be left without access to much-needed medical aid .
The uncontrolled spread of communicable diseases may lead to mass epidemics , contributing to an increase in the death rate , especially amongst children , who will be left without access to medical treatment or food aid and thereby lose all hope of survival in these exceptionally difficult conditions .
In view of the existing situation , we should unequivocally condemn the decision taken by the Sudanese Government to expel non-governmental organisations from the country , and call for this decision to be revoked .
At the same time , we should call on the Commission and the Council to begin talks with the African Union , the League of Arab States and with China , with a view to convincing the Sudanese Government of the potentially catastrophic consequences of its actions .
Moreover , we should strongly support the actions of the International Criminal Court and its indisputable contribution to promoting justice and humanitarian law at an international level , as well as its activities aimed at weeding out lawlessness .
In this respect , we should inform the Sudanese collaborating with President al-Bashir that a conviction for war crimes and crimes against humanity is now inevitable , and force the Sudanese Government itself to stop discriminating against human rights activists who supported the Court 's decision to arrest President al-Bashir .
This action should be taken as soon as possible , in order to prevent a further humanitarian crisis , which inevitably threatens Darfur .

( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I personally was in Darfur and I was also in neighbouring Chad with Mr Ribeiro e Castro and I can therefore fully support what he has said .
It is a calamity , and this calamity is exacerbated by the fact that , due to the expulsion of non-governmental organisations , only around 60 % of humanitarian aid is getting through .
This disaster could escalate .
Three million people depend on our help .
Therefore , Madam President , Commissioner , I am of the opinion that paragraph 4 of our resolution , in which we call on the only great power in the world that can influence this region , the People 's Republic of China , to make the Sudanese Government retract its expulsion of NGOs , is particularly important .
- ( PL ) Madam President , we are witnessing serious events taking place in the field of international politics .
The Sudanese President , for whom an arrest warrant has been issued , is seeking to take revenge on the international community by expelling politically neutral organisations which seek to bring humanitarian aid to the suffering people of Darfur .
International opinion cannot , of course , ignore the fact that the President of Sudan has banned the activities of non-governmental organisations such as Polska Akcja Humanitarna which , for the last five years , has been engaged in water projects in the Darfur region , in order to help the Sudanese people .
The Fifth World Water Forum might provide a good opportunity to react to the Sudanese President 's behaviour , as we mentioned yesterday in this Chamber .
I hope that the issue of the expulsion of non-governmental organisations operating in Darfur will be raised , within a political context , in Istanbul .
Ironically enough , the Forum aims to address the problem of the lack of access to water experienced by billions of people throughout the world .
In the meantime , in Darfur , President al-Bashir is expelling organisations which are trying to resolve this key issue .
We will need to react to such a move .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , very quickly , we are being blackmailed by a dictator who has taken millions of people in Darfur as victims and seeks to use these victims to avoid international sanctions .
We must not therefore give in to this blackmail .
It is clear that we need an international coalition to put pressure on President al-Bashir to abandon this position .
However we must not turn a blind eye to the fact that the real effect , the real cause of these things is this obsession with natural resources .
It is no coincidence that the greatest breaches of human rights are in countries where there are great natural resources and in particular in China , which drives this pressure for natural resources .
Therefore we cannot fail to consider how to tackle the root of this problem , that is to say by guaranteeing fair access to natural resources for everyone in the world - that is what we must do .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to say very quickly that we deplore all the horrors of Darfur and that we all demand that everything be done to ensure that the associations and NGOs , who have a crucial role to play in these cases , can conti