Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 4 July 2002 .
I should like to take the opportunity to welcome everyone back for the autumn session of our work .
I am sure that you are now relaxed and ready to do battle on the various public policy issues ahead of us .
In recent weeks in Central Europe , particularly in upper and lower Austria , eastern Germany and parts of the Czech Republic , entire areas have been ravaged by floods of unprecedented and catastrophic proportions .
More than 100 people have lost their lives and tens of thousands have been forced out of their homes and out of their work places .
Today , on behalf of myself and this House I want to express our deepest sympathy with the victims of the floods and their families , and to recognise the extraordinary efforts of the rescue services and so many volunteers .
Tomorrow , in a specially convened emergency debate , in addition to our heartfelt sympathy of this afternoon we have the possibility , in a practical way , to lay the foundations to show real solidarity .
As a mark of respect for those who died , I ask you to rise in a minute 's silence .
( The House rose and observed a minute 's silence )
On Sunday , 4 August , Cecilio Gallego Alaria and a six-year-old girl were killed by a car bomb which had been placed near a bus stop in the Spanish town of Santa Pola in Alicante .
On 1 August David Caldwell was killed in an explosion in Derry in Northern Ireland .
By these acts , terrorists have shown once more in their denial to the right to life their essential provocation to the democratic order .
Terrorism denies the common values and principles that the European Union is founded upon , represents , promotes and defends .
Our Union is based on the principles of democracy and the rule of law which are common to the Member States and therefore can offer no justification for the use of terrorist violence .
On my own behalf and that of the House , I strongly condemn these acts of terrorism and express my deepest condolences to the victims ' families , and our deepest sympathy for those affected by terrorist attacks .
On behalf of the House I express once more our support for the respective authorities in their efforts in the fight against terrorism .
I ask you to observe one minute 's silence for the victims of terrorism .
( The House rose and observed a minute 's silence )
The final draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday , 28 August 2002 has been distributed .
The following change has been proposed :
Wednesday :
I have received a proposal from the Verts / ALE Group to add to the agenda of Wednesday , 4 September a special debate on the International Criminal Court .
Mr President , I believe that the Criminal Court has the support of almost all the Parliamentary groups .
However , none of the governments - whether right or left-wing - really support the Criminal Court , and it is my view that we need to hold a debate during this part-session which will allow us to make it clear that we reject any proposal to grant immunity to anybody outside this Court .
Such a debate would give us the opportunity to adopt a resolution during the second September part-session .
In view of the fact that a meeting of Foreign Affairs Ministers is due to take place on 30 September to decide whether or not to allow exceptions , I feel that two debates will be more effective than one if we want to make it quite clear to all the governments that the European Parliament does not wish there to be any exceptions whatsoever .
That is why neither I nor my group feel that a single closed debate on a motion - on 24 September next - will be sufficient .
We recommend that a debate be opened so that the European public is informed of the firm position of all the Parliamentary groups .
We therefore call for another debate to be included in the programme for this part-session .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we do not disagree on the matter in hand , but we do urge that we go about it in another way .
On Wednesday , we will be having a truly wide-ranging and very serious debate on Iraq and other important issues , and our group has made very careful preparation for this not only as regards speaking time but also as regards what is to be said .
We therefore propose that it is not this week that we should have the debate on the International Criminal Court , but during the second September part-session .
That would in any case still precede 30 September and the Council meeting , so we can have a prior debate concluded by a resolution .
There is , then , no disagreement about this , but , when it comes to procedure , we favour the second September part-session here in Strasbourg rather than this week .
Mr President , I believe we are all in favour of the International Criminal Court . There are no disagreements about this .
We are dealing with an issue of procedure and my Group is in favour of a debate with a resolution in the second September part-session .
But if you will allow me , Mr President , I am going to make a proposal which I believe will interest Mr Cohn-Bendit and many other members of the House .
I would also point out that my Group expressed its disagreement with dealing with a question on Mercosur during this sitting .
My proposal is as follows : the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy should include this issue in its next meeting , with an express request to the Commission to communicate the opinion , which appears to exist , on the possible consequences for a Member State of altering its position in relation to a common position adopted , since there is a common position on this point , and , apparently , that represents a violation of the Treaties .
The issue is very important and I would ask - I cannot see Mr Brok , but I imagine this will be communicated to him - that the Foreign Affairs Committee consider it .
In a common position , we have all - the Member States and Parliament - given our word .
This should be looked into and , if it is a violation of the Treaties , Parliament would be in a much stronger position to condemn any possible unilateral change of position on such an important issue .
Mr President , Mr Cohn-Bendit raises a very important point because this is an issue on which decisions may well be made before our September II part-session .
We know that Member States are under great pressure at present and the matter needs to be dealt with .
At the same time , it was the view of the Conference of Presidents last week - and I believe it would be the view of this House - that we need to have a full debate on the current situation regarding a possible armed attack on Iraq .
I would ask you , Mr President , either to take up Mr Barón Crespo 's suggestion or to try to find a way of scheduling such a debate on the International Criminal Court this week without eating into the time foreseen for the debate on Iraq .
Mr President , this decision leads me , as a member of the delegation to Romania , to make a request of you . In mid-September , the Romanian parliament will be discussing the agreement which their foreign minister has negotiated with the USA in this matter , without - as you will perhaps be aware - keeping them informed about it .
The debate in Bucharest will therefore be a very lively one .
If we are to discuss this only at the second September part-session , you should perhaps write to your opposite number to the effect that the Romanian parliament should hold fast to the EU common position and perhaps decline to support this agreement .
That is what would be called for in that situation .
Thank you very much .
I would be very pleased to do so on behalf of Parliament .
( The agenda was adopted )
Mr President , it is also with regard to the agenda .
As it stands in front of us , it does not contain an item which , under our new Rules , namely Rule 121a , should automatically be placed on the agenda for Mondays : a 30-minute period of one-minute speeches for Members to raise items of political interest .
That should have been on our draft agenda and it appears to have been left out - no doubt an oversight , these are new rules , not everyone is used to them yet - but it should automatically be on the agenda at some point during the Monday .
Mr President , over the weekend , 11 Palestinians , including 4 children aged six , ten and fifteen years old , were killed by the Israeli army during targeted attacks .
According to the Israeli daily newspaper , Haaretz , no less than 30 Palestinians were killed during the month of August .
Sixteen other victims , including 9 children , had already been claimed during a raid on Gaza at the end of July .
Even the Israeli press condemned the irresponsibility of these crimes while , as the Yediot Aharonot stressed , the number of terrorist attacks fell dramatically .
That is why , on behalf of my group , I call upon the Council , the Commission and Parliament to adopt a very clear position on this change of tactic by the Sharon government , which , in my view , will incite hatred and the desire for revenge when there is a vital need for de-escalation , dialogue and peace .
Mr President , for quite a long time , we Danes had a very major problem in that we were unable to watch Danish news on television .
Then , the problem was solved , thanks to our efficient Quaestor over there .
We have now , however , run up against another problem inasmuch as a dispute between the Danish Broadcasting Corporation and Danish journalists means that we are again unable to obtain any news .
Could you not demonstrate sympathy with the journalists in the hope that the dispute might in that way be ended and that we might again be able to obtain information on the same terms as our fellow MEPs .
I really do hope that you will do this .
Mr President , on a point of order , I would like to raise a question that is causing grave concern to people in Ireland , particularly those on the east coast of Ireland - and indeed it should also be a matter of concern to people on the west coast of the UK .
It concerns the current shipment of MOX pellets that is being returned from Japan to Sellafield and is due to enter the Irish Sea some time next week .
The Irish Sea is already highly radioactive as a result of the emission of waste from Sellafield into the Irish Sea .
The shipment is in two first-generation double-hulled ships , which are not completely double-hulled and are very old .
This is causing concern to people in Ireland because of the risk of accident and the very real risk of terrorist attack on these ships .
There has already been fairly widespread world concern expressed about these shipments .
They are an environmental hazard to the high seas and to coastal states .
I urge the President of this Parliament to raise this matter with the Commission and in particular with the UK Government .
If this shipment proceeds it is likely that shipments will continue for some time to come .
The actual pellets themselves have been refused and returned by Japan , when it discovered that the quality control standards had been falsified at Sellafield .
Therefore Japan would not accept them for use in its nuclear reactors .
I am gravely concerned about this .
All political parties in Ireland have expressed concern about this and I urge that we take action in relation to it .
Mr President , on 8 August , two Turkish Cypriot journalists from what used to be the ' Europa ' and is now the ' Africa ' newspaper , its editor Sener Levent and Mentuh Ener , were sentenced to six months in prison by an illegal court in occupied Cyprus , accused of allegedly insulting Mr Denktash .
This is yet another example of blatant violation of human rights by the occupying Denktash regime , in this case of the freedom of expression and freedom of the press , to which the powers that be here on Earth have turned a blind , not to say hypocritical eye .
Clearly , the aim is to silence any progressive Turkish Cypriot voices opposed to the occupation and plans to partition Cyprus and this is especially significant at this crucial stage of the proceedings on the Cyprus question .
I also understand that five teachers are to stand trial for taking part in a cross-community choir which gave a performance in Istanbul .
We condemn this action outright and ask you to bring your influence to bear in securing the immediate release of these two journalists .
Mr President , you may recall that before the summer I proposed an initiative on a global Christian / Muslim / Jewish dialogue with representatives of the Christian , Muslim and Jewish parliaments to be sponsored by yourself here in the European Parliament .
During the summer , it has been noticeable that tensions have risen regarding September 11 or Iraq or what is happening in regard to Israel / Palestine .
I think it is time for such a dialogue , as a focus for the good forces of moderation and moderate people .
This idea was mooted to me by the Speaker of the Philippine Parliament , when we were there , and I think the time has come for this initiative .
Mr President , the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy held a debate with the Danish Presidency last Monday on the implementation of the Sixth Framework Programme .
This debate included discussions between a number of Members , including the Chairman of the Committee and the Danish minister , in the course of which it was stated that the Council , having adopted the Framework Programme 's specific programmes , which were laid down without Parliament 's codecision , had come to an agreement with specific reference to the sensitive ethical issues .
This led a number of Members to assert that this agreement goes against the agreement which Parliament reached with the Council of Ministers in May .
There was no mention , in the documents we had to vote on before second reading , of any agreement on the issues that the Council has now come to an arrangement about , nor have I had any information about it .
It therefore follows that it is right and proper for Parliament to put questions to the Council .
As an ordinary MEP , though , I would also like to ask if the President or anyone else has been provided with documents that were not available to all Members of this House when the vote was taken .
I will have to check on the details so that I can give you a definitive answer , but , to the best of my knowledge , the documents to which you refer have not been forwarded in any formal way to this institution , its President or its secretariat .
I will check that .
Mr President , I would like to draw your attention and the attention of the House as a whole to another case of severe violation of the most basic human rights , of violation , above all , of the freedom to choose where to live .
This is the situation , what is happening at this time , even as we speak , in Tunisia .
The facts are these : an Italian woman , married to a Tunisian citizen , was taken to Tunisia with her two children , aged 16 months and 5 years , for a week 's holiday - or that is what she was told by the father .
When they got to Tunisia , the father took away his family 's passports and is now forbidding them to leave Tunisia .
He expects his wife , an Italian citizen , to stay in Tunisia against her will .
A few minutes ago , I was informed that the Tunis Minors ' Court has granted custody of the children to the mother , recognising that the father is not able to look after the children , but that it does not as yet intend to allow the family to go back to Italy , where they have a house , where the children were born and which is their natural home .
Mr President , we who have bilateral relations with these countries in all fields also have the duty to make them understand that they must bring their legislation - whose authority we respect - into line with the changing conditions in the world so that dialogue can take place between parties on equal terms , with equal dignity and in mutual respect .
If they wish to enjoy good relations with the European Union , they have to understand that we have certain rules which we intend to uphold , starting with laws guaranteeing human rights and the free movement of persons .
Mr President , today is an important anniversary for the Vietnam war , not what is usually referred to as the Vietnam War but the war which is taking place day after day in Vietnam against democracy , human rights and fundamental freedoms , the war being waged against the citizens of Vietnam , against the Buddhist monks , against the leaders of movements opposed to the Vietnamese regime .
Today is the anniversary of the birth of that regime .
It is a significant date of grave import , particularly for the Catholic and Protestant minority of Vietnamese Montagnards who are being oppressed by this regime .
The Transnational Radical Party has called for next Saturday , 7 September , to be a World day of non-violent , Gandhian demonstration to promote democracy and freedom in Vietnam .
Chinese dissidents such as Wei Jing-Sheng , the leader of the Vietnamese dissident community , Vo Van Ai , the leader of the Montagnards , and Kok Ksor , will take part .
I call upon all the Members to support the initiative of the Transnational Radical Party and to take part in this world day of non-violent protest against this new , constant , daily battle which is taking place in Vietnam .
Mr President , I should like to ask the House for support for your and this House 's intervention in the case of the sentence of death by stoning imposed in various cases by a court in northern Nigeria .
This is both for so-called criminal offences and apparently , in the case of Amina Lawal , for the offence of bearing a child .
I am sure we are all agreed that whatever the case and merits of the case it is a dreadful death in any circumstances , but particularly in the case of a mother whose only crime is to bear a child .
I feel very strongly on this issue and would ask you - and I am sure you have done this already as I have written to you about previous cases - to intervene with all your best efforts in this particular case .
Mr President , this summer , as I was on my way along the Rome-Naples motorway to Rome airport , I stopped in Cassino .
Near Cassino , there is a small hamlet with 2000 residents , San Pietro in Fine , which was razed to the ground at the famous Battle of Cassino during the Second World War .
Not one stone of this hamlet , San Pietro in Fine , remained standing , and the few surviving inhabitants rebuilt the village a little way further up the valley .
It is my belief that young people should know what happened .
To this end , San Pietro in Fine should be made a memorial which is a reminder of the horrors of war and commemorates the major role played by the European Union in the past 50 years in preventing war in Europe .
Mr President , I support Mr De Rossa in relation to the nuclear shipments .
It is quite outrageous that , despite huge public opposition , these kind of shipments are taking place .
Coming so close to September 11 , people should be especially aware of the dangers of shipping materials like these .
The interests of the public should be served instead of the interests of the nuclear industry .
I also support Mr De Rossa in saying that you , Mr President , should do something about this .
Coming from a country like Ireland which is so strongly against these shipments and also against the whole concept of the nuclear industry , I think something should be done to send a message from this Parliament that we are extremely concerned about the shipments .
I would also like to support my colleague Mrs Ahern in relation to the stoning to death .
We need to encourage some countries in the European Union that have repatriation agreements with countries like Nigeria to review the whole idea that it is safe to send asylum seekers and refugees back to these countries .
I am speaking here about my own country which thinks nothing of sending refugees and asylum seekers back to Nigeria , knowing that this is the kind of situation they face .
Mr President , firstly I would like to join this House in its expression of sympathy for the victims of Santa Pola and Derry .
The question of political violence in the Basque country has been raised many times in this House .
However , the Basque issue has never been included on the agenda .
Apparently nobody dares to question Mr Aznar 's views on the Basque country .
There is no political deal , only a problem of terrorism .
I am aware that some of the Spanish MEPs , although not all of them , and the majority of Members of this House , know perfectly well that there is indeed a political deal that should be urgently tackled .
But everybody stays silent .
This House should no longer ignore the lesson of Northern Ireland and instead of denouncing the tragic results of violence should , as Commissioner Patten said some months ago , develop methods to identify and tackle the root causes of political violence .
Mr President , in my country there is currently a judicial process under way to ban Batasuna , with the sole objective of protecting democracy and the system of freedoms and , in this regard , I am grateful for your institutional words of support , because the truth is that there are hundreds of pieces of evidence linking ETA with Batasuna and it is not acceptable that public subsidies are being used to finance terror .
Just today Mr Gorostiaga Atxalandabaso has missed another opportunity to condemn this murder .
Neither does he question the fact that his colleagues , at events that he organises , shout support for ETA or chant ' Kill them , ETA ' .
What Mr Gorostiaga Atxalandabaso has done is to gather together more than EUR 200 000 , put it in the boot of a car and try to send it to Spain .
Mr President , we cannot stand by , we have the right and the obligation to prevent this appropriated money being used for the evil purposes of terrorism .
Mr Gorostiaga Atxalandabaso , it seems to me the height of cynicism , and absolutely repugnant , to hear you once again justifying crimes , in this case affecting a pensioner and a Spanish girl .
It is absolutely repugnant .
It is also repugnant to discover that a proportion of public resources , the money of the European citizens , which you receive , ends up in the hands of the criminals and fascists of ETA .
That is how repugnant it is .
Mr President , something is not working in the system if we in this House have to endure the indecency of people who come here to justify crimes .
Mr Gorostiaga Atxalandabaso , please be aware that the impunity of individuals like you and the impunity of your activities is coming to an end throughout Europe .
Democracy has the right to defend itself and it will do so .
Mr President , I want to reiterate the concern that colleagues , particularly Irish colleagues , have mentioned about this MOX shipment back from Japan .
The real difficulty is that we have no forum , as Members of this democratically elected assembly , where we can discuss our concerns and fears , be they real or perceived , and agree or disagree amongst ourselves in a democratic way on this issue .
Hence we must keep raising this issue on occasions such as this .
Could I appeal to you , Mr President , to consider , when Commissioner Palacio brings forward her nuclear package this autumn , that the very least that should be afforded to us in this Parliament and in national parliaments is the right of communication and consultation and full discussion on these matters , so that all our views for and against such issues can be properly aired .
I appeal to you , Mr President , to ensure that we proceed in that way .
Mr President , I wish to speak on a matter which I have already had occasion to bring to the attention of the Presidency in the past .
It is a matter which concerns my country , but I would first like briefly to make something clear in view of what some of the Members representing Spanish parties have said .
As a member of an autonomist movement , I would stress my strong conviction that the principle , the value of the self-determination of peoples must be recognised and enforced in Europe at a practical level as one of the basic values of the European peoples , of the Europe of peoples and regions .
No government or country must be allowed to suppress it .
I will now move on to another matter , the compensation of the soldiers used as forced labour in Germany during the Second World War .
The compensation is currently in the process of being granted , but only the Italian soldiers are excluded from this measure - a very serious omission - which removes a thorn left over from the Second World War from Europe 's side .
I call upon the Presidency of the European Parliament to look into the matter of the compensation of Italian soldiers used as forced labour in concentration camps in Germany during the Second World War .
Mr President , just two words about what my Spanish colleagues said about me .
First of all , it seems that Mrs Díez González is threatening me because there are only a few days left to me as a Member of this House .
I do not know if my life is in some way threatened by her words .
Secondly , regarding the two hundred thousand euros that were apparently destined for ETA ; here in this House there are responsible persons who are perfectly aware of where this money is at the moment and the origin of these two hundred thousand euros .
I am sorry to have to say to Mrs Díez González that she is lying , with hatred , which is very disappointing for everybody .
Mr Gorostiaga Atxalandabaso , in terms of ordinary Parliamentary procedure I would like to have that reference by one Member to another in the terms you have described withdrawn from the record .
I ask you to withdraw the imputation that a Member is misleading the House .
People have different views and bring passion to their views .
So please withdraw that latter remark and then other colleagues can express themselves on any other part of the content .
I do not mind withdrawing what I said , provided she withdraws what she said .
Mr President , in the Basque Country and in Spain people like myself are accompanied by escorts .
People like myself are murdered by people who demonstrate alongside Mr Gorostiaga Atxalandabaso in the streets , who shout at us and who shout ' ETA , kill them ' .
What he has said puts me in danger .
People like him live comfortably in the Basque Country and I want them to carry on living comfortably , but what he has said puts my life and the lives of many people like me in danger .
What I want this House to understand , please , is that all we Spanish constitutionalists want is to be as free as Mr Gorostiaga Atxalandabaso and to be as sure as him that we are going to get home at night to see our children .
We want to have his same liberty , his same security , but we do not have it , Mr President .
It is unacceptable that he should use this democratic House to threaten us with death , since that is what I feel he is doing , Mr President .
He and his accomplices know what I am talking about .
It is indecent to have to hear in this House the words of a person who demonstrates in the streets alongside torturers and murderers .
Mr President , this would be nothing more than a parliamentary incident were it not for the simple fact that , in the Basque Country and in Spain , when Batasuna threatens , ETA kills .
And this is a perfect illustration of the situation we are living in in our country .
Mr President , we have always had a point of reference in our political action - the ideal of freedom - and there is a condition linked to this ideal of freedom , namely that the ideal of freedom is totally and unequivocally incompatible with the use of violence .
Any form of self-determination which is based on or employs violence in any way , even indirectly , must be rejected in the initiatives and positions we adopt .
Secondly , we have an ideal of Europe , which is the ideal of subsidiarity .
We have never called into question any decision taken by a national parliament , for we recognise that national parliaments act in local contexts which are nothing to do with Europe .
Well then , we would like these two fixed reference points of our action to remain our ideals , for otherwise European politics will become a farce , with positions being adopted for Europe which are not part of our tradition .
That concludes this item .
The next item is the report ( A5-0261 / 2002 ) by Dorette Corbey , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on amending Directive 94 / 62 / EC on packaging and packaging waste ( COM ( 2001 ) 729 - C5-0664 / 2001 - 2001 / 0291 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , honourable Members , the European Union generated a total of 63.5 million tonnes of packaging waste in 1999 , which amounts to something like 17 % of municipal waste and 3 % of the weight of all waste produced .
Directive 94 / 62 / EC on packaging and packaging waste resulted in a reduction of the environmental effects associated with packaging and packaging waste , particularly because more waste was collected , recycled and recovered .
Today , packaging is recycled all over Europe and no longer only in central and northern European countries .
No Member State has failed to achieve the minimum targets for recycling for 2001 as early as 1998 .
This proposal is intended to lay down new targets for recycling and for recovery as a whole , significantly higher than those envisaged in the current version of the Packaging Directive .
The Commission proposal more than doubles the minimum target for recycling by fixing it at 55 % , and raises the minimum target for recovery as a whole by 10 % , to 60 % .
Parliament has repeatedly highlighted the need for the economic and environmental consequences of the targets for recovery and recycling to be taken into account .
This was done in the most detailed cost-benefit analysis ever carried out on the Community 's recycling targets .
The additional finance required is estimated at a total of EUR 700 million per annum , with , by way of comparison , the costs of alternative disposal methods totalling EUR 800 million .
The benefits to the environment are , in addition , estimated at around EUR 350 million .
There are , however , substantial differences between one type of packaging material and another , both as regards the environmental benefits and also the cost of recycling .
It is for this reason that the Commission proposal not only specifies overall targets for recovery and recycling , but also targets differentiated according to the materials concerned .
This is intended to have the effect of concentrating on those materials the recycling of which yields the greatest environmental benefit in comparison to the cost involved .
Some Member States have already achieved the new targets proposed by the Commission , whilst for others , whose recycling programmes have not yet reached this stage of development , these represent a major challenge .
I would like to add that I am presenting this proposal in place of my fellow Commissioner Mrs Wallström , who is spending today at the Johannesburg Summit on sustainable development .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the European packaging directive has had a considerable impact .
We are sorting and collecting our waste .
There are now recycling installations all over Europe .
There are people across Europe processing the waste that we all produce .
This is demanding and labour-intensive work .
We are doing all of this for the sake of the environment , and we must persevere , for the waste mountain is still growing .
However , we should not turn a blind eye to a few difficulties that the packaging directive poses .
First of all , there are major discrepancies between the Member States in their implementation of the packaging directive .
This is sometimes due to laxity , but often also due to real problems , such as a lack of waste disposal facilities .
Secondly , the environmental yield is not always obvious .
We think that recycling benefits the environment , but there is a limit .
In the case of excessive distances , for example , the environmental burden outweighs the benefit .
Thirdly , we still notice there is a great deal of unnecessary packaging .
Needless to say , packaging plays an essential role , namely to protect the product , but a double layer of plastic for a small loaf of bread is surely somewhat excessive .
These matters were raised in Parliament 's resolution last year .
We discussed the Commission 's proposal against this background .
We support the Commission 's review proposal , but do consider it to be too restricted .
The area of prevention , in particular , has had hardly any work done on it .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have discussed this topic at great length .
I would thank all my fellow MEPs and the shadow rapporteurs , in particular , for their contributions .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy is able to submit a result that sounds the right note for new steps towards sustainable developments .
I should like to single out a few key points .
First of all , there is the directive 's environmental result , which is , unfortunately , not always evident .
The environmental impact should be clear if the public are to continue to be motivated to separate their waste .
This is why the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy demands a clear evaluation of the environmental yield of the Packaging Directive .
Not only should the environmental impact be clear to the public , it should also be a primary consideration in the choices made by industry and governments .
We must lay the foundation for this here , which brings me to my second point : prevention .
Producers opt for product packaging on the basis of essential functions , within which there are various options .
Soft drinks can be wrapped in cardboard , metal , glass , plastic or a combination of these .
The Environmental Committee asks producers to opt for the most environmentally-friendly alternative , for which an indicator is to be prescribed .
This Packaging Environment Indicator consists of at least two parameters : the volume of waste and the emission of greenhouse gases .
As the emission of greenhouse gases is a global problem , the same value is to be accorded to this parameter in each country .
However , the waste issues and recycling capacity are different in each country , and thus the values accorded should differ in line with this .
The Packaging Environment Indicator has generated a great deal of discussion .
One effect is at any rate clear . Different materials , such as paper , metal , glass and plastic must compete with each other on the basis of environmental quality .
This is how an incentive is created to achieve consistent innovation in the environmental sphere , an incentive to invest in recycling capacity .
In this way , each country develops its optimum recycling capacity .
It is important for us to take the first step now .
Industry wants clear political statements that at least indicate the way .
My third point concerns recycling .
As long as the prevention policy is not fully functioning , we need to work with recycling targets .
The problem with the recycling target is that it can never absolutely suit all countries .
What is ambitious for the United Kingdom and Spain , is not for Germany or Austria .
I consider the 65 % proposed by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy to be a good compromise for first reading .
There has been a great deal of debate about whether material-specific targets should be prescribed or not .
Here too , I propose a compromise solution : no material-specific targets but a distinction between easy and difficult materials , with a minimum of 25 % for plastic and wood and 60 % for the rest .
This leaves Member States sufficient options to achieve the best possible percentages .
As for maximum targets , these were a good idea in the initial stages of recycling , but are now absolutely redundant .
Excessive national targets no longer distort the market .
My next point concerns re-use .
The discussion surrounding re-use focuses mainly on drinks packaging , which has again become a live issue in a number of countries , particularly in Germany , Denmark and the Netherlands .
Re-use also generates most internal market problems .
The obligation of re-use is often to the advantage of local producers of beer or mineral water .
It is , in fact , an improper use of re-use , and one that must be avoided .
This is why we must put the environmental result at the top of the agenda in this respect too .
Member States must promote re-use if this is more beneficial to the environment .
A final point concerns heavy metals .
It is clear to everyone that these must be eliminated .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy has opted for a complete ban .
It has been pointed out that this hinders the use of recycled material , and this is obviously not our intention .
This is why we would clarify once again that the use of heavy metals should be banned .
I should like to finish off with a word on sustainable development .
In Johannesburg , the entire world is talking about sustainable development .
Today , we have the opportunity of turning this fine concept into reality .
The concept of sustainable development must be given a practical dimension .
We must clear up our own mess instead of exporting it to developing countries .
This is why we must be serious about producer responsibility .
We have done this before in the directive on electronic waste and the directive on end-of-life vehicles .
Producer responsibility is not only of a financial nature .
Producers must also innovate in terms of environmental quality and their packaging .
Innovation is also the best guarantee for retaining employment in the packaging industry .
It is the best guarantee for future generations not to be saddled with our waste , a shortage of natural resources and climate changes .
We hope that the revision of the packaging directive helps to achieve this .
I thank you for your attention and look forward to the debate .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by thanking the rapporteur of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , Mrs Corbey , most warmly for her report and congratulate her on it .
She has expanded the debate on the amendment of the Packaging Directive and put it in the broader context of environmental policy .
Over and above the change to the recycling quotas , she has added consideration of environmental impact assessments to the discussion , by , among other things , drawing on life-cycle analysis .
One might say that she has thus already pre-empted the discussions on the White Paper on integrated product policy .
It is of course never wrong to give consideration , at as early a stage as possible , to methods of assessing environmental impact , for this is how more general awareness of environmental policies of this sort is created .
On the other hand , however , we must not use the Packaging Waste Directive to prescribe the outcome before we in this House have thoroughly got to grips with the issues .
This , after all , is what the White Paper on integrated product policy is about , or , in any case , that is what almost everybody on the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy thought .
That is why a majority of us on the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy urged that we should vote for the removal from the report of Amendment No 16 , which provides for the immediate introduction of environmental indicators for packaging .
Moreover , Amendment No 16 envisages an overall reduction of 10 % .
Does this mean that the production of packaging material is to be cut back ?
How is that to be achieved ?
Do we intend to reduce by 10 % the industrial production of goods that need to be packaged ?
That too is a proposal to which we should give a wide berth .
Just a few brief words on the content of the Directive .
The new targets must be seen as ambitious , but I do believe that they are justified , from the point of view of industrial policy , in terms of their objective , which serves the European Union 's environmental policy objectives .
Albeit with the reservations to which I referred earlier , we will be happy to give substantial support to Mrs Corbey 's report .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the report we are going to vote on tomorrow has kept us very busy in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy over recent months , particularly the rapporteur , Mrs Corbey , whom I would like to congratulate , because this subject is far from easy and she has had to work very hard .
The amendment of the packaging Directive will have significant implications for the various agents concerned . For public administrations , for selective collection systems , for companies producing materials and packaging , for the agri-food industry and - most importantly - for the consumer .
Because without the cooperation of the consumer , this Directive will not be complied with in any country .
It is clear that we must set quantitative targets and that they must be ambitious , but it is also the case that the targets must be achievable .
We must be aware that in certain Member States the targets will be more difficult to achieve due to a historical lack of infrastructures , low population densities or consumer habits .
We are debating a Directive which must have a sufficient degree of flexibility in order to allow national laws to be brought into line with it and furthermore we cannot oblige consumers to separate the waste from the containers in order to facilitate collection .
This is something they must do voluntarily as a result of education .
The recovery and recycling targets proposed by the Commission for 2006 are particularly ambitious for the majority of Member States and we must acknowledge that certain Member States will not be able to achieve them .
However , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats is going to support the approval of the percentages proposed , but maintaining the upper limits , because the proposal already provides for the possible exceeding of these limits with the permission of the Commission .
We are opposed , however , to the idea of specific objectives for each material , since they would lead to a distortion in competition between materials and reduce the consumer 's scope for choice .
Our proposal - in Amendment No 45 - is a minimum of 25 % for all materials , along the same lines as the Directive in force , although we know that for the plastics sector 25 % will be a very difficult target to reach .
The fact that the objective is 25 % will not prevent it from being exceeded .
Under the current Directive , with 15 % , objectives of 70 or 80 % for recycling are being achieved in certain countries , but nevertheless , this is going to promote free competition between materials within a free market .
I personally believe - and I am not now speaking on behalf of the PPE-DE Group - that the broad objectives for recovery and recycling must be set at local level by the competent authorities , who have the best knowledge of their capacities , their infrastructures and the habits of their consumers .
The Commission proposes that the objectives be fulfilled by June 2006 , and our proposal is that that date be put back to 31 December 2006 , because it is more practical to discuss and take stock by calendar years and because , furthermore , it is a very tight deadline .
In the light of this , I also understand the desire to put compliance with the Directive back to 2008 .
Moreover , the Member States are going to have little time to bring their legislation into line in view of the codecision procedure , which is going to increase the time it takes to adopt the Directive .
However , I believe that delay is a message which Parliament should not send .
On the other hand , I do support differentiated targets and time limits for certain Member States such as Ireland , Greece and Portugal , for whom it is very difficult to keep up with the proposed pace .
We also believe that a prevention objective is not necessary , because , for environmental and economic reasons , such as the payment of the ' Green point ' , which exists in certain countries such as my own , industry is already trying to reduce as far as possible the amount of material used in the manufacture of packaging .
We should bear in mind that the volume of packaging on the market also depends on the quantity of products sold , not just on the materials used in their manufacture .
We are in favour of shared responsibility , so that the manufacturer uses the maximum amount of resources to ensure that the product is appropriately packaged , that the consumer cooperates in the collection of waste and that the municipal authorities manage the volume of waste and recover value from it wherever possible .
We also opt - in Amendment No 44 - for recycling and re-use being promoted equally by the Member States , in accordance with their particular circumstances and infrastructures .
We must be flexible .
Industry is already making efforts to improve the design of its products and to make them more environment-friendly , because this is an aspect which the consumer is increasingly sensitive to , and we should not forget that the Directive we wish to amend arose originally as a result of problems relating to the operation of the internal market .
I would like to make a final observation , and that is that this proposal , like the others presented to us , is intended to be complied with by all the Member States and that the socio-economic conditions , infrastructures , traditions and ways of life vary very widely from one country to another , and this will be even more the case following enlargement .
We in the European Union must therefore implement rules which set minimums which everybody can achieve and which can be raised for anybody who is in a position to meet them .
When the application of legislation becomes a question of exceptions and non-compliances , it is because something is not working .
Mr President , my thanks go to Mrs Corbey for an excellent report .
The Sixth Environmental Action Programme approved the principle that the volume of waste generated should be de-coupled from economic growth .
This is also one of the most important environmental policy objectives of the summit currently being held in Johannesburg .
Indeed , this directive on packaging waste is just part of this problematic issue , but it is now a matter of debate for us here , and we should also bear in mind this higher goal whilst considering it .
For this reason , in any revision of the 1994 directive ambitious targets must be set , as the rapporteur , Mrs Corbey , has also stated .
What the Committee finally decided was not quite what the Social Democrats and the rapporteur wanted ; hopefully , however , we will be able to hold to that target of a 10 % reduction in the generation of waste .
The environmental impact of the use of packaging waste actually requires a lot more research .
It is not wise to establish any rigid hierarchy with regard to re-use and recycling ; in some countries recycling works better , whilst in some regions re-use is more effective .
For example , in Finland the re-use of soft drinks and beer bottles works excellently , and must therefore be encouraged , but in a way that allows everyone to be involved in this system openly .
Research into environmental impact should lead to the establishment of environmental indicators for packaging .
When we discussed this directive with various parties , we noticed that there are just as many experts as there are interested parties associated with the materials .
We must definitely have data based on research regarding which materials improve the state of the environment most and in which circumstances .
For there to be genuine competition between materials , in addition to the targets associated with materials I think there should also be a general aim where competition would be based on bringing more packaging materials that fulfil environmental criteria onto the market .
Recycling is also an excellent solution when talking of sustainable development as a combination of social , economic and environmental policy .
It creates jobs and helps the excluded in this sense , and it improves the state of the environment .
Mr President , on behalf of my group , I would also like to thank my colleague , Mrs Corbey , for a well prepared report .
It is absolutely necessary to revise the packaging directive .
A clear solution regarding objectives for the utilisation of packaging waste must be achieved , because the situation as it is at present is very confused .
The Commission 's proposal for a general level of recycling regarding packaging waste is an ambitious aim , but it is attainable on certain conditions .
Material-specific recycling targets should be closer to one another .
There can be no justification for very different targets , at least with reference to environmental criteria .
Material-specific targets within the EU accord a different status to each material , but Member States are also in an unequal position if their practices regarding packaging and , as a consequence , the proportion of different packaging materials they use varies greatly from one to another .
As has been said here already , it is especially important to prevent the generation of waste .
This can be done , for example , by making effective use of renewable raw materials , by manufacturing good quality , hard-wearing , durable and recyclable products , and by reducing the hazard of waste that results .
Whether the re-use of packaging should be encouraged must be assessed on a case-by-case basis .
For example , fibre packaging is easily manufactured from recyclable , renewable raw materials .
It is often more beneficial environmentally speaking and cheaper than re-usable packaging .
Mr President , firstly , as other Members have done , I would like to thank the rapporteur for the attention she paid to each of us who presented amendments and her acceptance of some of those amendments .
I agree with the Commissioner that the 1994 Directive has certain positive aspects , in that , to a greater or lesser extent , all the Member States distribute waste at source and recover , recycle and re-use waste .
I believe that it has those effects , although there are significant differences in each of the Member States .
I also agree with the rapporteur that it would be necessary , on this as on other aspects of environmental policy , since there are regulations , directives and decisions , to simplify and consolidate the legislation .
There are perhaps two issues which are the most controversial amongst the various groups : the first is the levels of concentration of lead , cadmium , mercury and chromium present in packaging and the second is the particular percentage of recycling and recovery for each of the materials proposed .
I believe that in the end it may be necessary to deal with the strictest aspects of these two issues , in order to be able to achieve a possible conciliation with a high level in the Directive .
There is also a concern of the rapporteur which we share , relating to the marketing of recycled products , which involves very many difficulties and , like the rapporteur , I believe that the public administrations must have these opportunities to contract recycled products .
I will end , Mr President , with what I believe to be the most important aspect of this issue : prevention .
Consumers must participate in prevention .
Experience demonstrates that consumers , if they are appropriately informed , duly participate in it .
For their part , as we saw in Johannesburg , producers are responsible for the use of materials which produce less waste and they must take account of the emission of greenhouse gases , dumping and the protection of scant natural resources .
Mr President , after a delay of one year the European Commission 's proposal to amend the packaging and packaging waste directive is finally before us .
I should like to thank Mrs Corbey for her work on this report .
I very much welcome the improvements made and hope that they will help in our efforts to reduce waste within the European Union .
It is extremely regrettable , however , that Member State governments are so unwilling to put the environment before big business , in particular in light of the rhetoric on sustainable development we have heard from Johannesburg over the past week .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance has tabled several amendments in an effort to further improve the text .
I should like to take this opportunity to briefly explain our reasoning behind some of these amendments .
Firstly , on the time : we propose a compromise date of 2007 rather than 2008 .
The Commission 's proposal is already one year behind schedule and according to the objectives should be postponed by one year but no more .
I also welcome the PPE Group 's amendment of a 2006 deadline , which would be better .
Secondly , prevention and reuse of packaging waste should be increased to reduce its environmental impact .
Waste prevention must be the first priority of the EU 's waste policy and yet too little is done about it .
Reuse systems have been shown to be beneficial to the environment , provided a minimum number of reuse cycles is achieved and transport distances are not too great .
They are often hampered by the use of too many different bottle types .
We have suggested that the Commission should look into the possibility of a uniform bottle type and of taking Community action to facilitate reuse .
Thirdly , we have tried to strengthen the use of recycling as opposed to recovery .
According to waste management strategy , recycling is environmentally more beneficial than recovery and , in my opinion , ' recovery ' is just another word for incineration - a polluting activity with significant environmental and health impacts .
For that reason recycling rather than recovery should be increased .
The Commission is saying that Member States ' shall encourage energy recovery ' .
' Shall encourage ' - the Commission is forcing Member States to introduce incineration .
For my own country , Ireland , this would be just wonderful because that is what it wants to do .
It does not want to solve the waste problem , it wants to burn it !
Look at the attitude towards recovery .
No maximum is set by the Council - which is very interesting - yet it has set a maximum for recycling targets , which is farcical .
Why should we prevent more recycling if it is possible ?
Fourthly , there should be no maximum targets for recycling as it is environmentally beneficial to promote a shift to materials which are recyclable and more ambitious minimum targets should be achieved .
As I have said , the idea of setting a maximum is not acceptable .
We have also proposed that exports of packaging waste to non-EU countries should not count towards the achievement of the targets .
Exports of packaging wastes are currently unregulated and are in violation of the requirements of Annex 2 of the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movement of Waste if they pose a significant threat to the development of environmentally sound recycling infrastructure for packaging waste in the EU and exacerbate the waste problem in the importing country .
At least some of the packaging waste currently exported from the EU is processed in operations that are harmful to human health and the environment , or landfilled instead of recycled , which should not be encouraged .
Finally , we propose several amendments covering heavy metals and PVCs .
Heavy metals should not be deliberately used in packaging after 2006 and there is no reason to exempt recycled materials from restrictions in relation to heavy metals .
According to the Commission 's studies on PVC there is no safe disposal method .
Current recycling rates of PVC packaging are less than 3 % in the EU and all of it is down-cycling , which produces inferior quality with no environmental or economic benefits .
We should phase out in line with the European Parliament 's resolution on PVC , which called for substitution policies to be introduced .
In 1997 , 58 million tonnes of packaging waste was produced .
In 1998 that increased to 60 million tonnes , equivalent to 2 kgs per day for a four-person family .
Some Member States have only half as much as others - here I am comparing like with like .
Finland and Sweden have 100 kgs per person per year ; France and Italy , which are very similar countries , have 200 kgs per person per year .
There are no figures for countries like Portugal , Ireland and Greece , which want a derogation .
I find it completely incomprehensible that my own country , Ireland - a country where the living standards are almost the highest in Europe and which has a booming economy - wants an exemption for its waste problems .
Austria , Denmark and the Netherlands reduced by 10 % the amount of packaging placed on the market from 1997 to 1998 .
So it can be achieved , we can achieve a reduction if we put the policies in place to encourage this .
Mr President , according to the Bible , we are stewards , all bearing responsibility for preserving the environment .
In our view , European environmental policy should therefore aim to protect the entire creation , including the health of people , animals and plants and the quality of air , water and soil .
Since packaging material in weight accounts for approximately one third of all household and industrial waste , you will appreciate the importance we attach to harmonising national measures in order to avoid , or reduce , the harmful environmental effects of packaging and packaging waste .
We are reasonably pleased with the directive as it is now before us .
I am specifically using the word ' reasonably ' , because the proposed review provides only for the stepping up of measures to recover and recycle material .
What is missing are more effective rules for the prevention of waste , the re-use of packaging material and producer responsibility .
Radical changes in these areas are absolutely crucial .
This is why the amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy are a good start .
Mrs Corbey , the rapporteur , has worked very hard and has , thanks to cooperation , achieved a good result .
I would like to congratulate her warmly on this and take the opportunity to call on the Commission to adopt a pro-active stance with regard to the new approach previously announced , in which the said matters will be dealt with in greater depth .
The proposal amended by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy that is before us , is , in our view , a first step in the right direction .
Mr President , I will , if I may , concentrate on the French approach to packaging , with which I am most familiar .
In France , manufacturers have introduced a policy of reducing packaging at source by means of the procedure for certifying conformity with standard 13428 on prevention .
Conformity with this standard is only mandatory in France and the United Kingdom .
The amendments which I tabled in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy sought to extend this procedure to all the Member States .
My colleagues did not include my proposal , but they were nonetheless sensitive to it , for Amendment No 16 to paragraph 5 of the provision in question states , quite rightly , that the Commission will before the end of 2004 evaluate the implementation of standard CEN EN 13428 on prevention in all the Member States .
I would draw the attention of my colleagues to the need to remove the change introduced by Amendment No 16 to Article 4 ( 1 ) ( a ) , for an arbitrary limit on the quantity of packaging does not take into account either economic growth or sociological development .
Indeed , unit sales are increasing rapidly in a world where more and more people are living alone .
It is through respect for standard CEN EN 13428 on prevention that the volume of packaging , its global tonnage , will be decreased , as is shown by the French example .
That is precisely the challenge that we have to take up .
I would like to draw your attention once again to the dangers of adopting an environmental indicator for packaging , as proposed by the change introduced by Amendment No 16 to Article 4 ( 3 ) ( a ) .
There is no need for this additional indicator for packaging , in that a standardisation tool already exists although it needs to be better enforced by manufacturers .
Furthermore , its complex definition should take into account all the relevant criteria such as the nature of the product , the raw material requirements , the manufacturing processes and the collection and recycling systems available .
The differences between the situations in the different countries have meant , I am sure , that the results are not representative .
Lastly , on the subject of re-use , this form of recycling should not be encouraged systematically , because the environmental impact of an item of re-usable packaging is not necessarily less harmful than that of an item of disposable packaging .
A number of studies have confirmed this , particularly in the bottled drinks sector , and I will not go into the complaints lodged by the Commission against certain Member States who generated trade distortions by making the return system mandatory .
I therefore call upon the Members to vote against Amendment No 17 .
We live in a society which functions according to a rhythm worthy of the machine in Chaplin 's ' Modern Times ' : produce , package , throw away and , increasingly , I am glad to say , recycle and re-use .
Let us not , however , lose sight of the fact that packaging is more than just an unfortunate side effect of our consumer society .
It is not just there to look pretty or attract the customer : in the main , packaging serves an essential purpose .
The solution to the problem facing us is to make this product subject to environmental requirements and to view it in the context of its entire life cycle .
Here we are again talking about waste and saying that the 1994 directive has had the desired impact , although the results differ between countries , between regions , between town and countryside .
The progress made is clear to see .
The Commission 's proposal seeking to improve the directive 's objectives would , nevertheless , appear quite appropriate .
I can therefore only support this step for , in view of the difficulties encountered in the field with regard to the treatment of waste , particularly the treatment of packaging waste , it would seem premature to want to undertake a more in-depth review of the text .
There is only one essential demand Parliament must make in this matter , and that is for realism , for our goal is to facilitate the treatment of packaging waste as far as we can and , even before packaging reaches the market , to provide for waste packaging which does the least possible harm to our environment .
We therefore need an integrated policy for products and their packaging .
Moreover , we must look for outlets for our waste .
Recycling is often problematic and it is therefore necessary to apply the principle of prevention and to limit the volume of packaging .
Our legislation must , quite simply , integrate prevention , but it also needs to be simpler and more flexible .
Some of the definitions used in the directive are also clarified , but the main problem at European level remains the harmonisation of definitions .
That became quite clear when Parliament was examining the texts .
Quite apart from the problem of waste packaging , it is essential that an in-depth reform is carried out and that the answer to a simple question - ' What constitutes waste ? ' - is found .
The problem of waste in Europe is fundamental - for the Community institutions , for the national governments , for local authorities , for companies and for our fellow citizens , who have a key role to play .
Perhaps we should be working towards a framework directive on waste .
Mr President , I am very pleased to be here today for more than one reason because , looking around the room , perhaps I am one of the few people who was actually here when we first wrote the packaging directive .
I feel a special responsibility to ensure that we do not forget that and ensure that this directive continues to develop in a positive way for the environment .
I welcome this proposal but I am not sure whether the timing is particularly good , coming as it does from the Commission before we can fully assess the impact of enlargement .
I think that we have to be sure that what we do to the directive on this occasion is a positive and sensible thing and we do not , for example , try to table ego-amendments rather than eco-amendments .
Politicians always tend to want to change directives and demonstrate their power .
What we have to do today is take a rather more limited approach than we took with the first packaging directives of many years ago .
But I see this as a useful opportunity , if we can take that approach , to adjust the directive in the light of experience .
We have learned that recycling is not in itself a good thing but only good when it is positive and beneficial to the environment .
Therefore , many of the tools that we have gradually developed need further refinement , whether life-cycle analysis or some of the other tools .
These will tell us the real value of the work that we are doing and that we are asking others to do .
Simply raising the targets without any thoughtful consideration of them is not something that we should do on this occasion .
Let us take the Commission targets , which are not bad targets at all - the Commission proposal is not a bad proposal at all - let us examine them carefully and let us refine them .
Let us see if we can improve them .
Perhaps minimum targets for each material is not a bad idea .
There are some materials that do indeed need a lot more work on them , or if you look at the area of glass and metal perhaps less work .
We need to think very carefully about this directive .
We must ensure that it is acceptable not just to those countries that are already and fully implementing the packaging directive but also to those that will have to implement it in coming times .
We must bear in mind , of course , the very different situation countries like Malta will find themselves in .
Smaller countries with particularly difficult waste disposal problems cannot really be realistically expected to adhere to exactly the same levels of recycling that might be achievable in the Netherlands .
We are also talking about Central and Eastern Europe and that is why I wonder whether we should not pause for a little thought before we push too far ahead with a radical revision of this proposal .
Circumstances and conditions in those countries that will shortly be members of the European Union will dictate that we take a different approach to some of the legislation .
In particular when it comes to packaging , there has to be some kind of uniform and level playing field across Europe , in which case we have to be realistic about what is achievable in central and eastern Europe in the foreseeable future .
Finally , I would say that when we sit down today , I hope we will perhaps feel satisfied and happy and have a warm glow inside us , but also feel that we have done something not just for our egos but for the environment .
Mr President , in the context of Johannesburg and the commitments to sustainability by the EU , it should not be too much to ask this Parliament to give concrete expression to sustainability , particularly in requiring that the principle of producer responsibility and the internalisation of external costs be enshrined in the current review .
We have already agreed this in the case of the electronic and electrical waste directive .
I am particularly concerned that my own Member State , Ireland , is seeking derogations yet again .
Why should this be agreed in view of the recent economic expansion there ?
My colleague has already mentioned this .
Irish industry is currently paying a levy to Repak to meet commitments that are not being met .
Minimum targets are being met , for example by the recycling of paper offcuts which have traditionally been reused , so there is more perception of progress than actual progress and a lot of smoke and mirrors around the meeting of minimum targets .
I am also very concerned about monopolies and cartels in the paper industry , particularly in Ireland .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the report Mrs Corbey has presented is a comprehensive and ambitious one , and I endorse most of its points .
All the Member States need in future to work together , in an active and constructive way , on avoiding packaging waste and on systematically collecting and recycling it .
The best possible systems are needed to deal with the approximately 58 million tonnes of packaging waste that the European Union produces every year .
They will enable us to ensure better protection for the environment , and also , at the same time , to give important sectors of industry greater security in terms of planning .
There are two amendments that I see as being of enormous importance when we come to the vote .
The first has to do with ceramic containers , which have for decades been produced in many Member States , principally France , Italy , the Netherlands and Spain , but also in family-run businesses in the region from which I come .
Ceramic bottles , ceramic pots , and ceramic bowls are nowadays used mainly for the packaging of foodstuffs , but also for the packaging of distilled liquors , chocolates , patés and so on , and they make up only 0.1 % of the European Union 's waste packaging , in other words , 60 000 tonnes out of a total 58 million tonnes .
Such ceramic packaging consists of nothing but baked clay and does not , therefore , contain pollutants of any sort .
The characteristics of the material make the recovery of the used ceramic containers pointless .
They cannot be recovered thermally , nor can they be recycled .
They are inert and pose no risk to the environment .
Locating such small quantities separately , collecting them separately and transporting them for thousands of kilometres across the Member States , would make no sense in either environmental or economic terms .
I therefore ask you to support Amendment No 68 , which creates a derogation for small quantities as regards recovery targets .
My second point has to do with the recognition given by the Directive to the latest processes for reprocessing plastics .
If we are to amend this Directive , we should take the opportunity to also make the objectives set by law technically up to date .
Amendment No 43 provides for the recovery of materials from plastics , facilitating the use of polluted waste plastics to produce plastics as good as new .
This process makes perfect sense in both ecological and economic terms and has proved its technical worth on a large scale .
In Germany , for example , it has already been used to recover raw materials from over 1.8 million tonnes of waste plastic .
Technology of this sort has enormous potential , providing as it does another method for recovering synthetic materials in addition to the melting down of plastic packaging of genuinely high value and the merely thermal recovery of mixed plastics in waste incineration plants .
That is why it should be incorporated into the Directive .
Over and above this , the protection of consumers makes it necessary for packaging materials to be safe , for them to comply with the requirement that the hazards of waste be minimised , and for the manufacture of packaging to use the most up to date technology .
I do not think much of the idea of developing environmental indicators for packaging .
The Commission should , rather , be working towards definite criteria for the assessment of the impact packaging has on the environment .
We need this Directive in order to establish a working system for managing packaging waste in all the Member States of the European Union .
Mr President , I have recently started to take a keen interest in waste issues , not simply because of the environmental needs of saving our planet 's resources , but also because I represent Wales , a region which has one of the worst records on waste in the EU .
97 % of our waste is landfilled .
At last the people in my country are starting to take the issue seriously , but coming from such a long way behind we need to be realistic about how quickly countries such as the UK and Spain can catch up with nations such as Germany which have already set the pace .
It will take years for the UK to approve the planning permission that will be necessary to build the plants in order to meet these targets .
It will take years for local authorities to follow public procurement rules .
It will take huge efforts to persuade the public to separate their rubbish and it will take ages to develop a market for recyclets .
That is why we need an extra two years to implement the rule change as agreed in committee .
I am delighted to see that the Council of Ministers have agreed to set relatively high standards in the whole area of recovery and recycling .
I am pleased to see that the committee has agreed to the suggestion of harmonising data collection in this field , so we can be really sure we are comparing like with like across Member States .
We must put pressure on business to reduce unnecessary packaging .
We have seen time and time again that voluntary agreements in the business world are rarely honoured .
That is why a compulsory reduction in packaging for goods should be agreed to .
An environmental indicator to measure packaging has certain merits , but so far no one has managed to explain to me exactly how this would work and I therefore have reservations about writing into European law a system that does not yet exist .
I hope that we all take our responsibilities seriously .
The governments need to take their responsibility for waste seriously , but so do all of us as individuals .
Mr President , as we debate the revision of targets set in the 1994 packaging directive , in an effort to reduce the EU 's growing mountain of packaging waste , I would like to thank our rapporteur , Mrs Corbey and the shadow rapporteur Mrs Ayuso González , for their hard work in this very important area .
There are two issues in this debate , the first is the targets and the second is the timetable .
While I agree with the emphasis on prevention targets and not only on the new recycling and reuse targets , I feel strongly that national authorities in each Member State should be free to optimise their own mix of recovery and recycling options .
In relation to the timetable , I urge the Commission to carry out further studies to ensure that the targets applicable in the EU are also right for countries at the margin , not the least the new applicant states .
The consultants engaged to assist the Commission in setting the revised targets , RDC-Environment and Pira International , assumed a number of underlying principles which do not apply to some Member States , such as Greece , Portugal and Ireland .
They fail to take specific geographical and demographic problems into account .
For example , in Ireland 80 % of our packaging is imported .
Therefore there are limited indigenous outlets to use recycling packaging in the manufacture of new packaging .
Hence my amendment , for which I urge support , for a 2011 timetable deadline for Greece , Portugal and Ireland .
I believe that the EU environment ministers appear to have already reached a ' common orientation ' on this Directive in June 2002 .
They called for a deadline of 2012 for Portugal , Greece and Ireland .
That is fine by me .
The real issue is that we should set realistically attainable targets and timetables and insist on the Irish , Greeks , Portuguese and others delivering on time , with no excuses .
I should like to end with a good news story , a dramatic example of a fiscal incentive to prevent , minimise , reuse and recycle and an example of how each Member State can determine its own mix of prevention , reuse and recycling to meet targets .
On 4 March 2002 , our environment minister introduced a plastic bag tax in Ireland , 15 % per bag .
It has had an incredible effect .
We have had a 90 % decrease in consumption in just a few months .
One billion plastic bags have been taken out of circulation in six months .
The Exchequer has collected EUR 3.5 million since March this year .
The turnaround has been dramatic and there have been few complaints .
There was a moan or two for a week when we would forget to bring the old shopping bags , but in changing the mindset this tax on its own has done what years of talking in this Parliament and national parliaments could not do .
I hope that the fact we have already done something to deal with the problem of these wretched plastic bags will not be held against us in relation to targets .
Perhaps we were a year too early , because this would have allowed us to show a dramatic improvement in meeting all targets and timetables - I am being somewhat sarcastic but it is a serious point .
The scheme has been a huge success and I would urge other countries to follow suit immediately to deal with this scourge .
I understand the United Kingdom is looking at it .
It will do more than all the talking and directives and transposition into national law .
Mr President , Commissioner , I , too , would like to thank Mrs Corbey most warmly for the great effort she has put in .
She had , apart from anything else , 123 amendments to work through , 35 of which were from my group alone .
Let me now also express very warm thanks to Mrs Ayuso González , who managed to achieve a coalition of highly divergent intentions in a most important area . I am referring to Amendment No 45 , to which I personally will be giving firm support .
You see , the Packaging Directive has already been transposed in widely divergent ways , and incurred different costs , in the individual Member States , rather than leading to the harmonisation that is required .
The maximum rate is therefore meant to prevent the four-speed Europe in this area from drifting even further apart , with even greater distortions of competition being the consequence .
Since 1994 , the current quotas have been achieved only by Austria , Germany , Belgium , the Netherlands and Denmark , although one has to bear in mind that the Netherlands and Denmark have done so only because they have fully-developed and highly economical systems of waste incineration , whereas Belgium and Germany have managed it through the use of the sort of recovery processes that environmental considerations make less than desirable and which will , indeed , cease to be authorised as a result of a change in definition contained in the proposal for a Directive .
As regards the burden of costs , Austria comes second in Europe , and it is high import levels and the huge problem of freeloaders getting away with not paying their way , especially in the plastics sector , that put Austrian foodstuff production , like , no doubt , that of other States as well , at the greatest competitive disadvantage .
As we have said so many times already , we will vote for this draft , but one most specific area seems to me to be in real need of improvement .
The Commission proposes that , in addition , the following minimum targets for the recovery of materials contained in packaging waste should be achieved : 60 % by weight for glass , 65 % by weight for paper , and so on .
With your permission , I will turn to Amendment No 45 .
The 25 % by weight minimum target for the recovery of materials is quite adequate for materials such as glass , paper , carton , metals and plastics .
As an Austrian , you see , I have not the slightest problem with it , but we have also learned that , where countries are quite simply not so far advanced , there is no point in giving them targets that they know they will not achieve anyway .
I do think it makes more ecological sense to set an objective that is actually capable of being achieved by all Europe 's states and economies .
We have always made environmental policy with business rather than against it .
Only an environmentally responsible market economy will enable us to reach our goal .
Mr President , I also wish to thank the rapporteur for her thorough work , and I particularly want to thank our Group 's shadow rapporteur for her balanced views .
This is an important directive we have been waiting for , as recycling must be introduced effectively precisely where it will genuinely benefit the environment , and the volume of waste generated must be dramatically reduced .
Recycling for the sake of recycling itself is something we have no need of ; it must mean a genuine saving .
By virtue of its legislative nature the directive should still allow for flexibility on the part of Member States in its implementation .
The criterion must therefore be genuine conservation of the environment .
Population density and distance will be the deciding factors in assessing whether recycling is sensible .
Overall recovery and recycling targets should be considered to be along the same lines , that is , along the lines of the Commission proposal .
This would prevent the use of recyclable materials merely as sources of energy .
I am of the same view as Mrs Corbey that material-specific recycling targets should not be put forward .
Apart from the fact that they would be awkward to set , it might mean that one sector is favoured and it might therefore distort competition .
I tabled amendments both for the Committee and plenary session . They concern really quite small details , but are the sort of thing this directive seems to need for it not to become too cumbersome .
One fairly prosaic example is the toilet paper tube .
Perhaps many of us would not be eager to class it as packaging waste that would then have to be recycled and used , for example , in our neighbour 's toilet roll .
It is to be hoped the directive will have an impact in two directions : it will be of major importance in rationalising practice , but , hopefully , also in preventing the generation of waste .
The volume of waste should be de-coupled from economic growth , as my colleague Mrs Myller quite rightly stated here .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me start by expressing my heartfelt thanks for the way your discussion of the Commission proposal has demonstrated your commitment .
I would like to comment on the most important of the amendments that have been dealt with and which are due to be voted on tomorrow .
The position taken by the Commission on these is that , firstly , as regards the timing , that is to say the extension of the deadline by which the targets are to be achieved , the Commission continues to favour an ambitious timetable .
In principle , though , it is able to accept delay to a limited extent .
Turning to the targets , the targets proposed by the Commission ought to remain largely unchanged .
They are based on a cost / benefit analysis of the proposals .
There is , in particular , no justification in cost / benefit terms for an increase in the minimum target for recycling from 55 % to 65 % , and so the Commission rejects this .
Nor is it willing to reduce the targets for glass , paper and metals from 60 % , 55 % or 50 % to 25 % , as these materials can be recycled with great benefit to the environment and at low cost .
We see these objectives , specific to certain materials , as also being necessary in terms of legislative clarity and of security of investment for firms offering recycling services .
As regards the maximum targets , the proposed deletion of the maximum target for recycling can result in distortions of the internal market if more material is collected than is capable of being recycled .
This can lead to increasing problems in the sale of collected materials , especially in the countries that have introduced their own recycling programmes only at a late stage .
On the question or prioritising the prevention of waste over its management , the Commission , in principle , shares your view that it is more important to prevent waste than to manage it .
However , this issue merits further consideration in terms of the criteria by which prevention should be guided , whether these should be the environmental effects or the weight involved .
The Commission is unable to endorse the introduction of 10 % reduction as a quantitative prevention target , as it is not clear how this objective is to be implemented and what the costs and benefits might be .
The possibility cannot be excluded that such a measure might have a negative overall impact on the environment , especially if it were only to bring about greater use of lightweight packaging such as plastic .
The requirement that , when choosing packaging , its impact on the environment should be minimised on the basis of life-cycle assessments , is in essence acceptable as proposed , even though an approach of this sort may well need to be worked out in more detail , and it is also preferable that it should be developed in the context of the Directive 's basic requirements .
I would also like to express the Commission 's gratitude to the rapporteur and her co-rapporteur and thank the Committee as a whole for the work they have done .
In total , there are 68 amendments , six of which the Commission is able to adopt in their entirety , whilst it can adopt six in part and accept fifteen of them in principle .
The bureau has been given a list of the amendments to which I have referred
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0230 / 2002 ) by Mr Deva , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on trade and development for poverty eradication and food security .
Mr President , we meet here as the World Summit on Sustainable Development is meeting in South Africa , following the ground-breaking meeting of the WTO in Doha last year .
It is also the day that the new Director-General of the World Trade Organisation takes office .
Dr Supachai Panitchpakdi is the first Director-General from a developing country .
We wish him well and also acknowledge with thanks the hard work done by Mr Mike Moore , the departing Director-General .
Let us remind ourselves of the United Nations Secretary-General 's report on globalisation to the Millennium Assembly .
He said that inclusive globalisation must be built on the great enabling force of the market and market forces alone will not achieve it .
It requires a broader effort to create a shared future based on our common humanity .
This report is an attempt to bring the Secretary-General 's hopes into a legislative framework here in the European Parliament .
It is trade , not aid , that will eliminate world poverty and accelerate sustainable development .
It is trade , not aid , in partnership with the global business community that will increase industrial , intellectual , educational and infrastructural capacities in developing countries and repeat what is now called the Asian miracle , which I am told is alive and well in China .
It is trade , not aid , that will drive the solutions to food security , clean water , housing , sanitation and information technology through foreign direct and inward investment .
Over the past 50 years , world trade has increased 19-fold .
Production has more than quadrupled and world per capita income has doubled .
But unfortunately the human development report shows that the spread of technology , trade and wealth has not been equal , with the world 's richest nations accounting for 20 % of the world 's population but 86 % of the world 's GDP , 82 % of exports , 68 % of foreign direct investment and 93 % of Internet users .
64 countries are categorised in this group but the biggest proportion of the world 's people are in the medium development category , including India , China and Indonesia and so on .
These people are having severe structural , infrastructural , environmental and population problems .
There are 51 chronically low-income countries , mainly in Africa but also in Asia and Central America , which depend entirely on aid because there is very little direct foreign investment .
We have to look at the world as it is , not the way we think the world should be .
In the world as it is , the combined gross national product of 182 developing countries is less than the global turnover of the top 200 of the largest multinational companies , the transnational corporations , of which there are 65 000 in all .
There are 200 chairmen of transnational corporations whose combined turnover is bigger than the combined GNPs of presidents and finance ministers of 182 countries , encompassing probably the largest population groups in the world .
But my report proposes that the people who are running these huge multinational corporations are brought into the development process , first by encouraging them to accept good governance and corporate social responsibility as enunciated by the United Nations Secretary-General .
We must create a framework in which the European Parliament , members of national parliaments and the directors of these companies can come together in a forum regularly , twice a year , with the rotating presidency of the EU to discuss matters of development and sustainability , not once in a blue moon as in Johannesburg or in Rio , but in a continuous dialogue .
As part of this , I have proposed in my report that they set up something called an ethical investment committee on the lines of remuneration committees and other committees in boards of directors .
The committee 's job would be to identify development investment , investment as offset investments in developing countries .
About 0.7 % of their turnover in that country would go into investment projects to build intellectual , educational and infrastructural capacity in developing countries .
That way everybody gains : the company because it gets a more skilled labour force and the country because it improves its capacity .
I hope that Parliament will approve my proposal unanimously .
May I thank the many people who have helped me with this report and express the hope that it will be passed tomorrow without any dissension .

Mr President , the Commission very much welcomes Mr Deva 's report on trade and development for poverty eradication and food security .
The report is timely because of the World Summit on Sustainable Development , which is taking place at this moment in Johannesburg .
It should also be seen in the context of the commitments made at the Doha Ministerial Conference last November and the Monterrey Conference on Financing for Development last March .
It is also timely as negotiations on economic partnership agreements will be launched with the African , Caribbean and Pacific States at the end of this month .
The European Union , as the largest trade bloc in the world and the largest source of foreign direct investment and official development assistance , has an important role to play .
I am pleased to note that the Union 's imports from developing countries have been rising by 15 % per year over the past seven years .
This is much faster than the imports from other countries .
At the same time , I am aware that many developing countries , particularly the least-developed countries , have not fully shared in this growth .
Much more needs to be done .
The motion for a resolution and Mr Deva 's report are broad in scope - and rightly so .
The Commission welcomes the overall thrust of the analysis and recommendations .
Indeed , while there is no doubt that trade can potentially contribute to development , poverty eradication and food security , the actual contribution depends on enabling policies and institutions being in place .
I can assure you that the Commission will pay close attention to honouring the negotiating commitments made towards the developing countries in Doha .
The Doha development agenda will address the improvement of market access , new trade rules that take into account the needs of developing countries and the further mainstreaming of trade matters into development and cooperation .
As to access , and the area of agriculture which is of particular interest to many developing countries , the Doha Declaration states that ' Building on the work carried out to date and without prejudging the outcome of negotiations we commit ourselves to comprehensive negotiations aimed at substantial improvements in market access ; reductions of , with a view to phasing out , all forms of export subsidies ; and substantial reductions in trade-distorting domestic support . '
For non-agricultural products , the Doha Declaration foresees : ' ... negotiations which shall aim ... to reduce or as appropriate eliminate tariffs , including the reduction or elimination of tariff peaks , high tariffs and tariff escalation , as well as non-tariff barriers , in particular on products of export interest to developing countries . '
Needless to say , this is an ambitious negotiating agenda , but one of great relevance for developing countries .
As regards rule-making , several subjects of great importance for developing countries will be covered : intellectual property , sanitary and phytosanitary measures , technical barriers to trade , competition , trade facilitation , government procurement and investment .
The provisions applying to regional trade agreements are another subject of negotiation .
These negotiations will need to take into account the developmental aspects of regional trade agreements .
Furthermore , the provisions for special and differential treatment in favour of developing countries will be reviewed with a view to strengthening them and making them more precise , effective and operational .
I am convinced that the Doha negotiations will make a great contribution towards making the multilateral trading system and its rules more development-friendly .
In relation to the third aspect - mainstreaming trade in development cooperation - the European Union has already made important progress over the past few years .
The Community 's development policy , based on the Commission 's communication of April 2000 , identified trade as one of six priorities for its development assistance .
I would also like to draw your attention to the Commission 's communication in February of this year on a global partnership for sustainable development .
Furthermore the Commission is at present working on a communication on trade and development , which will describe how mainstreaming trade should go well beyond technical assistance and embrace capacity building , training , institutional support , the preparation of fiscal reform and assistance for adjustment on the supply side .
The involvement of civil society and the private sector , including large corporations , which figures prominently in Mr Deva 's report , is also essential .
I am pleased to say that over the past years around EUR 640 million were allocated by the Union for trade-related assistance , of which about 61 % went to the ACP Group , 14 % to Latin America and 12 % to the Mediterranean .
For the current ACP programming exercise for the ninth EDF , between 40 and 50 % of the regional indicative programmes - EUR 280 to 350 million - is earmarked for trade-related assistance in the broad sense .
In addition , up to EUR 50 million have been pledged for new programmes with ACP-wide scope .
The Union is also the main provider of funds for the Global Trust Fund created for technical assistance provided by the World Trade Organisation in support of the Doha development agenda .
For the Commission , regional integration is very much part and parcel of a strategy of opening the economy and taking advantage of trading opportunities .
Regional integration initiatives among developing countries , South-South integration , can contribute to their effective integration into the global economy and to the multilateral system , provided that they are outwardly oriented and lead to lower external barriers .
Therefore the Union is committed to continuing its support for realistic South-South integration .
At the same time it is stepping up its efforts to use North-South integration to stimulate deeper and more effective integration within the South .
This approach should be reflected in the economic partnership agreements between ACP regional groupings and the Union .
Among the industrial countries , the European Union took a lead last year with the Everything But Arms initiative .
All exports from the least-developed countries , except arms , can enter the EU market without restriction .
Only for three products - rice , sugar and bananas - is there a transition period .
The benefits of this initiative for the least-developed countries would be greatly enhanced if the other industrial countries , as well as the larger trading nations among the developing countries , were to make a similar gesture .
In conclusion , I should like to say that Mr Deva 's report makes a constructive and far-reaching contribution in helping to define strategies to allow developing countries to take advantage of trade and globalisation in order to attain the fundamental development objectives of poverty eradication and food security .
The Commission can benefit from this analysis and assessment during the forthcoming multilateral and regional negotiations .
A regular dialogue on this with Parliament is most welcome .
Mr President , the 1990s saw an almost universal opening up of world trade , while , worldwide , with the exception of China , the number of people living in absolute poverty increased .
The number of countries classed as ' least developed ' has increased , while the scale of poverty has continued to be huge in a number of countries with a high growth rate .
The relationships between trade , development and poverty are complex , then , and we must avoid hasty judgments .
My report to the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , which was adopted unanimously , contains proposals on this subject , some of which have been included in the Deva report .
I will just focus on two main issues here .
Firstly , aid , particularly technical assistance , is a key issue .
There is very little information available on this subject but there appear to be a wealth of horror stories .
What is essential is that the countries concerned can define their needs and communicate them to international agencies , setting themselves objectives and pursuing them .
That is where our support is needed , and we must ensure that civil society and companies in the field participate as widely as possible .
We must break with the practice of setting biased conditions which , in actual fact , serve the interests of the dominant countries .
Aid must serve principally to create local diversified supply capacity .
Any trade administration must be established at the level of regional common markets .
The report also requires the WTO to negotiate social measures to give vulnerable peoples new prospects in the face of the impact of liberalisation .
Moreover , it calls for the issue of migrant workers to be included in the negotiations on services .
Lastly , it calls for aid to offset losses from customs receipts in the least-developed countries .
Secondly , the report considers that the place of anti-poverty objectives at the very heart of unilateral trade rules still needs to be defined .
I fear that the Commission may be frankly sceptical about Special and Differentiated Treatment .
Not so us : we call for it to be redefined .
As regards future negotiations on investment , they may prove to be fruitful , but we would warn that direct investments very seldom reach the poorest countries and , when they do , it is in return for tax favours which harm these countries first of all .
Without cooperation between the WTO and the other major bodies , without combating financial fragility , it is unlikely that the negotiations on investment will produce fruitful results for all those who are afflicted by poverty in the world .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to begin by saying that my feelings about this debate are bittersweet .
On the one hand , Mr Deva has defended this own-initiative report which he has worked on for a long time with great dedication and taking up many interesting contributions .
I would particularly like to highlight the consultations he has held with all the governments of the developing countries in order to hear their opinions and suggestions , in particular what these countries expect from the Millennium Round .
The result is this report , which comes with the unanimous backing of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , to be voted on tomorrow .
But allow me , Mr President , to mention the less pleasant aspect of the issue .
In the recitals , the rapporteur mentions more than twenty documents , resolutions and international agreements of recent years which demand more decisive action to fight poverty and the list is not exhaustive .
22 years have passed since Willy Brandt presented his impressive report on North-South relations .
Since then , things have only got worse .
We know about the examples of success , but unfortunately there are many , many more cases which show that , after decades of persistent growth , this world has never been less egalitarian ; never has the distribution of wealth been as uneven as it is now .
I therefore believe that we cannot continue merely to make proposals , even if they are as interesting as those made today by Mr Deva .
The problem of poverty throughout the world - including Europe - is not economic ; it is a political problem , which requires political and global solutions .
It is pointless to seek the people responsible , as is currently happening in Johannesburg .
We do not have guilty and innocent parties here , just victims .
And all the rest of us are guilty to a greater or lesser extent .
The financial resources approved in Monterrey , which have been mentioned by the representative of the Commission , represent a step forward , but everyone agrees that they are insufficient .
The international organisations cannot continue to be the guardians of orthodoxy while one country after another falls victim to crises , not just in Africa , but also in Central America , South America and in other regions .
I wonder why the representatives of the European countries , which constitute a majority in the International Monetary Fund , are not able to opt for new formulas which speed up the development of the poorest countries and those countries which are becoming poorer as a result of bad government and corruption .
The regional economic blocs , apart from our own European Union , are not living through good times .
We only need think about Mercosur or the Andean Pact .
We must be tougher in our demands for progress in the direction set in Doha , in order to bring about greater openness in the markets , which will stimulate world trade .
We must apply pressure in order that those who have resources may contribute more of them .
The Commissioner has mentioned the data relating to the European Union , which are certainly the most important data given for development aid in the world .
But the trend is not satisfactory , Commissioner .
Official development aid in the European Union has been decreasing over recent years .
Therefore , the data are as you say , but the trend illustrated by the current data is not acceptable to us .
We must promote and stimulate more democracy and the development of human rights , of health , of food and of education for all . Also , and above all , in the developing countries .
We must fight aggressively against corruption in all its forms , which exists without doubt in the least developed countries , but which also exists - and this is more reprehensible - amongst us .
I agree very much with Mr Deva 's comments on the greater involvement and co-responsibility of the large multinational corporations , but I must say that many of these leave much to be desired , and that their actions now move in the opposite direction .
These are the essential elements if we are to shed light where there is only gloom ( to recall Conrad ) , but let us demand more action , more decisions and fewer words .
Mr President , thank you and congratulations to Mr Deva for a very wide-ranging and comprehensive report .
It is , as Commissioner Byrne said , appropriate that we are here just as those long and arduous deliberations are taking place in Johannesburg .
But perhaps more important and appropriate for us is the fact that the economic partnership agreement negotiations will begin this month .
They have a wide-ranging agenda in Johannesburg , just as we have here .
The fact is that there are agreed goals in place and we now need all audacious and principled people to get down to working out how we meet the challenges : the challenges presented by the needless deaths of 11 million children under five every year ; how we feed eight hundred million people who still go hungry ; the 2.4 billion who have no adequate sanitation and the six million people we are losing every year to AIDS , TB and malaria .
Aid is essential , as Mr Deva says , for developing countries , but trade will bring benefits on a far greater scale .
If sub-Saharan Africa had just one percent more of the global export market , it would bring in an extra USD 70 billion each year .
That is five times what the region now receives in aid and debt relief combined .
Of course poor countries need more aid , but they also need better and fairer export opportunities .
The great thing about trade is that it brings self-reliance ; trade brings opportunities for jobs and for investments .
Trade also provides that ladder out of poverty which is what our committee and this report are all about .
There is nothing inevitable about all the concerns raised in Mr Deva 's report .
It is not written on tablets of stone that global politics and global policies should be about ' them ' and ' us ' and about the survival of the fittest in an unequal world , as President Mbeki said when opening the summit in Johannesburg .
We must take into account too the impact of the WTO , the IMF and the World Bank and the conditionalities which they impose upon developing countries and which actually make their trading possibilities more difficult .
What we need to say is that all the global actors on the global stage need a fair and comparable opportunity to perform well .
Trade barriers hurt poor people in general and women in particular , since it is these groups of poor people who tend to produce the goods that are most affected : agricultural goods and labour-intensive manufactured goods .
As this report suggests , we clearly need a radical shake-up of world trade rules .
What we see now is untenable ; the unfairness and the inequity have to be tackled and trade is the key to doing this .
Certainly in terms of the ACP-EU negotiations , we have a real opportunity to be centre stage and to be offering that equity and fairness .
We are an agricultural superpower and we can lead in the whole post-Doha agenda by opening markets and by ending the dumping of what we produce on to the world market , thereby producing distortions which developing countries simply cannot deal with .
On TRIPS , the EU should maintain a strong and determined leadership .
TRIPS must be implemented fairly .
The issue of compulsory licensing must be resolved .
Returning to the EPA negotiations , we should use the Doha Declaration on TRIPS as a ceiling for any discussion with the ACP on intellectual property .
Finally , as Co-President of the Joint Parliamentary Assembly , I think that we have a very serious role to play in the EU 's negotiations .
We are saying very clearly in the Joint Assembly that we want a strong and unequivocal dimension , which is a development dimension .
This will require a huge investment in building capacity and a serious analysis of the implications of the impact of reciprocity on our ACP partners .
So , as Mr Deva makes clear , we have a long ' to do ' list - a list which will not be dealt with unless we confront the vested interests that benefit from the plight of the poor .
Europe has to be driven by the moral imperatives which we face .
It is time , as Mr Deva suggests , to challenge the orthodoxies and abandon the prescriptive notion that free flows of finance and information and trade advance welfare in all cases .
It is time not for defeatist language but for constructive and practical answers .
Mr President , I admire Mr Deva 's courage for tackling this subject .
I have been working in developing countries for some twenty years myself , and I have to admit in all honesty that I have yet to discover how exactly one goes about developing a country .
What works in one country does not in another .
That is my conclusion in general .
Mr Deva himself refers to eastern Asia , which has experienced a tremendous economic upturn .
What strikes me is that this development has taken place without any major development aid , and that this took place when most markets in the world were still closed .
How is this possible , and why does this not work elsewhere ?
As Mr Fernández Martín has already pointed out , the report , in my view , does not sufficiently highlight the fact that sound development requires sound government , and certainly not a corrupt government .
Unfortunately , I come across these far too often in most countries .
My group has tabled a few amendments at second reading . These amendments pertain to the following points .
Firstly , we feel it is exaggerated to ban all exports of insecticides that are banned in Europe .
Locust plagues in Africa can only be treated with pesticides that are banned in Europe , unless something new has come on the market in the last year , of which I am not aware .
This is how it has always been .
It is also exaggerated , in our view , to prescribe the same food safety requirements in Europe as in the developing countries .
Needless to say , we will not be exporting any meat that is contaminated with dioxin or BSE .
But food is in short supply and - as we say in Dutch - hunger is the best sauce .
We will therefore need to make the necessary adjustments .
I do want to confirm that our group is completely behind the Doha Declaration , and I am pleased that the Commission has reiterated this .
Regrettably , the resolution does not mention the importance of a good price for agricultural products .
As far as trade is concerned , I do not know whether Mr Deva has read the article in The Economist a few weeks ago , which clearly stated that the trade barriers among the developing countries are much higher than those with the rich countries .
He partly refers to this in the resolution , but this should , to my mind , be emphasised .
It would be perfect if we could blame the use of guns and pistols on those who manufacture them , but it seems a little idealistic to me .
We regret that none of the amendments tabled by our group were adopted because there happen to be new rules .
This is one of the reasons why my group will largely be abstaining from the vote on this resolution .
Mr President , there is nothing indecent about stating the figures on extreme poverty in developing countries .
What is indecent is the wilful blind eye turned by rich countries , who , despite the horror of the situation , still carry on in the same way .
It is in this context that the increasing overlap between business and development should be viewed , including here , within the Committee on Development and Cooperation .
If the fight against poverty and food insecurity is to succeed , it cannot be left up to the business community .
It must attack the structural causes of poverty in developing countries .
Priority must be given to structural change in their economies in order to increase their share of products produced and diversified , including in the agricultural sector .
That is why it is essential to promote fair access to land , water and the resources of biodiversity as well as a policy of local support for agricultural smallholdings .
In order to achieve this , we must take account of three factors .
Firstly , new international commitments are needed and , most of all , must be honoured .
I have just come from Johannesburg .
After the disappointing Monterrey and Food Summits , Johannesburg is a new opportunity for the northern Heads of State to repeat how important it is to help the people of the South but also to provide ourselves with the proper means to do so .
All well and good , but when will these significant commitments be followed up by practical action ?
Secondly , the approach concerning multilateral trade relations should definitely be thoroughly reviewed .
Within the WTO , these relations do not actually take place with a view to achieving the priorities set by the United Nations , but are dominated by the ' give-and-take ' philosophy .
What is more , the negotiation methods and pace automatically exclude many developing countries .
Why refuse the protection that has enabled developing countries to implement their own industrialisation ?
As for the ADPIC agreements , these restrict access for local peoples in the South to their own natural resources and are incompatible with the objective of food security .
Moreover , pressure in favour of the liberalisation of services endangers their public services , such as water , energy , communications , health and education .
Lastly , new funding must be found urgently .
In Johannesburg , the French President , Jacques Chirac , suggested taking a small percentage of the wealth created by globalisation to finance the fight against its negative effects .
Who is he trying to kid ?
Why not suggest that the rich countries set aside the equivalent of 5 % of the money they spend on subsidies for their own agriculture in order to fight hunger in developing countries ?
Johannesburg , in particular , is also an excellent reflection of people 's experiences and anger , but also the hopes of the numerous NGOs , associations , men and women from all continents who meet to find alternatives and draw up effective proposals .
We must listen to them .
To Mr Berlusconi , who said in July that it is not the fault of rich countries if they have 80 % of the world 's wealth , I would say that three quarters of the world are slowly dying on the doorstep of this so-called ' rich ' world .
It is the responsibility and duty of rich countries , for the sake of fairness as well as of economic efficiency , not to limit themselves to formal commitments , voluntary guidelines or the business community , but to define a proper , restrictive code of conduct that penalises countries which fail to give the necessary aid to the poorest countries .
The same applies to transnational corporations , whose exceptional power must be regulated and controlled as a matter of urgency .
Although the Deva report does not demonstrate a radical will to throw off the shackles of die-hard commercial globalisation , it still raises the need to protect the economies of poor countries and cancel all or part of the debt .
This is a significant starting point .
Mr President , first of all I would like to thank the rapporteur for his report .
He has shown considerable goodwill towards the various political groups in incorporating the possibilities put forward by each one .
The result , as we can see , is that the balance between the various chapters is uneven .
All in all , however , I think the report provides a starting point on some important issues .
The chapter on food security , for example , is extremely promising , particularly where it says that ' the fight against poverty and food insecurity must incorporate an attack on the structural causes of poverty ' . It is poverty that is often the cause of malnutrition , and even famine in the worst cases .
Clearly , attacking the structural causes is definitely the most intelligent approach .
To date , however , it has often been thought that it was enough to open up the markets of rich countries to the products of poor countries , which I believe is only a partial solution - and then not even in every case - and that agricultural productivity in these countries needed to be increased .
This does not take account of the fact that unless the poorest people are guaranteed access to land , they will still not have enough food .
I therefore consider the approach of promoting access to land , water and the resources of biodiversity to be a good one , just as I consider the promotion of support for agricultural smallholdings to be a good approach .
The discontinuation of export subsidies - and this is a black mark against us and against the United States - which disrupt local markets , and the cancellation of the debt which swallows up more than 40 % of the GNP of the least developed countries , should also be applied in structural terms .
So , those are a few proposals we should support .
The second important point is the acknowledgement of the fact that access to food must be recognised as a fundamental human right .
This is essential , as it means that trade rules cannot affect the exercise of this right , which is the case today .
To put it plainly , we need to challenge the hierarchy of rules which means that the WTO takes precedence over everything else , and therefore over all the international conventions designed to protect fundamental goods such as water and biodiversity , not to mention access to these fundamental goods .
I therefore think that all this is positive and , although I do not share the same enthusiasm for Mr Deva 's proposals with regard to the role of multinationals , I believe that overall I will be able to support this report .
Mr President , a protectionist sugar fortress Europe amounts to theft from the poorest people in Africa .
It prevents poor farmers from earning their own income by exporting to Europe .
In the report ' The Great EU Sugar Scam ' , published last week , Oxfam International shows how Europe 's subsidies undermine local African sugar sales .
Despite pleas from Parliament and the Commission to abolish these subsidies in 2002 , the European sugar lobbyists managed to persuade their governments to extend the protectionism to 2009 .
This to me is theft at the expense of the poorest of the poor .
Today , such embarrassing practices are a central theme at the World Summit in Johannesburg , and the European Union should therefore use that forum to call for fair trade , the abolition of unfair subsidies and the opening up of our rich markets .
That is what sustainable development is about .
Under the Bush administration , the United States has drawn up its own Farm Bill , completely in contravention of the agreements reached at Doha as part of negotiations on the worldwide abolition of agricultural subsidies .
This attempt to win the goodwill of the voters is a direct attack on the world 's poorest , unfortunately with grave consequences for world trade and worldwide development .
Luckily , the Commission and Parliament are choosing a different route .
All credit is due to the Commission , which , via Mr Lamy in Doha and Mr Fischler , wants to make a U-turn through agricultural reform proposals .
It is time to move towards a shift from production aid to agricultural policy .
More environmental agriculture , the abolition of export subsidies and the strict enforcement of food security rules - that is what sustainable development is about .
I call on the European Commission to help the EU Member States to send out this signal at the World Summit and to help bring about an agreement on fair trade and fair agriculture in Johannesburg accordingly .
Anyone who is not prepared to bring these issues in Johannesburg to a concrete resolution is standing by the poverty issue empty-handed .
Sustainable development is not possible without adopting a structural approach to the environmental issue .
Nature will strike back with a deterioration in the climate and the accelerating disintegration of woods , sea and soil .
We have experienced the effects of this close to home during the recent floods .
The most recent example of the local market being distorted , and thus preventing any further development , is the dumping by the US of genetically modified corn on the African market .
The famine that is currently affecting southern Africa does not mean that those countries should just accept anything .
The Commission , fortunately , seems to be adopting a sensible stance .
Countries should not be coerced , and it is unacceptable to take advantage of their famine .
The Deva report on trade and development , on which we reached agreement following tough negotiations between various political persuasions in the Committee on Development and Cooperation , is a warning signal to the European Council , a warning signal that the Council should cease to oppose the plans of Commissioners Lamy and Fischler , and of the European Commission .
Let the Council now send out its own signal in Johannesburg , starting with a worldwide structural approach to the environmental issue and a worldwide structural approach to poverty .
The first signal should be that of credibility .
Tear down trade-fortress Europe , put an end to European theft , which is only detrimental to the income of the poor farmers in this world .
Only then can we really talk about sustainable development .
Mr President , I am taking the floor because I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on the report he has prepared and thank him for the sterling work that has been done .
It is incredibly important that the European Parliament should keep this debate on the agenda and also never stop further developing not only the debate but also the practical proposals .
I shall not present an inordinately long general and specific introduction but merely refer to Mrs Kinnock 's words , with which I can declare myself completely in agreement .
I thought it might be discussed how much benefit we derive from a meeting such as that taking place in Johannesburg .
Listening especially to those who participated in the Rio Summit , the impression can be created that Johannesburg is really just confirming what we achieved back then in Rio , and that is of course a rather sad state of affairs .
I just saw the problem 's being that , without these summits , we could not ensure that the debate continued but , that being said , Mr Deva has of course shown us one of the ways in which it can be .
Before I discuss individual points , I want to say that I of course think it important that we make demands both of ourselves and of the developing countries in terms , for example , of good governance , to which Mr Deva has also referred in his report .
I should then very much like to comment on the first points mentioned by Mr Deva , namely points A , B and D in which he clearly emphasises that globalisation is here to stay , which is of course a good thing .
If , however , we do not temper globalisation , it may end up by marginalising a number of countries and a number of population groups in those countries .
This is , in my view , an incredibly important message .
The second important message conveyed by Mr Deva relates to a situation outstandingly exemplified by ourselves and the EU inasmuch as we have of course grown up within the framework of protectionism .
Moreover , it is as if we completely forget this when we go on to discuss the developing countries .
It is a very exciting train of thought Mr Deva has embarked upon when it comes to enterprises , which we cannot manage without .
I should like , however , also to say that enterprises must not be used as a poor excuse for doing nothing in the sphere of general aid on which we unfortunately see countries cutting back at the moment .
Mr President , the situation created by your approach to managing society is so revolting that even here , in this safe environment , you feel obliged to pretend to be doing something .
Anyway , you have to admit that the majority of the world 's countries , and in particular the vast majority of their inhabitants , do not profit from progress in the area of production .
You have to admit that billions of human beings are casualties of progress and that many of them are not guaranteed drinking water or food on a daily basis .
By writing in the report that the top 200 companies have almost twice the economic clout of the poorest four-fifths of humanity , you do in fact recognise the responsibility of these huge corporations and their shareholders , whose enormous profits come from low salaries and from pillaging the natural wealth of poor countries .
And yet the best you can come up with is to suggest asking these multinationals to set up ethical investment committees .
As the very height of cynicism , you ask that these committees , and I quote , ' should report to the board of directors , the shareholders ? ' , in other words report to exactly those who are pillaging , impoverishing and starving the planet .
At the end of the day , failing to prevent murderers from committing their crimes makes us their accomplice .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we will be endorsing Mr Deva 's report and we also want to congratulate him .
In fact , we are convinced that a huge number of people in this hemisphere will be supportive of this report , but I fear that many will lose all interest when the welfare of their own electorate is put at risk .
This is currently what we see happening at the Johannesburg Summit .
This hypocrisy must stop .
Economic globalisation is being imposed by the rich North and it is wreaking havoc in countries with weak economies , great social needs and weak democratic structures .
We ask poor countries to open up their borders to our products , without giving them the opportunity to strengthen their economic structures first , as we did ourselves at the time when our economies first started to thrive .
If we are serious about the fight against poverty , concrete action of the sort requested by many here today is what is required .
We must then open up our own borders , pay fair prices for products from the developing world and guarantee the producers a reasonable income .
We must then abolish all subsidies for our own products if they lead to unfair competition with products from developing countries and to the demoralisation of the local producers who are responsible for food safety in their own country .
We must then impose on our multinationals a code of conduct which protects weak economies , governments and peoples against arbitrariness and exploitation .
Their great power brings with it commensurate responsibility for the world .
I am ashamed when I observe how privatisation makes entire peoples , entire countries or regions , dependent for their income on executive boards that only take account of the interests of their own shareholders .
What means does a country such as Zambia , for example , possess whereby it can exert pressure on the owners of their copper mines , such as Anglo American ?
Countries that are dependent on a product , such as petroleum , diamonds , wood or sugar cane often have no defence at all against multinationals that determine the prices and regulate the market .
It is a matter of power relations .
It is therefore first and foremost our problem .
We should , however , meanwhile display solidarity , and the rich north must realise that solidarity and the fight against poverty are a form of peacekeeping .
Mr President , I begin by congratulating Mr Deva on what I believe is a comprehensive , balanced and meaningful set of proposals .
I particularly welcome his resolution because it restates our commitment to the principles of special and differential treatment of developing countries , to the importance of food security and to enhancing the accountability and social responsibility of corporations .
The rapporteur 's last point , the proposal for a European Forum of Enterprises in paragraphs 61 to 63 , is an interesting one .
But it should not deflect the Commission from ensuring that the current CSR Forum that it is due to launch in October fully addresses the actions of European enterprises in developing countries .
I want to make two substantive arguments in this debate .
First , it is right to record in a report by the Committee on Development and Cooperation that we can enunciate all the EU development policies we like , but too often these have been submerged beneath the EU 's own trade and commercial interests when it really matters .
We remember the hypocrisy of the Commission and Member States in regard to the free trade agreement negotiations with South Africa .
Initial responses to Mr Fischler 's proposals on CAP reform , limited as they are , and current reports from Johannesburg suggest that Mr Byrne 's words about the phasing-out of agricultural export subsidies may well be an empty promise .
If only the EU sought reform in the WTO with the same vigour it has won the USD 4 billion trade sanctions against the United States in relation to our steel exports , perhaps the poorest countries would start to believe us when we say we want a development round .
Secondly , as other speakers have made clear , we have direct responsibility as the trade negotiations start with our ACP colleagues .
Commissioner Byrne , when talking about the economic partnership agreements , should answer the questions that the Commission has refused to answer , before the process begins .
Why does the Commission fail to talk now about the alternatives which were written into the Cotonou Agreement ?
Why does it talk about capacity building but commit only 0.1 % of the current NIPs for trade support ?
How can we have confidence in the sustainability impact assessment when the Commission could not agree amongst itself on the impact of Everything But Arms on the sugar sector ?
Finally , why does the Commission resist the proposal from the ACP heads of government in Fiji to enter an initial phase of negotiations on principles with the ACP Group as a whole ?
Is it that the Commission wants to use the old tactic of divide and rule by attacking the solidarity of the ACP Group ?
That is not what this European Parliament wants .
Mr President , in reply to some of the issues raised by honourable Members , first of all in relation to the ACP-EU trade negotiations , the European Union is prepared to further open its markets to ACP goods and services , provided the ACP States are prepared to implement appropriate policies and to strengthen their supply capacity .
This approach will also be relevant in relations with other developing countries and groupings such as Mercosur , Central America and the Andean Community .
I would stress that economic partnership agreements are above all instruments for development .
They will therefore be designed with all the flexibility required to take account of the economic , social and environmental constraints of the ACP countries .
On the other hand , they must be integrated into the development policy of the ACP countries themselves and into the support strategies of the European Union .
The second point I want to make is that it has been suggested that the trend for economic support is downwards .
There might be an element of truth in this , but there is reason to believe that this could well have bottomed out , having regard to the commitments in the Monterrey process .
There is an expectation and a hope that this support should rise in view of that situation .
Reference is also made to the need for support for the eradication of AIDS , TB and malaria .
I would like to draw the attention of the House to the Global Health Fund that has been established .
A number of Commissioners , including myself , Commissioners Lamy and Nielson are working on this .
The influence of the CAP has been referred to on a number of occasions .
As has been mentioned , Commissioner Fischler and the Commission have brought forward proposals on a review of the CAP .
You will have taken note of the fact that the supports there have been decoupled from production .
In my view , this is a very important step in relation to the role of agriculture and supports and the impact it has on developing countries .
Finally , the food support in southern African states , particularly GMO maize , was mentioned , and I am happy to note the honourable Member 's reference to the fact that the Commission had adopted a reasonable approach to this .
In a statement about ten days ago the Commission pointed out again , as I and other Commissioners , and in particular Commissioner Wallström , have repeatedly said , that the scientific evidence available to us in the European Union indicates that GMO food is as safe as conventional food .
That statement has been reiterated by the Commission in the last ten days in the hope of assisting in the impasse on this issue .
Part of the concern relates to the fact that some of the governments involved are worried that some farmers might retain some of the GMO maize , resulting in cross-fertilisation with conventional crops in those countries .
Most if not all of the maize that I understand is involved in these shipments has already either been approved within the European Union or has already received positive risk assessments from the scientific committees , even though it may not yet been given full authorisation due to the existence and continuation of the moratorium .
Finally , if there is continuing concern on this issue , the famine problem can be addressed by adopting a sensitive approach to the planting issue and milling the seeds involved , thereby eliminating the risk that some of the governments identified as being of paramount concern .
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0242 / 2002 ) by Mr Stevenson , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the Commission communication to the Council and the European Parliament on options to promote the cultivation of plant proteins in the EU ( COM ( 2001 ) 148 / 2 - C5-0260 / 2001 - 2001 / 2116 ( COS ) ) .
Mr President , the fact that Parliament views this report with great seriousness can be gauged from the two major hearings which have been held during the past year : one by ECOSOC and one by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
It is understandable why Members are concerned .
In the EU at the present time we have a 35 million tonne annual shortfall in plant proteins .
This situation has been exacerbated by the continuing MBM ( meat and bone meal ) ban which has created a further 2 million tonne hole in our protein supply .
EU self-sufficiency in plant proteins has fallen to 23 % , placing the Community in a position of great vulnerability .
We now have an enormous reliance on imported proteins from outside the EU . Most of it comes from America , Argentina and Brazil in the form of soya cake .
Much of it is genetically modified .
Clearly such heavy reliance on sources outside our control makes the EU vulnerable to sudden price rises , climate change or harvest failures in these countries , almost placing our livestock sector in the same position as our heavy industry once was at the time of the oil crisis .
There is a further alarming factor which will inevitably add to our problems .
Currently the accession states are more than 80 % self-sufficient in plant proteins .
While this is a considerable improvement on the situation in the 15 Member States , it remains the case that the accession states , for the most part , export their oil seed because their crushing mills are obsolete , meaning that they still have to import soya cake in large quantities for their livestock sector .
However , the Commission is forecasting a fall in plant protein production in these countries once they become full Members of the EU and a switch to cereals .
This would be disastrous .
We have a ready-made market for oil seeds and protein crops from which the accession states could benefit greatly .
On the other hand , an increase in cereal production would simply add to the overall surplus and lead to the introduction of higher set-aside rates .
We must implement a plan which would encourage the production of rape seed , pulses , sunflower and soya and provide major economic benefits , not only to the accession states , but to ourselves , through greater self-sufficiency .
In the existing Member States and the accession states , we also anticipate a continuing rise in meat consumption which will in turn lead to a demand from livestock producers for ever greater quantities of protein feed .
So it is against this background that I have set out in my report to look for ways of encouraging more self-reliance within the EU .
Amongst many recommendations , I have suggested various ways of encouraging an increase in plant protein production by investing more in research into and development of new and improved plant varieties .
I have also called for rotational aid payments to farmers to encourage the production of plant proteins in the cereal crop cycle and for the growing of protein crops , grain legumes and oil seeds on set-aside land .
I have called for a safety net or income insurance scheme for producers of oil seed and protein crops .
I am alarmed at the continuing ban on fish meal in ruminant feeds by the Commission .
I see this as quite unjustified by science and simply adding to our overall protein shortfall .
I urge Commissioner Byrne to think again on this issue and to lift the ban , which is affecting a significant number of jobs in the fish processing and livestock feed sector .
I believe there is great potential in developing the non-food sector .
The production of oil-bearing plants for biofuels such as methylester and for biolubricants and biodegradable solvents is important in the concept of this debate because oil cake is produced as a valuable by-product .
The Commission has shown a great deal of interest in this sector . It merits closer examination .
However , developments in this area are mainly determined by the tax situation for biofuels . We have a long way to go before we can expect agreement on an EU-wide harmonised system of taxation which would encourage greater biofuel production .
Finally , I fear that the mid-term review of the CAP since the Agriculture Committee dealt with my report may have significantly altered the thrust of some of these recommendations .
I would be interested in hearing how Commissioner Byrne and Commissioner Fischler think the mid-term review will affect this position .
Mr President , first I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Stevenson , and also the members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for their constructive attitude to this communication .
At the outset , we would do well to recall the context in which the present discussions about protein crops arose .
Since the Council Decision of 4 December 2000 , the use of processed animal protein has been banned in feed for all animals .
Because the use of animal meal for ruminants had already been forbidden for a number of years , the ban mainly concerned the pig and poultry sectors .
Shortly afterwards , the European Council in Nice took note of the Commission 's intention to analyse the supply of and demand for oilseed and protein-bearing crops in strict compliance with the financial perspective .
This analysis resulted in the Commission papers presented in March 2001 .
Let me summarise the conclusions which we drew from our analysis of the situation and of possible policy options .
Firstly , the ban on meat and bonemeal for non-ruminants would create a deficit of 1.5 million tonnes of soyameal equivalent .
Secondly , increased aid for EU domestic production would produce disappointing results : little extra output at a high cost .
Furthermore , our degree of self-sufficiency would scarcely change .
Thirdly , increased aid for oilseeds would bring us back into the Blair House Agreement 's restrictions on areas cultivated with crop-specific aids .
Since the presentation of our report , we have continued our reflections not only on plant proteins but indeed across the board .
This culminated in the mid-term review of the EU 's common agricultural policy presented by the Commission on 10 July 2002 .
The Commission is of the opinion that public expenditure in the farm sector must be better justified .
Besides supporting farming incomes , it must yield more in return in terms of food quality , conservation of the environment and animal welfare , the countryside and the farming landscape , and enhancing social balance and equity .
For EU consumers and taxpayers , the review should ensure better value for money .
We will be discussing these proposals in the autumn .
Turning specifically to protein crop production , let me remind you that we propose introducing a separate supplementary aid of EUR 55.57 per hectare .
We also envisage integrating the aid schemes for grain legumes and dried fodder into the list of decoupled aids .
The current provisions on non-food crops will be replaced by non-specific aid for energy crops .
The mid-term review of the CAP gives us a chance in the context of the new round of WTO negotiations to oblige our trading partners to accept our demands on , for example , the recognition of registered designations of origin , animal welfare , food safety and the precautionary principle .
Our new system of income support dependent on production output will avoid distorting trade and should not have a negative impact on the developing countries .
Unlike the situation during the Uruguay Round , the European Union will be in a position to take an active part in negotiating the agriculture chapter of the WTO Doha Round , fortified by a strong negotiating stance and a level of credibility which the United States has lost with its recent farm bill .
Finally , let me say something on the feed ban relating to fishmeal .
The extended feed ban prohibits the use of fishmeal intended for ruminants , not because of a potential TSE risk of fishmeal itself , but for control reasons , as we have discussed here on a number of occasions .
In particular it may be difficult to exclude the presence of land animal proteins in fishmeal or feed containing fishmeal .
The reallowance of fishmeal in ruminant feed therefore mainly depends on the availability of methods of differentiate between fishmeal and prohibited animal proteins .
Several researchers are working on this at the moment and I believe there is an opportunity to revisit this particular issue under the comitology procedure that is set out in the animal by-products regulation for which I have responsibility .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this report seeks to express the European Parliament 's position on the Commission communication on options for the plant protein sector , given the two million tonne increase in the shortfall resulting from the ban on the use of animal meal in the European Union .
The debate on this matter at the current juncture in the European Union requires me to make an assessment of the problem and a suggestion for its resolution .
The assessment is , unfortunately , easy to make , given that it concerns the extremely vulnerable situation the European Union is in , being only 23 % self-sufficient , as indeed the report states . What is at issue is not only the fact that one of the most powerful blocs in the world - the European Union - has a production sector that is so highly dependent on the supply of raw materials from outside the EU .
What is also at issue , apart from this high degree of dependence with regard to raw materials for meat and milk production , is the fact that these imports are concentrated in only three countries , the United States , Argentina and Brazil , which are , of course , our main competitors in the world agri-food markets .
The enormous risk that we are running in the European Union , in terms of competitiveness , is , therefore , easy to see from the fact that sectors as important as these - meat and milk - are ultimately dependent on our main competitors .
This does not make sense .
The solution to this problem must involve three main measures , in line , in fact , with the rapporteur 's proposals .
The first is to end the area limits imposed by Blair House .
With the current WTO agreements coming to an end , and with the alignment of oilseed aid to that of cereals from the beginning of the current season , there are clearly no more reasons for self-imposed limits .
The second reason , or the second measure , is that due to the excessive deficit specifically in the plant protein sector , the current increase in aid must be maintained or , if possible , increased .
With this aid differential and without the area limits ( the semi-area imposed by Blair House ) , we will be able to improve our situation within a few years .
And the third reason , also mentioned in the report , is that a review must be undertaken of the ban on fishmeal in ruminant feeds , following a proper scientific study .
To conclude , I wish to state that , in addition to the importance of plant proteins in the European Union 's food production chain , we must stress the strategic importance of these crops in the European Union 's Mediterranean areas , where the choice of crops is limited , and where , above all , there are few crops that provide farmers with options , but where these particular crops adapt very well to the unproductive land and the predominant soil in these areas , which is poor , limited and marginal .
It would , therefore , be necessary to extend the range of eligible crops , as the rapporteur also states , because it is incredible and unacceptable that the main varieties of plant proteins from the Mediterranean regions are not currently eligible for aid .
This situation must be reviewed .
Lastly , I would like to add that we also need to see what the relationship is between this Commission communication and the new proposals for a mid-term review of the CAP , which provide for a separate production aid system .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to congratulate Mr Stevenson on the quality of his report .
It is the result of a very long period of work , carried out intelligently , taking account of the opinion of his fellow Members and the experts we have heard within the Parliamentary Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
I sincerely thank Mr Stevenson .
The issue of plant protein supply for the European Union obviously involves economic factors , but also , and more importantly , it involves strategic aspects relating to the nature of the European agricultural model and the role played by this model in external trade .
We should be aware that we import almost 80 % of the plant proteins required to fulfil our needs and that this heavy reliance cannot be approached solely from the point of view of the commercial interests at the time .
Aside from the current matter of GMOs in imported soya proteins , we must ask ourselves what would happen in Europe if , for whatever reason , whether due to climate or other reasons , the supply from the United States , Brazil and Argentina were to be cut off .
Commissioner , those affected by the American embargo in 1973 , as I was , are aware of the price of this reliance and cannot tolerate the level of risks run today .
Paradoxically , although demand is high in Europe , production here is stagnating , or even decreasing , and the worst thing is that the European Union does not seem determined to remedy this situation properly .
Of course we can examine your proposals on the introduction of a ' carbon credit ' , which are a step in the right direction .
The impact of this credit could , however , be limited by its small scale , and discontinuing the use of set-aside land for non-food crops might not be compensated for by the move towards some energy crops being produced by workers ' cooperatives .
The various measures you are advocating on behalf of the Commission to adapt Agenda 2000 to current needs do not seem sufficient to address the current problems .
This failure is both serious and regrettable .
Without going so far as to set the unrealistic objective of total self-sufficiency , the European Union could still reduce its reliance on external suppliers .
That , Commissioner , is why I ask you to examine more carefully the recommendations of the Stevenson report , which I , indeed we , find relevant .
They were unanimously approved by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
I recommend in particular that you pay attention to those advocating greater investment in research into the protein sector under the 6th FRDP and those concerning the introduction of plant protein-producing crops in cereal crop rotation .
I believe the same applies to the security of our long-term supply and the promotion of sustainable agriculture .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would first of all thank Mr Stevenson for a particularly thorough report .
I agree with the conclusions and the diagnosis .
It is therefore cause for concern that EU self-sufficiency in plant proteins has fallen to below 23 % .
Market-related price relationships have made it advantageous to buy imported oilseed cake , especially soya meal , but climatic risks and changes to production in those countries from which we supply ourselves make the EU all too vulnerable .
The EU therefore needs to increase its self-sufficiency by cultivating oil-bearing plants , and I am also able to endorse the various initiatives put forward by the rapporteur in his report .
Nor shall I omit to alert the Commission to the fact that the arrangements made specifically impair the European grain market by making it possible to import cheap grain from Russia and that they simply contribute to making plant production less profitable financially . At the same time , the lower grain prices in Europe give rise to an increase in pig breeding which in turn requires higher imports of soya meal .
This initiative therefore promotes neither European plant cultivation nor European production of proteins .
I should also like to point out that there is no proper scientific basis for the ban on fishmeal mentioned by the Commissioner .
It is not technically correct to argue that , because of a fear of meat and bone meal from ruminants being mixed with fishmeal , it is necessary to keep fishmeal out of the protein supply .
We must say to those countries which are in control of their production - that is to say , those countries which really can keep the production of proteins separate - that they must of course also be given an advantage so that those countries which cannot keep the production of proteins separate are not those which impose penalties .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I congratulate Mr Stevenson on the report he has presented and which deserves our support .
As the document we are now debating states , the European Union 's current rate of self-sufficiency in vegetable proteins has fallen to below 23 % , as other Members have already said and which becomes all the more serious when you realise that , at world level , plant protein production has increased by 60 % in the last fifteen years and is largely concentrated in three countries .
It is , therefore , hard to understand the Commission position of insisting on depending almost solely on the world market , with the aggravating circumstance that this supply is concentrated in three countries , and I would remind you that one of these is the United States of America .
I would also take this opportunity to remind you of that country 's agricultural policy , which is not only in competition with the European Union but which is also protectionist .
This fact puts the European Union in an extremely vulnerable position and is not a sustainable response to our needs in terms of plant proteins , as the rapporteur points out in his report .
It is , therefore , important that we encourage the development of plant protein production in the European Union , which will help to make us less dependent on imports and to ensure the multifunctionality of Community agriculture , introducing other species and varieties of grain legumes which have inexplicably been excluded from Community support and from the improvement plans .
I would remind you of yellow lupin and other species that have traditionally been used for animal feed , particularly in the Mediterranean countries , and which have not benefited from Community support .
Hence the importance of granting rotational aid to farmers to encourage the production of plant proteins in the cereal crop cycle , using fallow land , as we have advocated in other reports , and also the need to terminate the Blair House agreements , or , at the very least renegotiate them .
It is hard to understand why no effort has yet been made to renegotiate them , in the aim of terminating them , thereby making greater direct aid possible for the protection of proteins in the European Union .
We believe it is equally important for the Commission to approve the additional aid for plant proteins - beans , peas and lupins - not covered by the Blair House agreements and we support the terms referred to in the report by the our rapporteur .
We hope , then , that the Commission will take account of these proposals , whilst respecting the principle of monitoring production and the positive effects of these , in both the socio-economic and the environmental fields .
I would also remind you that now , when it comes to revising the CAP , neither this report nor the proposals that will surely be approved here in the European Parliament must be forgotten .
Mr President , Commissioner Byrne , in the minute I have , I want to focus on the question of what is to become of set-aside .
There is an overall shortage of foodstuffs and feedingstuffs , particularly of protein crops , and deficits in the area of protein production .
Our concern is , then , with the recovering of areas for the production of protein , and this we can achieve through protein cultivation in rotation - the ecological distribution of crops .
If , in the new proposal , you provide for the permanent set-aside of 10 % in order to protect nature , then there can certainly be no objection to incorporating 5 % -10 % into this category in order also to take account of factors that determine the character of the landscape .
In the other set-aside areas , though , we must focus on the environmental impact of protein cultivation and on the fact that this cultivation of protein yields 40 to 80 kilos .
We need to look again here at how we achieve a monitoring system and how , too , we can incorporate environmental factors into the negotiations with the Americans in such a way that we come to a new agreement and are not permanently obliged to refer back to one that dates back ten years -- by which I mean Blair House .
Mr President , I strongly support Mr Stevenson and congratulate him on an excellent report .
The aftermath of the BSE crisis and the ban on the use of meat and bonemeal has left a serious , sharp fall of proteins in animal feed and must be filled by other means .
We all know that the lesson we have learned from that particular crisis in European farming is that we must have a food chain that guarantees the highest possible standards of traceability and safety .
I am not really enamoured by the Commission 's proposals to address this situation .
The suggestion by the Commission that we should source the feedstuffs shortfall on world markets is not a realistic long-term solution .
We should produce those feedstuffs within the EU where we can and would be in a position to control each element of the food chain .
This is beside the fact that home production offers a number of other distinct advantages .
It allows our farmers to diversify their production and to produce crops for which there is a clear and demonstrable market . This would offer welcome assistance in their current plight .
I would also have serious concern about the long-term desirability of becoming dependent on outside sources for our feedstuffs .
One of the fundamentals of the CAP is to guarantee a secure supply of high-quality foodstuffs for our citizens and I hope that the Commission will take on board the concerns of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , which will no doubt be supported by a strong majority in this House tomorrow .
Mr President , Commissioner , the outbreak of mad cow disease heralded a crisis in cattle farming .
Driven by a desire to cut costs and increase production , the cattle feed industry has completely ignored the order of creation .
Cows became cannibals and the animals ' nature was no longer taken into consideration .
The Commission was right to introduce a ban on the use of animal meal .
I hope that the Commission does take account of each animal 's individuality and does not buckle under the pressure from industry to re-admit the use of fishmeal in animal feed .
I have never seen a cow by a ditch , looking for fish .
Given the poor fish stocks , it is a mark of even less insight if fishermen are encouraged to supply young fish to the fishmeal industry .
In his report , the rapporteur , Mr Stevenson , calls on the Commission to promote the growth of crops containing protein so as to replace animal meal .
I wholeheartedly support him in this appeal , particularly also to protect the EU from imports of genetically modified soy , which is , again , an organism whose characteristics are not being taken seriously .
Mr President , the role of the protein-rich oil plant sector in Europe is not just an agricultural problem , but in many ways , a social issue .
First and foremost , it is a food security issue .
European consumers quite rightly require all the elements of the food chain to be traceable .
In the case of the protein fodder needed for livestock farming , Europe cannot be content to rely on external supply for more than three quarters of its needs .
Community production must regain a dominant share of the market in order to avoid risks relating to residues , contaminants or GMOs .
The Union has decided to apply a moratorium prohibiting the use of new GMOs in foodstuffs for humans and animals .
We know , however , that soya-exporting countries mainly grow GMOs .
The second issue is the quantitative security of the world market .
The supply of protein fodder is concentrated in a very small number of countries , primarily the United States , which represents 45 % of world production , and 90 % of pressing is carried out by four industrial groups .
If a meteorological disaster were to occur , Europe would be in an extremely vulnerable position .
Furthermore , this market is growing by 5 % per year , and it would be even more senseless for Europe not to be involved in this growth since internal demand within the Union , including demand in the future Member States , where meat consumption will increase on accession , is destined to experience sustained growth .
This is also a significant environmental issue .
Let us not forget that increased cultivation of protein-rich oil plants fosters biodiversity , improves soil structure , counters the tendency towards single-crop cultivation and reduces the use of chemicals .
The increasing protein shortfall in the Union should , therefore , be a matter of the utmost priority for the Commission .
This , however , is not the case at all .
In response to these issues , and in order to replace animal meal , the Commission is merely proposing that we resign ourselves to seeing an increasing percentage of our consumption rely on imports , over which we would have no control with regard to price , production conditions , or compliance with the social and environmental specifications we impose on our own farmers .
Quite simply , this is unacceptable .
That is why our Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has pursued a far more dynamic strategy in adopting the Stevenson report , which aims to infuse a little political will into the feeble Commission communication .
The amendments we tabled in Committee emphasise the contrast between the seriousness of the European situation and the substantial subsidies implemented by the United States , in particular within the framework of the Farm Bill in favour of their oilseed crop producers .
They ask the Commission to examine how to renegotiate the Blair House agreement with a view to increasing protein production s in the Union and to augmenting supplementary aid for protein crops that are not affected by the Blair House agreement .
They suggest setting up a safety net in favour of oilseed and protein crop producers and lastly , undertaking the necessary research work into these crops .
Mr President of the Commission , we now want ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too wish to join in thanking the rapporteur , as the work he has done here is most valuable .
The BSE crisis and the resultant ban on the use of animal bonemeal in feed have significantly increased the demand for replacement source of protein in the area of animal feedingstuffs .
The shortage of plant protein is made a live issue by the EU 's low level of self-sufficiency , to which reference is often made these days .
This situation makes a European protein plan urgently necessary in order to promote the cultivation of protein plants , thereby reducing our dependence on imports and giving us more varied sources of supply .
I would bring to your attention the fact that the EU , the most significant importer in the world , gets by far and away most of its plant proteins from the USA , Argentina and Brazil , and that these are very often genetically modified ones .
Our concern here is not only with the cultivation of soya and rape , but to an equal degree with seed flax , camelina and many other plant proteins .
It is for that reason that I attach particular importance to the products ' traceability , in order for transparency to give consumers choice , quality and confidence that the food is safe .
Over and above this , the cultivation of protein-rich cultures contributes to the diversity of crop rotation by making it possible to reduce input and by preventing the rise of monocultures .
If it were possible to utilise set-aside areas , that would be a practical approach .
Whilst , of course , safeguarding Budget neutrality , it is not only cultivation of organic areas that needs to be promoted , as the Commission proposes , but conventional agriculture should also have the opportunity to cultivate plant proteins , fodder legumes and so on , in their fields , benefiting from the EU 's environmental programmes .
The production of oilseeds for use in biofuels and building materials gives , in fact , further significant impetus to agriculture .
What I seek at the international level is for the Blair House agreement to be at last seriously reconsidered and for all parties to see the urgent necessity of facilitating the production of plant protein in the EU in accordance with the regulations .
I do believe that a genuinely serious discussion on this has to be set in train at European level , for we are well aware that biofuels are environmentally friendly and can also be produced without prior energy input .
Whilst remaining within the financial framework , the EU needs to promote the use of plants in protein production with the minimum possible delay , in order to secure an independent supply of protein for farmers and European agriculture , facilitate energy generation and thus reduce our dependence on fossil energy .
We are all aware that Europe imports something like 60 % of its energy .
Mr President , promoting the cultivation of plant proteins in the European Union is one of the key issues on which the present and the future of European agriculture and food safety hinge .
I therefore consider it to be extremely appropriate , Mr President , that both Commissioner Byrne , who is responsible for food safety , and the Commissioner for Agriculture and Fisheries , Mr Fischler , have attended this debate .
The European Parliament has reflected the importance of the matter and has dedicated extensive debates to it as well as two parliamentary hearings .
As a consequence of all of this , wills have been united and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development voted in favour of this report with an extremely broad consensus , and it today comes before the plenary without a single amendment .
I congratulate Mr Stevenson on his magnificent work .
The Commission ought to accept this extremely representative vote and this unity of position because , Mr Fischler , the position of the European Parliament is quite clearly reflected in paragraph 3 , which says ' The European Parliament recommends that the development of EU plant protein production should be encouraged to reduce its reliance on imports and to sustain the multi-functionality of Community agriculture ' .
In order for this position to develop to its full potential and to become a reality , it is absolutely crucial for the Commission to implement what is asked of it in paragraph 5 : ' ... the Commission should fund an extensive research and development programme ' because unless it does fund a programme into the increased genetic and yield potential , utilisation and nutritive value of fodder legumes and grain legumes as key protein providers within the EU , what we will have are words rather than deeds .
Similarly , Mr President , Recitals F and I draw attention to the Mediterranean areas , which Commissioner Fischler very frequently overlooks .
It has been said more than once in today 's plenary sitting that he must review this position , because these areas must receive aid for this purpose too , so that the production of grain legumes for livestock breeding in the Mediterranean areas of the European Union can also have highly beneficial effects .
Lastly , Mr President , I wish to note the importance of the suggestion made in Recital D that we must take account of the difficulties currently facing Argentina , in order not to make that country 's situation worse .
Mr President , Commissioner , the rapporteur , Mr Stevenson , has done some very thorough work and I particularly want to thank him for his ability to cooperate and communicate with various groups and parties .
This proved invaluable and certainly helped us achieve this excellent result .
The Commission has thrown a very simple solution into the debate and I also think that it is indeed meant to be a way of getting the discussion started .
Imports will make up the shortfall ; it is a childishly simple proposition .
But the answer contained in this report is exceptionally good .
It raises the issues of new plants , the Blair House negotiations , oil plant production aid in the United States of America , the fishmeal problem , and others .
These are matters that have to be , and can be , resolved .
The most crucial question , however , is whether to support the production of plant proteins in the EU Member States or not .
That is the question we first have to tackle and then make the very profound and fundamental decision that it must be supported .
We cannot embark on a programme of unprofitable production , and with that in mind Mr Garot has submitted the proposal that we should carry out research and move forward on the basis of that .
Research brings with it the possibility that there will actually be a demand for our own plant proteins .
Demand will raise prices and prices give a boost to cultivation .
These problems must be resolved and we hold the key to the solution .
Why can we not provide solutions ?
Why is that ?
Everyone is a little wary : everyone is out to safeguard their own interests a bit too much .
We need to have a broader view and provide a comprehensive solution instead of hiding behind excuses the whole time .
With regard to bioenergy and plant proteins , for example , the solution is very simple .
All we need to do is pass resolutions and resolve problems of taxation .
These sorts of procedures will result in a comprehensive solution leading to our own plant protein energy programme in Europe , one that is not dependent on the United States , Brazil or Argentina .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Stevenson , the European Commission rejected the proposal by the Spanish Presidency of the Council to adopt actions to promote protein crops of which there is a shortfall in the European Union , and which are being replaced with soya imports , mainly from the United States and often genetically modified .
The Commission argues that amending the current policy could lead to legal proceedings being instituted against us in the WTO , something that should not concern us , given the protectionist attitude of the Bush administration .
Commissioner , there is no doubt that our animal-feed industry and , ultimately , our livestock production and our food depend , to a large extent , on just one product : soya , the production and trading of which are under the control of the United States .
How can the European Union allow this enormous strategic dependence to continue ?
Maintaining or increasing imports of these products which are not surplus to requirements , such as non-genetically modified soya and corn from developing countries , must be an important part of our cooperation policy but , at the same time , it must also be a priority to promote self-sufficient and sustainable agri-breeding systems within the least-favoured regions of the European Union , which create employment and sustain the rural population , primary genetic resources and the necessary production of biofuels .
Mr President , Commissioner , first of all I should like to congratulate Mr Stevenson on his report , which was adopted by a majority in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
Since the ban on meat-and-bone meal , which lay at the root of the mad cow crisis , the Community shortfall of protein-based feed for livestock has grown worse . As some of my fellow Members have said , it has increased by 23 % .
Faced with this deficit , the only solution that the European Commission has proposed is to increase imports of these protein crops , an increase that will grow worse after the new Member States have joined the Union .
The Community 's Executive has rejected the memorandum presented during the recent Spanish Presidency and supported by many Member States , in favour of promoting these crops in the European Union , despite the fact that we are increasingly dependent on soya from the United States .
This dependence could , furthermore , increase , following the increase in aid granted by that country under its new agricultural law .
Whilst the United States is quite unabashed about increasing its annual aid to soya producers by USD three million , the European Union is not only reducing its aid to oilseed crops , but is also putting its market at the service of imports from these third countries .
Apart from commercial reasons , however - which the European Commission wishes to bandy around in order to justify its refusal to re-establish specific aid for oilseed crops - there is no reason not to support other crops with a protein content higher even than that of oilseed crops , such as dry fodder , in the case of which production quotas cannot match demand .
In order to address protein supply needs , there are also other crops , such as protein and leguminous crops - such as kidney beans , beans and sweet lupins , which have already been mentioned - which are not subject to any type of WTO restriction and which we could also include .
It should not be forgotten , furthermore , that the European Union has given a commitment to reducing CO2 emissions , and that one possible approach is to promote the production of biofuels , which is another reason why the European Parliament should support the report by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development in favour of promoting these crops and of reducing , if not eliminating , these external dependencies , which can cause so many problems with regard to the degree of supply and the quality and safety monitoring of these crops under our rules .
Lastly , a comment : Mr Commissioner , if we do not maintain our production and supply capacity , what will become of our ability to negotiate and defend our interests in international forums ?
Mr President , honourable Members , I will just take this opportunity to add a couple of comments on the issues that have emerged as the core of the debate .
One of them has been addressed by a very large number of you , namely the issue of the European Union 's dependence on imports from the USA .
It must be clear to us that recent years have seen the production of soya transferred to a very large extent to South America .
As we are dealing here with developing countries , this means that it is imports from developing countries that are ever increasing in recent years .
If I include the financial year that has just begun , we can take it for granted that , for example , the number of Latin American exporters has all but doubled over the past two years .
Second comes the issue of GMOs .
Our position is in tune both with the current legal provisions and with the latest Commission proposals on traceability and labelling .
The only genetically modified soya bean to be marketed internationally is already approved in the EU ; it is called Round-up Ready , and is a genetic modification that we have approved in the EU under Directive 90 / 220 .
The only other genetically modified type of soya in the USA and worldwide contains a high percentage of oleic acid and is subject in the USA to strict trademark safeguards , being capable of being sold at very high prices by reason of its health-giving properties .
The latest proposal on traceability and labelling does not provide for the labelling of any animal products produced using GM feedstuffs .
It does , though , make provision for the traceability of feedingstuffs .
Another point of international relevance is the issue of the Blair House agreement .
It has repeatedly been urged in this House that we should renegotiate the Blair House agreement .
My response to that today is what it has always been , namely that , if we want to renegotiate the Blair House agreement , we have to be told what we are to offer the USA in order to get them to move away from their position .
This has generally put a stop to debate , even in the Agriculture Council , nobody of course being prepared to accept other concessions at the expense of the concessions we have gained on soya beans .
It has been suggested that we should deal with this issue as part of the mid-term-review debate ; I believe this to be a good and important suggestion , and one that I am happy to take on board .
This is something we should do , as we cannot but observe it happening in other contexts .
For example , we now have the debate about defining soya as a protein plant rather than as an oilseed as it was in the past , which would mean that soya could be looked at squarely when considering the protein plant rules , in which we envisage a specific premium for the production of protein plants .
Of course , that also has an international dimension , but right now I am in favour of discussing the issue .
The other issue raised here , namely the set-aside problem , falls within the scope of the mid-term-review in precisely the same way .
In that connection , land is still to lie fallow or be set aside on a rotating basis .
There are two reasons why our proposal on the mid-term review does not provide for land to lie fallow on a rotating basis .
One is that we take the view that , in a decoupled system , leaving land fallow or setting it aside should primarily be determined by environmental considerations , although it may be , in view of the tragic events we have lived through over recent weeks in connection with various floods in Europe , that other new issues will come into play .
I am very much aware that the rotation of fallow land is in itself an environmentally positive factor , as it makes it possible to make full use of the effectiveness of legumes as a forecrop .
Our second problem is that , if we continue to permit land to lie fallow or be set aside across the whole of the usable agricultural area , we will find it difficult to monitor .
This issue will have to be discussed , as we must not lose sight of the possibility of simplifying our system of arable farming .
In this sense , the many suggestions made by Mr Stevenson in his report are of great value .
As my fellow-Commissioner , Mr Byrne , has already , to my knowledge , answered certain questions , particularly those concerning fishmeal , that is something I do not need to do .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Fischler .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Mrs Ana Palacio Vallelersundi has been appointed Minister for Foreign Affairs in the Spanish government and , given that she has been a much respected , very enterprising and productive colleague in this House , it gives me very great pleasure on behalf of the House here today , on the record , to congratulate her on her appointment to this high office of state .
It is a tribute to her special qualities that she should be chosen for that office but it is also a reflection of the growing integration in substance of European Parliamentarianism and the regular day-to-day political life of our Member States .

Under Article 12 ( 2 ) of the respective regulations , her appointment renders membership of this House incompatible and in the meantime the Spanish authorities have informed me that Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi has been replaced by Mr Marcelino Oreja Arburúa with effect from 23 July 2002 .

I have also received the resignation of Mr Lucas Vander Taelen with effect from 1 September 2002 and the Belgian authorities have informed me that he has been replaced by Mr Jan Dhaene with effect from 1 September 2002 .
( Applause )
I welcome these new colleagues to the House and remind you of the normal procedures with regard to the verification of accreditation .
Announcement by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , I would remind the House that Rule 148 of the Rules of Procedure has been amended .
As of today , the Minutes will be approved when the sitting is resumed in the afternoon , at 3 p.m ..
They will be distributed in the Chamber to all the Members at 2.30 p.m. but they will be available from the distribution service from 2 p.m. onwards .

Mr President , you have already answered one part of my question , but I wanted first to say that I do not know whether I signed myself in yesterday , although I was here all day and actually voted .
So I would like to ask that that be added , in view of the Minutes arriving so late anyway .
The second point I wanted to raise is whether it might be possible in future for the Minutes to be distributed in the morning ?
This would mean that deferring the approval to the afternoon would have the advantage that we could peruse the Minutes at our leisure in the morning .
I really do not see why their distribution has to wait until the afternoon .
Mr Posselt , I would suggest that you make your statement about your attendance in the House yesterday again this afternoon , so as to be sure that it reaches the ears of the services .
In any case , you took part in the vote so you do not have to worry .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today we are going to deal with a legislative package aimed at establishing the Single European Sky .
The main objective of all these measures is simply to respond to the problem of congestion in European airspace without reducing its safety , but rather increasing it .
Once again we must remember that that is our main concern and priority , above all following the tragic accident of Überlingen - where regrettably a number of people were killed - and which left us with the feeling that it should have , and could have , been prevented .
Our intention is to introduce a harmonised regulatory framework which governs the management of air traffic in the European Union , thereby facilitating better management of the airspace and improving safety .
I would point out that the Single Sky was one of the initiatives that President Prodi announced during his investiture debate as a political priority for a Europe which is close to the citizens .
Over these three years we have been working on this issue , and today is the day to achieve concrete results .
Turning now to the actual reports , I am firstly going to mention those by the rapporteurs , Mr Fava and Mrs Sanders-ten Holte , which recognise the strategic importance and maturity of the initiative on the Single Sky .
I would like to express my satisfaction with the support the competent committee has lent by studying these proposals here in Parliament and , once again , I would like to thank the European Parliament for its cooperation and work .
With regard more specifically to the amendments , the Commission is able to accept the majority of them ; some with changes of wording better suited to the text and others partially , since these amendments generally clarify and strengthen our initial proposals .
However , the Commission cannot accept and must therefore reject Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 13 , 19 , 24 , 27 , 29 , 34 , 35 and 37 to 40 of Mr Fava 's report , and Amendments Nos 3 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 26 , 46 , 50 , 51 , 56 , 57 , 58 , 59 , 60 , 61 , 63 , 66 , 75 , 77 to 80 and 83 to 107 of the report by Mrs Sanders-ten Holte .
If you will allow me , I would like to make some observations on the amendments of most importance .
Firstly , I am thinking above all of those which relate to relations with Eurocontrol .
I agree that it is necessary to establish good cooperation between the Community and this organisation and , in fact , the technical negotiations for the Community 's membership of Eurocontrol have already been completed .
As the honourable Members know very well , the signing of the official agreement on the protocol for the Community 's joining Eurocontrol is scheduled for one month 's time , simply as a result of a problem with parliamentary agreement in one of the countries of the Union .
It is not therefore necessary to specify in the Regulation the methods for technical assistance for this organisation , since we are going to be part of it .
I believe that the amendments proposed in this regard relate to aspects which are already adequately covered as a result of the Community 's membership of Eurocontrol , otherwise they will have to be modified in order to bring them into line with the nature of the Community acts .
The same is true of the amendments which request obligatory consultations .
The Commission does not question the principle of consultation with business and social operators , but it wants this principle to be applied while respecting its right to initiative .
With regard to the nature of the air traffic services , the legislative package has been carefully worded to reconcile the demands of public interest with the need to support the dynamic of the sector .
While recognising the inherent characteristics of these services , we cannot ignore their economic impact on the direct and indirect costs they imply .
Therefore the Commission cannot accept , and rejects , Amendments Nos 12 and 13 of Mr Fava 's report .
This is also the case with a series of amendments which I mentioned earlier , which we believe to be legally or technically incomplete and which we cannot therefore support , as well as those amendments which call for the rejection of our proposal in its entirety .
I would also like to add the following considerations on certain amendments in the report by Mrs Sanders-ten Holte .
Amendment No 13 , on the principle of the separation of the national monitoring authorities from the air navigation service providers affects the reasonable compromise found at the time of the negotiations within the High-level Group , where - I would remind Members - all the countries of the Union , as well as Norway and Switzerland , were represented .
I share the view that the cooperation between the civil and military sectors is a key factor for the success of the Single European Sky and , in fact , our legislative proposals are intended to create the conditions necessary to stimulate that cooperation .
But Amendments Nos 57 and 59 go further than we are allowed under the current distribution of competences and therefore the first pillar .
Amendments Nos 14 and 51 introduce appeal mechanisms which are already provided for within national procedures .
With regard to the report by Mrs Maes , on the safety of third-country aircraft , this proposal is intended to improve air safety through the creation of an inspection system for third-country aircraft aimed at verifying their conformity with international safety standards .
The Commission had presented a proposal on this issue in 1997 , which had not been able to be approved until today because of the argument over the Gibraltar airport .
The proposal now presented to Parliament includes the provisions of the common position which the Council had approved previously , as well as the amendments approved by the European Parliament at second reading .
The rapporteur , Mrs Maes , whom I would like to thank , has agreed to this new proposal and the Commission is satisfied with the report adopted by the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism .
In fact , we are in a position to accept the majority of the 23 amendments ; five of them , with regard to their principles , with a different wording , and some others also with certain textual changes .
Nevertheless , there are seven amendments which the Commission sees as problematic and I would therefore like to make the following observations : firstly , the list of shortcomings which appears in Amendment No 3 is restrictive in relation to the data available to the Commission ; secondly , Amendment No 6 is not acceptable either , since the proposal for a Directive relates solely to third-country aircraft and not to aircraft of Member States of the Union .
The same can be said of Amendment No 8 , which would allocate new responsibilities to the European Air Safety Agency and this would require amending the Regulation establishing it , and of Amendment No 10 , which is outside the scope of the proposed Directive .
Amendment No 14 does not seem to us to be necessary , since the Commission 's proposal specifies that all complaints are admissible , and Amendment No 15 would give the aircraft inspection authorities considerable additional work and anyway the practical usefulness of the supplementary information requested seems to us be doubtful to say the least .
Finally , Amendment No 17 is outside the scope of the inspections covered by the Directive and would contradict the principles of the Chicago Convention , and we must therefore reject it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I hope I have clarified the Commission 's position with regard to the various reports which are the subject of this joint debate .
Nobody doubts that the reports which Parliament will approve tomorrow will contribute significantly to the safety , efficiency and punctuality of air traffic in Europe .
Once again , I would like to thank the competent committee in general for its work and the rapporteurs , Mr Fava , Mrs Sanders-ten Holte and Mrs Maes , in particular , because they have done some very commendable work on issues which are very technical and complex .
Mr President , Commissioner , Council representatives , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission 's proposal for a regulation is a response to the report by the High Level Group on the Single European Sky .
It is aimed , as we have been aware for some time , at turning the sky over the European Union , by 31 December 2004 at the latest , into an integrated airspace governed by the same principles and rules .
We are also quite familiar with the priorities and principal objectives of this important regulation : firstly , to ensure better use of airspace , which means bringing down the costs , improving management with a view to reducing delays and increasing the system 's capacity , and , in particular , to significantly improving the level of safety , which is our top priority .
We are also aware that it is not enough to declare that these are our priorities , that this is a time to take decisions : the first decision which Parliament and the European institutions are called upon to take concerns precisely the handing over of a large chunk of sovereignty , and this decision requires sensitivity and determination .
There are just a few points included in our report that I would like to focus on : these , in our opinion , are the most salient points of the regulation .
I would start by mentioning that a Single Sky is being achieved thanks to the unambiguous support of the European Parliament , which it had already declared in a resolution in July 2000 , and thanks to the support of the governments of all the countries .
The Commissioner cited - and I will mention it again - the recent agreement between the United Kingdom and Spain concerning the inclusion in the legislative act on the Single European Sky of the so-called ' Gibraltar clause '
As I said , the regulation contains points of crucial importance .
The first was mentioned by the Commissioner and concerns cooperation with Eurocontrol .
This cooperation is essential . It was called for by the High Level Group and should prevent , in particular , the duplication of tasks .
Reciprocal cooperation is important even though the Community is going to sign and accede to the Eurocontrol Convention in a month 's time .
In our opinion , the amendments we have tabled in this respect will be superfluous after the Convention is signed .
We do , however , feel that it is useful to emphasise it , particularly after the long wait we have had before our accession to Eurocontrol and the ratification of the Convention by the Member States .
Furthermore , we feel that a matter of crucial importance is cooperation between civil and military authorities .
This subject is particularly delicate as it could touch on various customary practices and prerogatives which unquestionably fall within the scope of the Member States ' sovereign powers .
Our report and the Commission 's regulation follow two lines : we call for very close cooperation between civil and military air navigation service providers and we consider that military authorities should be represented on the Single Sky Committee .
Although no specific provision is made for this in the text , we call for one of the two seats available for each State on this committee , which will be set up and assigned the task of political and technical control of the Single Sky , to be given to a representative of the military authorities , in order to achieve greater sharing of responsibility and a higher level of cooperation between civil and military authorities .
Thirdly , penalties .
The question of enforcing respect for the Single Sky rules through effective , proportionate , dissuasive penalties , as Parliament had already requested , is a sensitive issue .
In our opinion , it is essential that we do this to ensure that the Single Sky becomes more than just a list of good intentions and has genuine legal certainty for all the countries of the European Union .
The last important point is that the gradual opening-up of the market , and therefore of competition , will take place within specific constraints .
We must remember that air traffic control constitutes a service of general interest , as has already been established by the Judgment of the Court of Justice , and , in this respect , we call upon the Commission to emphasise especially the economic and social impact as regards employment .
Amendment No 36 , which we are retabling , provides for the creation of a Sectoral Dialogue Committee on all measures with social implications taken to implement this regulation .
In this sense , we feel that it is an essential point .
I will conclude , Mr President , by expressing informed optimism regarding the results achieved in recent years .
With the Single Sky , we are , at last , in a position to remove the borders in the sky as well as on the ground , and we are certainly taking a step towards fuller , more tangible European citizenship .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , despite recent , tragic events , flying remains an extremely safe form of transport .
However , since the use of airspace is set to grow exponentially over the next few years , our busy airspace will be placed under enormous pressure , with all the safety risks that this entails .
This is the imperative force underlying the present Single Sky proposal .
' Safety first ' appeared to be the motto of my fellow MEPs , because 24 of the 79 amendments were adopted immediately and these all concerned safety .
I hope that this sends a very clear message to the Council .
For the rest , I believe that a good compromise has been reached in the Commission , and I should like to raise three points .
First of all , I should like to mention the position of air traffic controllers and their concerns surrounding privatisation .
The Single Sky , the European Sky , is in my opinion certainly no privatisation via the backdoor .
It remains up to the relevant Member States to determine whether air traffic management services in the new cross-border functional airspace blocks are provided by the public or the private sector .
We should not be dogmatic in this respect .
A high safety level and a strict regulatory framework are what matter ; not whether services are provided by the public or private sector .
I can nevertheless reassure my fellow MEPs , for a large number of Member States are convinced that these services must remain in the public sector .
In fact , the Danish transport committee recently stated in our committee that Danish air traffic control should remain in the public sector .
Furthermore , those who provide core navigation services also retain their monopoly position in the functional airspace blocks , and will certainly not be expected to compete with each other .
Another point concerns the service providers .
If they enjoy a monopoly position , it is important to guarantee the independence of the regulator in each Member State so as to ensure that the safety level is applied to the letter .
The message Parliament must send to the Council is that we believe that this is how things should be done in practice .
This means that I am unable to support the amendments tabled by Mr Simpson on behalf of the PSE Group .
This is also true of the amendments tabled by the GUE / NGL Group because these require all services in every Member Stated to be carried out by an integrated service provider , and leave no option for second-line services to be subcontracted .
Such an approach would , in my view , make it impossible to reach the goal of increased efficiency whilst retaining the same safety level .
Furthermore , it does not reflect the current situation in many Member States .
A second point which I should like to raise is civil-military cooperation .
This cooperation is , in my view , crucial to the success of the Single Sky .
However , in order to accomplish flexible use of the airspace , the military airspace users must be involved in the daily decision-making processes in the Single Sky committee .
We in Parliament must guarantee that the Member States comply with this and this is why , Commissioner , my amendments go further .
Without military cooperation , the Single Sky 's added value is seriously affected .
In this respect , I have great difficulty with Amendment No 40 , because , thinking it through logically , it prohibits military involvement in the Single Sky committee .
My third and final point concerns the role and position of Eurocontrol .
Commissioner , I have heard many times that everything is cut and dried , but I need to see it to believe it .
Hence our amendments and our intense pressure to have these adopted .
Although I can generally live with the outcome of the votes , I remain concerned about Eurocontrol 's role in the decision-making process .
After all , it is an intergovernmental organisation and not a legislative body , and it is beyond dispute that it possesses significant expertise .
I also think that it should play a key role where technical support is concerned , but that is where its remit should end .
Eurocontrol is not the panacea for all airspace management problems in Europe , and that has become evident .
The Commission has drawn valuable lessons from Eurocontrol 's successes and has integrated them into the proposals , but it has also tried to address its shortcomings .
If , for example , we had to make the Single Sky Charting system entirely compatible with that of Eurocontrol , it would be impossible to develop a system of incentives .
It is impossible to promote best practices in the field of air traffic flow management in this way .
Moreover , Eurocontrol is not only a regulatory body but also a service provider , which means that we are creating a serious conflict of interest .
This is why I have proposed Amendments Nos 81 and 82 and have asked , on behalf of my group , for a split vote on Amendment No 51 , so as to establish a better balance of power between Eurocontrol and the Single Sky decision-making process in this way .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would ask you to vote for my report today , the text of which , I hope , remains as close as possible to that of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism .
We have made a step forward .
It is an ambitious proposal .
I should like to thank my fellow MEPs for their useful contribution and particularly the staff .
It was not an easy task , we have had many discussions and thus gained a clear picture of the situation , and I believe that we have struck the right balance between safety and efficiency .
With Johannesburg at the back of our minds , I should like to say that the Single European Sky will also be of tremendous value for the sustainable development of our environment .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , if safety were to be held constant at the 1996 level , this could result in a serious accident every week by 2015 .
It is in these terms that our explanatory documents once again underline the importance of the Commission 's proposal for a directive .
Safety in the aviation sector has never been so relevant .
In the run-up to the momentous anniversary of 11 September , safety in aviation is of primary concern to the majority of users .
This should not be the safety of our own European aircraft , but that of third-country aircraft as well .
This is why this proposal that is now being raised within the framework of the proposals , that have also been expanded on by my fellow MEPs in their various reports on the open sky , is of extreme importance .
The Commission has already re-opened the procedure for issuing a directive on the safety of third-country aircraft .
It is , in fact , tragic that the procedure surrounding this directive was stopped , for it was as good as completed in 1997 , but was , due to a dispute that arose between Spain and Great Britain over Gibraltar , relegated to the back-burner at the time .
Fortunately , we can now count on large-scale unanimity , although I regret that the matter is still being dealt with at Member-State level and that the Member States ' continuing control over the procedures means that the way in which the inspections are carried out still leaves something to be desired .
The need for a Community safety policy , however , is , in my view , beyond dispute .
We cannot fail to observe that the accident figures vary widely across different regions and continents across the world .
Airlines based in Africa , Asia and South and Central America have accident rates at least twice as high as the world average .
We in Western Europe and Australia can count our blessings with the lowest accident rates , whereas Eastern European countries have the highest accident rate , nearly 50 times higher than in Western Europe .
To think that we are facing this massive EU enlargement and that , consequently , there is a greater risk of safety levels falling in our countries too .
Moreover , just as aviation users cross borders , safety should not be tied down to national borders either .
Frequently occurring problems can be ascribed to inadequate primary aviation legislation , and the lack of institutional structures , qualified staff and financial resources .
Recent accidents have demonstrated that an inadequate command of aviation 's official language , English , can have tragic consequences .
Suffice for me to remind you of a few serious accidents , one in France and one in Italy , which were both directly the result of the fact that the aviation staff did not have a sufficient command of English , the official language .
Other shortcomings can also have major consequences .
In 25 % of the cases involving third-country aircraft , the flight manuals or navigation maps are missing , or the Global Positioning Systems are not sufficiently updated .
Coordinated action accompanied by exchange of information that allows for early identification of possible defects in aircraft is preferable to working with national measures .
In that way , Member States can fall back on the EU 's common position with regard to third countries to prevent unsafe aircraft from being re-routed to airports in neighbouring Member States where such inspections are not carried out .
Specific elements in our report relate to the fact that people living in the vicinity of airports can lodge complaints about aircraft safety and that they can also obtain information about the lack of safety of some aircraft that fly into their local airports .
The people of Ostend will welcome approval of this section .
The Commission , however , is less than forthcoming on this score .
I should like to emphasise that there is no room for discrimination .
Aircraft from the EU should be inspected according to the same strict rules as third-country aircraft .
Since the events of 11 September , we must take more account of the safety of those living in the vicinity of airports and approach routes .
Furthermore , and I should like to finish on this note , we need to prevent privatisations in the aviation sector , and particularly privatisations in the safety field , from undermining this very safety , because that is probably when corners will once again be cut .
I hope that cutting back on safety , which became so apparent in Überlingen , will not have fatal consequences .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen , at the beginning of this new parliamentary session we are dealing with one of the issues which I would describe as a star issue for this legislature .
You will remember that at the end of the last parliamentary session we congratulated the Vice-President both on the work she has done in terms of rail transport and the work she has done on the Erika packages in relation to maritime safety .
Well today , at the outset , we are returning to a star issue : the attempt to create the Single Sky ; the attempt to harmonise the technical standards ; an increase in safety ; an increase in the capacity of our airspace .
Harmonising all of this with national interests .
Harmonising or trying to involve the military authorities , but at the same time trying to respond to a demand of the European citizens : an increase in flight capacity and an increase in safety .
We believe that that safety can be achieved , precisely by means of harmonisation .
We believe that the creation of the Single Sky will respond to the increasing demand for air safety .
I therefore urge the Vice-President , with the support of this Parliament - because she knows that we support her - to take on , following the approval of the reports we are currently debating , the difficult task of trying to convince the Council to come to an agreement quickly .
This is what the European citizens demand : that technical safety be increased by means of the approval of all the proposals and measures which we are debating here at the moment .
I would like to point out that the Transport Committee and , of course , the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , which I represent , have been urging and pressurising the European Commission to adopt this type of measure .
Unfortunately , as happened in the case of the debate on the Erika package , we are holding this debate on a dramatic anniversary in the history of the world , which is also significant in terms of the history of air travel .
Safeguarding military interests - strengthening the coordination and cooperation between civil and military authorities - increasing air safety , harmonising technical standards , creating the Single Sky committee , increasing the role of Eurocontrol through cooperation between the European Commission and Eurocontrol in the manner proposed and discussed by the Vice-President .
These are the challenges and the options and direction we have to take .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs and the honourable Members for your efforts on this important debate .
I would also like to congratulate the Vice-President and I urge her to do everything possible to achieve an agreement quickly .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too would like to preface what I have to say with a few words of gratitude addressed to both rapporteurs , Mr Fava and Mrs Sanders-ten Holte , taking as I do the view that both reports have been drafted with great care and have also demonstrated a very responsible approach to their subject-matter .
Let me also say that I am grateful for their willingness , in preparation for the votes in the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , to work together in seeking compromises and ways ahead , in which we largely succeeded .
I also wish to thank the Commissioner , who has indeed invested a great deal of commitment in this project , and I do believe that , without her sustained efforts , we might well not have reached the point we have come to today , of being able to complete the first reading of a project of this sort .
There is , however , something I would like to add .
I was rather surprised , Commissioner , that you take such a critical view of the many amendments that Parliament has adopted , and which I have taken a quick second look at , and raise the prospect of your being unable to accept them .
I do think you should take a closer look and see Parliament as the partner you will need if you are to be able to successfully and consistently put the case for this joint project of ours to the Council .
We find ourselves today talking about a situation that has long been a reality on the ground .
It has , in the meantime , become the norm for goods , just as much as people , to be able to cross the borders at will , at whatever time and in whatever manner .
This freedom on the ground must actually have originated in the heavens , as it seems far less problematic to set down borders in the sky than to remove them on earth .
Things have turned out differently now , though , and the public , the people who fly frequently , have expectations that are all the greater and all the more pressing ; it is they who are telling us to at last get on with politics and sort matters out .
It is the fact that the present position is simply unsatisfactory that prompted our desire for a Single Sky .
Let me make that clearer by giving some examples .
The situation in Europe today is that one out of every four flights is delayed .
A proportion of the delays can be attributed to the fact that airspace is overstretched , and it is overstretched because we have this catastrophic situation with a fragmented sky .
Every year , 350 000 flying hours are wasted because the direct route goes over military areas which may not be overflown , which means that aircraft have to fly by circuitous routes .
We also have the situation today in which there are 41 blocks of airspace in 15 EU Member States .
I always like to illustrate that by the example of an airline pilot who , on a flight from Rome to Brussels , has to fly through nine different blocks of airspace , meaning that he has to report in and out nine times .
Misunderstandings are of course always possible and linguistic problems can crop up , so if anyone tries to tell me there are no additional potential hazards here , he is off beam .
This makes it clear that we must make a long-overdue change here .
I see these proposals as likely to give the sky a new architecture , create functional blocks of airspace and thereby ensure that , on the one hand , we increase capacity - which the increase in air traffic makes urgently necessary - and on the other , we enhance safety by minimising potential dangers from the outset , are able to reduce costs and so make flying cheaper and , finally and particularly , that we do the environment a favour by cutting at a stroke the 350 000 unnecessary flying hours to which I have already referred .
So we have our eyes on the right objective , but I will also say that I am sure there are a number of points we could subject to critical discussion , and I know that one or other of my fellow-Members of this House has doubts about whether this or that is the right way to go ahead .
In the Committee , we tried to add certain things .
One I will mention is an industry consultation body , as we felt it was right that both the users and the manufacturers should be more involved in the project , to prevent us coming up with something that later proves unusable , or , on the other hand , from requirements bearing no relation to the products that come on the market .
The fact is that , as well as the fragmentation represented by the 41 zones in the sky , Europe is fragmented in the field of technology .
I believe that our technologies must also be modernised and harmonised as soon as possible .
Like Mr Stockmann , who tabled an amendment on the subject , I would have liked us to go a step further by creating a European supervisory authority and removing this area much more from the nation states .
I know that to be , at the moment , a chimera , but my relative youth gives me hope that we will today take the plunge and take an important second step by declaring our desire for a Single European Sky , deciding on the political objective , and then going down the road the Commission has pointed out to us .
Thus we may hope that , at some point in the next ten or twenty years , there really will be a Single European Sky with a European supervisory authority , which will of course safeguard national interests .
So I ask you to vote for these projects by a large majority .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , ' and yet it does move ' - European air transport policy , I mean .
There are obviously so many pressing problems that Spain and Great Britain have given up their decades-old blockade in the Council .
That is a great step forward for Europe .
The Single Sky project has a significance in terms of European airspace comparable to that of the introduction of the euro for the European economic and monetary area .
I only hope that there is just as much awareness of the problems involved and willingness to resolve them , as the devil is well known to dwell in the details .
We can already see quite divergent national interests girding their loins to jeopardise the ambitious objective of making this project a reality by 2004 .
The reports by Mr Fava and Mrs Sanders-ten Holte show the necessary will to resolve the problems , and I hope that the House does as well .
I would also like to say something about a number of core issues that have had a part to play in the discussion and which seem to be important .
I still find it hard to understand why the sharing of responsibilities between the Community and Eurocontrol has not been resolved in a truly definitive way .
Things still need to be done in that area .
My second point is that the Commission was quite right to refer to cooperation between civilian and military authorities , but this does not , in my view , go far enough , since , in the final analysis , there is still an intrinsic need for their air traffic control services to be fully integrated .
This area calls for more than what the Commission has proposed .
I am aware that this would of course require an ongoing discussion in the institutions , one that would encompass the Common Foreign and Security Policy and not relate solely to transport policy .
Thirdly , the provision of air traffic control services calls for independent national supervisory authorities , which would , in the final analysis , need to be institutionally separate from the service providers .
As my colleague has pointed out , we would prefer it if we already had a European supervisory authority , but the time for that does not yet seem to have arrived .
Fourthly , we need clear procedures for authorisation and appointments and transparent rules on charges .
I would ask you , at the present time , not to let yourselves be tangled up in a discussion as to whether air traffic control requires State or private-sector service providers , or else the whole project risks being brought to a standstill , as we have seen happen with public transport .
That would be harmful .
It is safety that is in the foreground and has priority , along with the facilitation of integrated air traffic control services appropriate to the functional blocks of airspace .
My fifth point , which is at the heart of the whole structure , follows from that . We need the creation of functional blocks of airspace .
The Commission 's description of how we get there is , however , incorrect and inadequate .
Here , the need to rid the skies of the small-state mentality means that there is still a need for improvement .
We have 26 subsystems , 58 monitoring systems , and different equipment .
That is superfluous and , as has already been said , increases the likelihood of error .
Safety must be the highest priority .
Mrs Maes , your report is one that I cannot but fully support .
There are scarcely any objections to it on the part of our group .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President of the Commission , I would like to start by saying that the debate in committee was lengthy and in-depth , and so the amendments accepted were not random but were the fruit of lengthy discussion .
I too would like to thank the three rapporteurs , who have done an excellent job , and I think I can say that Parliament 's support for the Single Sky was confirmed both in the discussion in committee and in today 's debate , which have proved a constructive contribution to the creation of the Single Sky .
However , if we want 2004 to remain the date for the introduction of this new airspace model , we will need , in my opinion , to pursue dialogue within the Council , particularly with those countries which are still sceptical - some of them are downright against the idea - and with the countries whose internal systems are in most need of modernisation , and here I am thinking of the problems which are clearly going to arise with enlargement , which is now imminent .
I have noticed a political theme emerging during the course of the debate : the perpetuation of the myth that the Single Sky is an attack on the sovereignty of the individual States .
It was even said in committee that it is an attack on the physical sovereignty of States over their territory .
I feel it is important to make it clear that this myth is completely unfounded and that it is , of course , contrary to the spirit of the Treaties , but I fear that it is even becoming an issue in high-level negotiations .
Dialogue is also necessary - as a number of Members have said - with the trade unions , which I believe are voicing the legitimate concerns of the people , particularly as regards the more sensitive points relating to the concept of public service or service of general interest , especially where controls are concerned , which is clearly a sensitive issue .
I feel we must stress , as has already been done , that liberalisation , which is absolutely essential in this sector , does not mean privatisation , that competition , although as wide as possible , must , of course , take into account the essential safety requirements .
We therefore need to increase capacity to deal with the huge volume of traffic , while , as I said , increasing safety and making air traffic control less fragmented by using new technologies , not least , and resolving the still pending complex issue of integration with military systems , for I feel that this is a political matter which does need to be addressed .
One of our guiding principles must be to create new airways which will prevent congestion in certain airspaces , for we are now faced with saturated routes and a huge increase in costs caused by delays and the enormous amounts of fuel consumed .
I believe that the Single Sky will bring an efficient , effective system for the European citizens .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the proposal for the creation of the Single European Sky is a complex issue , one that I , personally , still find rather ambiguous .
I think , however , that Mr Fava and Mrs Sanders-ten Holte have done a considerable amount of work , given the size of this report .
From the outset , in order to understand the full implications of this matter , I took the time to work with the industry .
Only last Thursday , I spent the morning at the Roissy air traffic control centre and the afternoon at Athis-Mons , which is Europe 's third largest air traffic control centre after Maastricht and London .
From this experience , I have come to believe that - in spite of the fact that the rapporteurs and the Commission have taken a number of points into account - what is being proposed today still presents serious dangers .
I would like to thank the RET Committee for having incorporated a series of amendments that I had proposed so that more attention is paid to safety .
I also feel it is very positive to include an amendment specifying that each Member State is free to appoint a public or private entity as its operator or operators , although I do believe that air navigation services represent a service of general interest and that competition rules cannot apply to them , as the European Court of Justice has in fact ruled .
Unfortunately , even though these amendments were adopted , this has not , in my view , significantly changed the liberal undercurrents of the draft text .
I shall try to explain what I mean .
All the amendments proposed by my group , which clearly ruled out introducing competition in the air navigation sector , were rejected in committee .
Even so , the House must still reflect on the fact that the air traffic control trade unions are united on this issue .
Everyone in the industry - although there are , quite naturally , differences of opinion between the various parties - is coming to the same conclusion regarding the dangers of the current proposal .
Yet , we are not talking about staff who are attached to so-called privileges and who are unable to accept change : the very job of an air-controller involves constant development and change .
The current system is far from perfect .
In addition , it is already cross-border in nature .
Everyone is aware that cut-off points do not , generally , begin and end at borders .
There are other reasons for this apart from air traffic control .
The current system of course needs to be improved , but in my view , there are other problems , particularly that of the ultimate objective .
The ultimate objective should , indeed , be the priority .
There is also a problem regarding method .
No reform of the air traffic control system will succeed without the help of air traffic controllers who are responsible for maintaining high safety standards in Europe .
In addition , it was possible to bridge the gap - a very considerable gap between the extraordinary growth in air traffic in recent years and improving traffic flow - due to the increase in air traffic controllers ' productivity , not to mention the significant investment made to upgrade equipment .
The search for standards that everyone in Europe can apply is an essential goal for the Union and , from this point of view , the European Commission can certainly play an extremely important role in providing harmonious organisation and effective control .
Although the proposal for a regulation treats safety as a priority , I believe that all the proposals seeking to place the regulation on an economic basis run counter to this affirmation .
Whatever forms , and they all differ considerably , are chosen by the Member States , the proposal to introduce competition in air navigation services by casting doubt upon the integrated system , including all the technical services , would be detrimental to navigation and it represents a tangible danger to safety .
It is true that there is a link between safety , capacity and costs , but to purport to establish high safety standards by taking the economic question of cost as a priority and by referring to it above all else is , at best , illusory and , at worst , misleading as to the goal of maintaining high safety standards .
Obviously , the flow of air traffic and its safety are dependent on a chain , all the links of which are essential .
If the chain is broken , we risk seriously compromising safety .
That is why , to put it frankly , if the texts do not make significant changes on these crucial issues , I will be unable to support them in their current form .
Mr President , I very much welcome the proposals before us today , which are clearly designed to tackle delays caused by air traffic control problems in Europe .
These delays are taking place on many flights because of the difficulties with air traffic systems in Europe .
These systems need to be modernised and centralised so as to guarantee that flights are not delayed because of air traffic control deficiencies .
We have all seen surveys that show that air traffic is going to increase in the coming years .
The objective of the Single European Sky proposal is to ensure that air traffic management systems are designed , managed and regulated in a harmonised way within the Union and with the highest possible level of safety .
I come from an island nation with a high dependence on air transport and improved efficiency in these transport models is extremely important to enable future economic development to take place in my country .
At present there are 73 air traffic control centres in the pan-European airspace , which all operate under different codes of classification .
Air traffic management in Europe is fragmented and the current system is not able to keep pace with the demand , which results in delays in many flights .
In the European Union we need to establish effective and binding regulatory arrangements to solve this problem sooner rather than later .
On a separate but not unrelated matter , a conciliation process is going to begin shortly in relation to the issue of the new EU regulation concerning the establishment of common rules in the field of civil aviation security .
This conciliation process must reach an effective agreement .
We need to ensure the introduction of a 100 % whole baggage screening process at all airports in Europe . We must also guarantee that the necessary staff training is put in place to make these changes work .
Improved security is not a cheap exercise and one of the issues that has to be addressed at the conciliation stage is agreeing exactly who is going to foot the bill for the implementation of the new anti-terrorist security arrangements .
At present the financing of anti-terrorist security measures for air transport differs from country to country and between transport models .
We cannot continue to accept this situation .
Mr President , airlines and passengers are facing a number of serious problems , which the combined management of the airspace above Europe should be able to resolve .
Increased efficiency and handling rates should reduce delays , environmental pollution and avoidable costs to a minimum .
We are confronted with a number of complications , prime among which , in my view , is the division between military airspace and civil corridors .
It is up to national and military authorities to take up the challenge to end this division .
Safety should be at the forefront of our minds during the liberalisation of navigation services .
Nobody benefits from lower costs that result in a higher risk for travellers and staff .
This is why we endorse the emphasis which Mrs Sanders-ten Holte places on this aspect .
The standards for the various services should be as uniform as possible , preferably at global level and at least at European level , where we should draw on the expertise and experience of organisations such as ICAO , Eurocontrol and soon also EASA .
I would ask that special attention be given to the enforcement of these standards .
In many areas , sound legislation breaks down as a result of insufficient monitoring and enforcement .
An adequate draft and implementation of this inspection and enforcement also make it possible for enterprises other than strictly public ones to offer navigation services .
Finally , time , capacity and safety all require an improvement in the current situation as a matter of urgency .
I hope that the Commission can keep to its ambitious time schedule , which should never be at the expense of the quality and safety of drafts , however .
In our view , the rapporteurs have sufficiently called attention to this in their reports , which we can endorse accordingly .
Mr President , both the explosion in air traffic in recent years and the saturation of Europe 's skies mean that a number of measures to reduce congestion are needed . One of these measures should be improved regulatory coordination between the European countries .
From this perspective , the Commission 's Single Sky initiative which aims to provide a safer and more fluid airspace appears to be based on the obvious .
Yet , the obvious seems much less clear , however , when you study the practical details of the project and when you realise that there is already a body that regulates air traffic , Eurocontrol , which has a great deal of technical expertise and covers a much wider territory than that of the Union , since its membership includes 31 countries of the continent .
In this respect , there is a considerable discrepancy which , in truth , the texts presented by the Commission do not mention .
This discrepancy is fully evident even in Article 1 of the regulation laying down the general framework , as it is stated that the Community shall be given the means necessary in order to create the Single European Sky whilst taking into account Eurocontrol 's task in establishing a pan-European airspace .
Further into the text , the issue of coordination between the Commission , which represents the Community , and Eurocontrol , does not become any clearer .
This could be summed up in one sentence : who gives the orders and who is has the last say in drafting the regulation ?
Although the text attempts to suggest the opposite , we can only see one possible answer .
It is Eurocontrol that gives the orders , which the Community must obey , alongside Member States which still have the most important role .
We feel that the majority of Member States share the same view .
We must maintain Eurocontrol and its prerogatives and we must , therefore , firstly clarify the prerequisites of regulatory relations with this body .
Failure to do so will risk complicating matters rather than simplifying them .
Mr President , I would like to begin by congratulating Mrs Maes on a very competent and excellent report .
Consideration of this subject is long overdue and I am grateful to the Commission for bringing it forward .
The problem of third countries ' aircraft and their safety standards has been of great concern to many people , particularly Eastern European airlines and maybe even further east than that .
The Commission 's directive has sought to resolve this problem by introducing a large number of ramp inspections and inspectors to do spot-check inspections on these aircraft as they land in the European Union .
That is one way to do it .
There is another way we could have approached this , but I am not going to complain .
I would just like to say that the way the Commission has proposed is a massive job creation programme for aeronautical engineers and technicians .
I myself am an aeronautical engineer so I should not be complaining about this .
But it is going to create a number of jobs at the Community airports where people will have to go and do spot-check inspections and ramp inspections .
An alternative that I might suggest for future consideration is to actually upgrade technical and maintenance facilities in third countries and give them support and aid so that they can upgrade their own technical specifications and maintenance facilities to a standard that is internationally acceptable .
That is what the United States has been doing , particularly with African countries .
This is good for exports and good for the United States aviation industry in that it provides a long-term opportunity to sell its goods and services .
It is also a way of getting its equipment into place around the world - the Boeing-Airbus agreement , I suppose .
There are , of course , a number of issues relating to Community air transport which we need to look at .
Might I be permitted to raise a very important issue for the British MEPs coming to Strasbourg ?
We get thrown off flights , even with fully confirmed tickets .
Air France has done this repeatedly ; yesterday two of my colleagues with confirmed tickets were thrown off because the flight had been overbooked .
That is against international rules .
It is also - and the Commissioner might wish to write to the president of Air France about this - a criminal offence for a Member of Parliament to be prevented from coming to Parliament in Britain .
There is such a thing as a European arrest warrant , which we understand is now going to be put in place .
I am raising these issues so that we may act before it is too late .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , although I do of course agree with the basic idea , I feel that , when it comes to the question of a Single European Sky , which is a very complex issue , we should look very carefully at local parameters and anyone advocating the privatisation of air traffic control and management will need to come up with some pretty persuasive arguments .
We also need to make arrangements , in conjunction with the military sector , in order to protect its decision-taking powers on defence issues and ensure that current common foreign policy and defence levels are not exceeded .
Clearly , several questions have arisen which require further clarification .
For example , on the question of national sovereignty , each Member State will be required to hand over the planning and control of its airspace to a central agency and this may cause numerous Member States constitutional problems .
This needs looking into .
Likewise , despite the initial opinion of the Council 's legal services , airspace above international waters does not appear to have been covered .
For countries such as Greece , but not just Greece , this is a very serious question because , without airspace continuity , technical and institutional problems will arise and we may end up with different systems operating within a single Member State .
This will complicate daily operations and thwart the very flexibility which is the whole purpose of the exercise .
Even the involvement of the military sector in this overall exercise has not been clearly safeguarded with respect to national security issues , i.e. second pillar issues .
And then there is the , in our view , equally serious question of the legal basis for the proposed regulations which , by their very nature , appear to warrant more than just Article 80 ( 2 ) of the Treaty , given that this is not just a transport issue .
To conclude , I feel that if the most serious of these concerns are to be entertained , the right of defence and security enshrined in national legislation must be clearly safeguarded when we introduce the Single European Sky we all want .
Thank you and my especial congratulations to the Commissioner and the honourable Members for their excellent work .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too would like to start by thanking the rapporteurs for their excellent work in drafting these important reports .
They have taken different points of view into consideration and have achieved a balanced whole .
The aims of the regulation package before us to improve the viability of air traffic are especially welcome .
The reforms are necessary to keep the costs of air traffic down , reduce the number of delays and increase capacity .
As has been said here many times , it is very important to improve traffic safety .
There is broad consensus on these goals .
There are whole areas in the regulation where opinions in Member States have differed .
These include consideration of the military dimension , the provision of services , functional airspace blocks and relations with Eurocontrol .
In taking a decision consideration must be given to the needs of national air defence .
These could be ensured by means of a safeguard clause .
The Member States must furthermore retain the power in the future to decide the provider from which it is to acquire air navigation services .
With regard to the provision of air navigation services , the regulation proposes the possibility of establishing supranational airspace blocks .
That would give national authorities a choice when procuring services .
The recent EU decision to apply for membership of Eurocontrol , the European Organisation for the Safety of Air Navigation , was a necessary one .
After accession the EU will be able to use the powers of decision of Member of States in those matters in which the organisation is involved which concern all Member States .
Eurocontrol 's foremost objective is specifically the improvement of traffic flow and safety .
The harmonisation of air navigation systems and the control of traffic flows will contribute to this .
Improvements in air safety will also call for action in respect of the assessment of aircraft from third countries .
That is discussed in the report that Mrs Maes drafted and it is important .
The different points of view that have been raised here can be reconciled in the way the rapporteurs have demonstrated .
We should try and make swift progress in the debate on the legislative package so that it can be adopted some time this year .
Mr President , Commissioner , it is beyond doubt that the airspace above the European Union should be under common management if its safe use and greater quality is to be guaranteed in the form of reduced delays .
The approach taken by the rapporteurs , of involving representatives of consumer associations and of industry , as well as of Eurocontrol and of the armed forces , in the discussion in order to come to decisions on proposals for the use of the Single Sky , is one that I support .
Only this combination , taking account of the experience of civilian and military operators , of suppliers , of those who provide air transport services and those who use them , can lead to decisions being made that effectively make the connection between the required safety standard , efficiency , and the interests of the workforce .
I do have doubts , though , when it comes to the technical implementation that is proposed .
I can understand why service providers and regulators are to be separated , but I am opposed to the option contemplated of destroying the hitherto integrated air traffic control system by awarding individual contracts , some of them to operators in the private sector .
Whilst this may well lead to more competitors becoming active in the market , I see it as bringing about the very opposite of the increased safety that is intended .
The geographical fragmentation of air traffic control services that prevails at present gives way only to fragmentation of an economic kind .
In no way does this reduce the existing problems in European air transport , but rather - as demonstrated by the example of the recent crash of two aircraft over Lake Constance - new ones are added .
Considerations of profitability led to cutbacks in personnel that made it possible for a situation to arise in which in fact only one pilot was actually on duty , and this made trouble-free and , above all , safe operation impossible .
Here , it is abundantly clear , the question arises of whether air traffic management 's highly-sensitive safety issues might not be better taken care of by a public service , which would incorporate the advantages of the integration of the individual services into one single chain with the required quality of work , professional qualifications and the necessary material resources .
Whilst the introduction of cross-border blocks of airspace represents a step towards the necessary integration of European airspace , it can only come about with the agreement of all the States concerned .
When cases of uncertainty or dispute arise , it should not be possible to settle them over the heads of one or more states .
In contrast to this Commission proposal , which presupposes cross-border cooperation by regional services that are available only to a very limited extent , close collaboration between the nation states ' existing public air traffic control services is very definitely conceivable and indeed realistic .
In this instance , two countries would constitute a cross-border block of airspace .
This complex question of how the sovereignty of states may be respected is also apparent in the Commission 's thinking and reporting on improved collaboration between civil and military use of airspace .
It is not clear from these reports precisely how the closure of airspace to civil , as opposed to military , aviation can be rolled back .
The current regulations can hardly be said to achieve better use of the single European airspace or greater safety .
The extended interoperability of the European air traffic management network can be seen in a positive light , as integrated networks have a natural tendency to facilitate greater compatibility and contribute to the reduction of acquisition and maintenance costs .
Mr President , Commissioner , the fact that we in this Parliament are some of the most frequent users of air transport requires us to pay special attention to all initiatives designed to improve the organisation , punctuality and safety of air traffic navigation and control services .
We are certainly not calling into question that the proposal to create a Community air regulation body , known as the ' Single European Sky ' , and the development of connected regulations are intended to increase the effectiveness and safety of this means of transport and to respond to the challenges of its foreseeable growth in the future .
The simple truth is that in this field there are questions that cannot go unanswered .
Because I have very little speaking time , I shall only discuss the main ones .
First , is Parliament aware that the legal base invoked for the four regulations , Article No 80 ( 2 ) of the Treaty , might not be a sufficient basis for the measures recommended by the Commission , which will have the consequence of communitising national airspace , leaving States Members to exercise , alone , and jointly , their powers of sovereignty ?
Furthermore , do you realise , ladies and gentlemen , that , as a result of these regulations , the distinction between civil and military users of common airspace will become blurred ?
Thirdly , is it not obvious that the assumption of these new competences by the Union , to be exercised in accordance with the rules of comitology , requires the inclusion of a ground of competence which does not exist in the current Treaty , and even the definition of a common defence policy , which is still so far from being reached ?
Furthermore , will the introduction of economic competition mechanisms into air traffic control activities be appropriate to pursuing the objective of air traffic safety , in other words , the safety of people and goods that are transported and of communities living under flight paths , given the need to maintain the high standards of safety practiced ?
Lastly , during this process , will an impartial and objective analysis have been carried out of the genuine causes of the delays European flights have been experiencing ?
Can these only be attributed to the shortcomings of the air traffic control system , which we are now seeking to remedy ?
Will due account be taken , for example , of the responsibilities of airports or of those of airlines that refuse to phase out their flights , or of meteorological reasons ?
In these new regulations we do not see proposals for measures designed to improve the practices of the other components of this complex system .
We do not see them and , therefore , we are still concerned .
Mr President , Commissioner , if one reads the texts proposed by the Commission , one is led to believe that air navigation services might be subject to the Community 's economic rules , which would mean having to publish calls for tender for public services of this particular type .
Yet , in its judgement of 19 January 1994 , the Court of Justice stated that air navigation control is a task of the public authorities that is entirely devoid of economic character , since this activity is a service of general interest designed to protect both air transport users and the populations affected by aircraft flying overhead .
One might believe , therefore , that air traffic control , flight information and alerting services exert a form of administrative police of a regal nature , and they cannot , under any circumstances , be incorporated into a market service , despite the existence of user charges .
The fact that these services are covered by charges paid by the users does not , however , confer upon them the character of services that are subject to the economic rules of the Treaty .
That is why the Member States must be able to choose the procedures for organising and providing these services depending on the volume and nature of traffic that they have to manage , as well as the economic realities specific to their territory .
We should also point out that air traffic services cannot be subject to the economic rules of the Treaty , nor can competition be introduced .
The conflicts of interest which might arise from this would have an extremely harmful effect on the safety of air transport and , more importantly , of the general public .
One of the sovereign functions of the State is to ensure the safety of its population and its territory .
It is therefore the duty of the States and the States alone - which must , of course , improve harmonisation within Eurocontrol - to fulfil this duty .

Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking our rapporteurs , Mr Fava and Mrs Sanders-ten Holte , and also the shadow rapporteur , Mr Schmitt , for all their hard work on a very complex and detailed report .
However , I should like to raise a number of concerns that have not yet been addressed , in particular by the Commission .
The aviation industry cannot continue to sustain the loss of USD 4 billion due to delays across Europe and I recognise that doing nothing is not an option .
Notwithstanding those remarks , as the saying goes , the devil is in the detail .
The proposals before us could result in duplication of regulatory efforts and measures aimed at either Member States or at the full Eurocontrol membership that at present covers 31 countries .
Even worse , there is still a real danger of damaging or destroying existing pan-European systems that function to everybody 's satisfaction , solely because they need to be placed all of a sudden in an EU context .
I refer in particular to the Commission proposal to recreate the Eurocontrol route charges and central flow management systems .
I would also question the establishment of an industry consultation body , as this would be an unnecessary duplication of the existing system .
It is our duty to look beyond our borders and create meaningful and effective actions and measures to improve the safety , efficiency and economics of air traffic management which will not lead to a two-tier system , thereby jeopardising the current modus operandi .
In addition , we cannot ignore the genuine concerns of many Member States regarding the military dimensions of Single Sky , nor the sovereignty issue .
On 6 July 2000 , during our initial debate here in this House , I informed the House that 44 % of delays and 30 bottlenecks were concentrated in sectors straddling north and south , including Switzerland , France , Italy , Spain and parts of Germany .
I also stressed that it was inappropriate to use Eurocontrol as the scapegoat .
A Single Sky will not solve all of our congestion problems if these Member States and Switzerland do not make a concerted effort to address their specific shortcomings .
Finally , both airlines and airports will also need to look closely at their practices , as they too are far too often responsible for a high percentage of the delays incurred .
This report has come a long way and , again , we must thank the rapporteurs .
But we are not there yet .
I hope that there will be further and better clarification once Council has met .
Mr President , this debate is not only about safety or the elimination of delays through better cooperation at European level .
In my view , this debate also has an international political dimension .
Cooperation is the EU 's strength but also its weakness .
It is useful to conclude agreements about European rules on aviation , including the use of airspace .
However , the weakness lies in the way this is done : slowly and with a large number of reservations on the part of the nation states .
As is evident from Kyoto and the whole affair surrounding the International Criminal Court , we in the European Union try to emulate the United States on the international stage .
The Americans often try to play us off against each other , and often , we are unable to offer any resistance .
The aviation dossier is a case in point .
If you compare the European Union with the United States , it is evident how much better things are organised over there and how weak we often still are .
The debate and the Fava report also show that we are still not agreed by a long shot on the use of airspace and the rules for air traffic control .
This discussion is immaterial in the US , as it has one aviation authority .
I therefore believe it is important , also in the light of this debate , to make swift progress and to work on a system , a set of rules , which can form the basis of one space instead of fifteen different regulations that are given a common European denominator in one way or another .
I should like to conclude with a remark about Mrs Maes ' report , which is excellent .
It is good that we can now finally wrap up this dossier .
It has gone on for too long , partly as a result of the Gibraltar issue .
There are risks involving third-country aircraft , often because these are obsolete .
This creates unjustified risks , including for airports in the EU at which passengers board these planes .
I welcome an inspection system , and I should like to congratulate Mrs Maes once again on her sterling report .
Mr President , introducing competition within the air navigation services will not reduce delays to flights , nor will it harmonise Europe 's skies , as the Commission claims .
Competition would , in fact , compound these difficulties , as competition hampers cooperation .
Applying productivity criteria to what is merely a question of commercial profitability cannot improve the service provided to air transport users .
More importantly , though , attacking the public and integrated character of air traffic control services and , therefore , breaking the safety chain that this service provides , only increases the risk .
Unfortunately , the air disaster that occurred at Lake Constance in July served as a tragic reminder of this .
Air traffic controllers are quite right to reject the so-called ' Single Sky ' project , a message reinforced during their Europe-wide strike on 19 June , and the risk that it involves .
My colleagues , Mrs Laguiller and Mrs Bordes , and I condemn the breaking up - planned by the Commission - of this public service in preparation to hand it over to private greed .
The shareholders of the airlines , of the aeronautics industry and the information technology sector are already calculating the profits that they will make from the break-up .
If you strip the draft text of the pretexts put forward by the Commission , the reality of this project becomes all too evident .
We therefore reject the project outright , and we shall vote against the Fava and Sanders-ten Holte reports as privatisations and the pursuit for profit are harmful and incompatible with progress , with the concern for safety , with the possible and necessary renationalisation of human activities , on land as well as in the air .
Mr President , when my colleague spoke about the Single European Sky in July 2000 he thanked the then rapporteur , Sir Robert Atkins , for providing a gift to the Eurosceptic movement in the United Kingdom .
Since then , the Europhile British press , particularly the national Sunday newspaper The Observer , has made great capital over the recent tragic collision between the Swiss and the Russian airliners .
One journalist even suggested that the lack of a unified system was in part responsible for the incident .
However , this issue is not about controlling airspace .
A unified system through Eurocontrol already exists . It has been doing the job of coordinating air movements in 30 countries , half of them outside the EU , for 42 years .
The real issue is the battle as old as the Communities themselves : the battle between supranationalism and intergovernmentalism .
The Eurocontrol system is based on intergovernment control ; the Single European Sky framework directive is naked supranationalism .
The Community wants to bring a portion of the system under supranational control .
It wants to take over relations with Eurocontrol from Member States , bringing it closer to achieving its ambition to be what Monnet described as a European government .
That is the real agenda .
I remind my British colleagues particularly , therefore , that if they vote for this measure they are voting for political integration .
Mr President , I would like to start by thanking the Commission and congratulating it on its initiative , as other Members have done . I would also like to thank the rapporteurs and the Parliamentary bodies and congratulate them on their work on this very complex subject , with regard to which I feel it is right to apply the principle of flexibility we cite so often .
I must also thank the Commissioner and Commission Vice-President because , in this case , making a minimal , formal change to procedure , she has anticipated the line the Commission will take at the end of the debate on the amendments too .
This has given us the opportunity , the subject being so complex , to specify some of the reasons for the importance we attach to the amendments and , precisely , to bring out crucial , sensitive points of the debate .
The Single Sky initiative is positive , for the reasons already mentioned by all the speakers , which I will not go over again so as not to waste time or space .
The guiding principles are safety , efficiency and punctuality , to quote the Commissioner herself .
For this very reason , although we have chosen not to make an explicit , isolated reference to the economic side of things in some amendments , that does not mean that we do not realise its importance but that we want to avoid playing into the hands of those who have viewed this process in a negative light right from the very beginning .
We often say that we must not throw the baby out with the bath water but , in this case , there are some people who have been trying , right from the beginning , to make the bath water dirty precisely so that the baby will then be thrown out , and we would like to avoid this .
The same applies to the issue of cooperation between civil and military authorities .
The solutions we are proposing will not resolve the problem but , if there is one way of ensuring that it is never resolved , it is not even to address the issue .
The problem will arise again with regard to relations with Eurocontrol and respect for national sovereignty when we come to redefine functional airspaces too , and there are potential solutions which can enhance the positive work already achieved hitherto .
Mr President , I should also like to thank the rapporteurs for their work and remind colleagues that the real issues , the three guiding principles against which we should test these proposals , must be safety , environmental sustainability and consumer rights .
The current systems of air traffic control in Europe are living on borrowed time and the tragic events this summer only go to prove that .
Mrs Maes is absolutely right that in 20 to 30 years we could well be witnessing a major aviation tragedy every week unless we take action now .
The Single European Sky and the proposals for checks on non-EU aircraft are important contributions to making our skies safer .
But we must also take account of the environment , particularly in this week of the Johannesburg Earth Summit .
Every day millions of litres of fuel are wasted and unnecessary emissions are produced because of aviation delays and aircraft in transit across Europe 's skies .
A Single Sky will be a major contribution to reducing pollution , emissions and wasted fossil fuel .
Finally , let us not forget consumer rights .
One in three flights in Europe is delayed .
The human cost is incalculable : thousands of family holidays were ruined this summer with people kept waiting in hot and antiquated airports .
Business is disrupted and delayed .
I hope that this proposal will be widely supported .
I am pleased that the Commissioner is ambitious enough to say that we must see a significant breakthrough in 2004 .
Like Mr Fava , I remain optimistic that we will meet that deadline .
It is just a pity that the Council is not here to respond to our concerns and our calls for immediate action , because the Commissioner has done her work .
We have done ours .
Now it is up to the Council .
Mr President , we have nothing against a Single Sky that is designed , as is proclaimed , to increase safety levels in European airspace by coordinating guidelines and actions and by harmonising rules .
But this is not , objectively , the real reason for this Commission proposal .
Incidentally , issues of safety or even delays do not fall within the main scope of airspace control .
And , in fact , the proposal adds little in the field of safety .
Some of the guidelines it contains could actually even call into question the high safety standards they claim to want to achieve : this applies to the opening up of the auxiliary service market , given the priority attached to improving results , which could lead to lower spending on staffing and equipment . This also applies to transforming geographic blocs into economic blocs that will tend to compete with one another , to the detriment of safety .
It is at other levels , however , that this proposal concerns us most , as well as some of the amendments that were introduced in the competent parliamentary Committee .
I am referring specifically to the intention to transfer the definition of ' functional blocks ' from the Member States to the Community sphere .
Since this issue has been and still is a matter for the forum on territorial management , in accordance with the Treaties and the constitutions of some countries , specifically my own , it falls within the exclusive competence of the Member States .
There is , therefore , no legal base for proposing what is being proposed , especially not in the terms adopted in the parliamentary Committee , which strengthen the Commission 's role as the authority of last instance .
In fact , this matter takes on particular importance given the involvement of the military sphere .
It is , therefore , unacceptable that attempts are being made to subordinate control of military airspace and , in general , to define new ' functional blocks ' in the absence of a competent decision by the Member States .
We feel , therefore , that the approach with which the Council has been studying this issue recently is a sensible one .
These concerns - but also others , such as those regarding the mobility of controllers - have deserved our full attention and have led to the submission of a set of proposals for amendments , which , if adopted , could be added to other amendments that have already been adopted in Committee and which have improved some aspects of the Commission 's initial proposal .
These are the idea that air traffic control services were a matter of general interest ; the previously missing participation by the social partners in the process ; the now accepted possibility of the use and management of air traffic control services remaining in the public sphere ; and finally the commitment to improving cooperation with Eurocontrol .
I repeat , however : the questions that I mentioned at the beginning are crucial to the final evaluation of this proposal .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , these three reports - by Mr Fava , Mrs Sanders-ten Holte and Mrs Maes - were adopted by very large majorities in committee .
Members have therefore rightly drawn attention to what the present legislative process will achieve as we move towards a Single Sky .
All that , including the thanks to the Commissioner and to the rapporteurs , merits nothing but agreement .
As several Members have already said , though , ideal solutions are still a long way off .
Those who are unwilling to admit that should put themselves , for a moment , in the position of the public .
Our citizens take a far less rosy view of the topic of ' flying in Europe ' , above all when , as frequently happens , they are obliged to travel by air .
They regard flying in Europe as safe .
That is a good thing , and may it stay that way , even though , here too , there is still room for improvement .
Above all , though , they regard flying as extremely expensive .
For what I pay to fly from Graz , my home town , to Brussels , I could just as well fly to Los Angeles or Kuala Lumpur .
Quite clearly , something is out of proportion here .
More delays are occurring .
Flying at high speed as we do , we spend more time sitting around at airports , and it happens all too often that we do not fly at all .
Strikes , especially just before public holidays , keep reminding us to what an extent some people , when the issue of safe air travel comes up , consider their own interests rather than the public interest alone .
Looked at in that light , we should not only laud what has been achieved , but we should also , and especially , work on the basis that what we are taking the first steps to get moving today might well need further improvement , so that , setting ourselves higher standards , we may ensure greater safety in the air , and also proper transport conditions in Europe .
There is still much to be done .
Mr President , Commissioner , this proposal sums up our approach quite neatly .
Our point of departure is a known problem , the delays of 1999 , even though this year was exceptional due to the war in Kosovo and the changes to flight paths .
When a problem arises , we quite spontaneously turn to Parliament 's favourite topic , namely competition . We will sooner or later have to build an effigy to competition .
The limits of competition are reached very quickly when the safety of passengers is at stake , and these limits , which fortunately appear , for the most part , in the draft texts , are a matter of responsibility for Member States .
Air-traffic controllers are , essentially , equivalent to a policeman on the side of the road , to a ship 's captain steering a vessel into port , and we can never do deals at their expense .
In addition , each Member State is free to select its air navigation providers , and the regulation must provide for cases where public or private businesses concern missions of general interest .
An amendment has been tabled to this effect .
Airspace is not only used by civilians but also by the military and cooperation between the two is therefore necessary .
I would point out that this cooperation , for the army , falls under the intergovernmental rather than the Community pillar , and in this case , the Single Sky Committee is not answering the question .
Moreover , the Fifteen are not alone ; there are other countries .
You told us that they are to join Eurocontrol next month and this is a positive step .
We must now wait for the next developments .
There are more limits - and I shall end on this point - since control is a single entity that we cannot carve or cut up into slices .
The services involved in providing control cannot be disassociated .
I hope that the outcome of our vote will take into account all this information .
Having said that , our fellow Members have done a good piece of work and I thank them for listening carefully to what we have said .
Mr President , there is a danger that the open skies which the proposed directive is designed to create will turn into a safety nightmare for millions of passengers .
Problems in air transport , competitiveness and efficiency are being used as a cover for the total liberalisation of the market in this sector , for bumping up the profits of big business and , at the same time , for a rude assault on the safety of aircraft and on the national independence and development potential of the Member States , especially the less developed Member States and more remote areas .
And that is not all .
The proposed open skies will , it is openly admitted , be used to serve the militaristic , anti-grass roots plans of the warmongers in ? ? ? ? and the European Union .
At the same time , the very nature of the transport service will change from a service for the benefit of the people to a way of raking in profits for big business .
The adverse effects of this directive will be many and varied , especially for Greece , a country with hundreds of islands , with areas which are among the least developed in the Union and with serious defence and security problems .
That is why we , the workers and consumers oppose this directive .
We are fighting for nationalised airlines which meet high quality and safety standards and which are integrated into a national development programme designed to serve the people , not big business .
Mr President , Commissioner , I , on the other hand , welcome the adoption of this raft of measures today with satisfaction , and if we have any cause for regret at all , it is that it has taken so long to achieve : we have wasted 10 years over this dispute between Spain and the United Kingdom - which was not even based on historical fact - but it cannot be helped .
Today , at last , a new horizon has opened up before us .
I have to say that , in any case , a great many difficulties arose because the dossier was and still is genuinely complex , and its passage has certainly not been smooth .
The effects of this complexity have been felt even today in this House , although it is clear to everybody that there are many economic , safety , environmental and consumer protection justifications for producing this package : we have seen the amount of delays , the level of air traffic congestion , the costs of this congestion and the difficulties of creating new airspaces in terms of safety .
Despite the fact that we can all see that there are more than excellent reasons why we need this raft of measures , objections have been raised even today and have taken a number of different forms : the rather unusual reference to the States ' sovereignty , cooperation with the military authorities , which has suddenly become so vital - I am particularly surprised to see the far left showing such deference towards the military authorities - and the confusion between liberalisation and privatisation .
These are all objections which , in my view , in actual fact conceal a certain resistance and the desire to maintain the status quo , the desire not to change , which is the exact opposite of what our citizens are demanding from us .
Commissioner , there are many areas in which Europe needs to take a step backwards rather than forwards , where it must not take over the functioning and competences of the individual States , but this is not one of them .
Our citizens are demanding this initiative , and so you must press ahead resolutely and give us a Single Sky through which everyone can travel safely and without concern .
Mr President , this issue demonstrates beautifully the need for something like the European Union .
No Member State on its own can effectively resolve the problems of air traffic control or safety in the air .
We have a Union where we not only cooperate as states but we also share our sovereignty and our law-making in the best interests of ourselves as individual Member States and the total population of the European Union .
This is a good example of how we can do that effectively .
That is not to say that this is a perfect proposal , but it is a good step in the right direction .
There is no doubt that we need interoperability between our air traffic control systems ; we need better integration and better and more common equipment and training of staff .
We need to try to restore not only the pleasure of flying but also the sense of safety that people have when they board an aircraft and go from place to place .
As Members of this Parliament we fly as part of our work ; we are constantly in the air .
I know that , certainly in the last number of years , the pleasure of going to an airport and boarding an aircraft has deteriorated , not only because of delays for reasons of air traffic control and lack of space , etc . , but also because of delays at airports , baggage retrieval and security - it could be argued that security is necessary .
I also welcome the public service character of Eurocontrol .
It is important to bear in mind that this is an issue that cannot be regulated by private enterprise .
Regulation has to be maintained by having a strong public service element .
Finally , in terms of the principles I would apply to this area , safety is the first priority , environmental sustainability the second and efficiency the third .
It is important to bear them in mind and we should move on with this proposal .
Mr President , Mrs de Palacio , ladies and gentlemen , here once again we have been hearing all kinds of reasons why we might not be able to switch to a single European solution with regard to the use of airspace .
The reasons given have often been what would appear to be concerns about safety but in fact this is all about selfishness and the fact that we want to preserve the status quo .
It is hard to imagine a more sensible and more logical project than the rational and coordinated use of European airspace , especially as its use and the number of passengers are set to increase from here on .
Why should an aircraft travelling from Helsinki to Athens or from Warsaw to Dublin zigzag over Europe with the pilot having to do the same things many times over ?
This should be seen as just one exercise .
The result of the current practice is delays .
Finnish Members of Parliament no longer fly from Helsinki to Strasbourg via Paris because the flights are always late or cancelled , or luggage goes missing .
Now we fly to Frankfurt or Zurich direct and then travel by car for three hours .
That is better than using European air traffic services .
This is also a very expensive system .
In the United States of America , as we well know , they can operate double the number of flights for the same amount of money .
Who pays the bill in society when we act inefficiently ?
It is always the poor .
The rich can afford to look around for some alternative .
It is also vulnerable .
The tragic accident that happened in Switzerland was certainly not due to the fact that the equipment there was poor or that there were not enough people on duty .
We have to put this question : why must Switzerland , a small country , have its own airspace ?
If a modus operandi based on international borders is the right one , we ought to establish centres in Andorra , San Marino and the Vatican .
Actually , the Vatican is already is a sort of heavenly air traffic control centre - a spiritual one .
There they remind us that the heavens belong to us all , as something we all share .
Mr President , Commissioner , rapporteur and draftsmen , the need for regulation to make European airspace truly integrated is widely acknowledged .
The current situation is characterised by the existence of various service provision systems , implemented by fifty or so air traffic control centres , with two dozen different management systems and 70 computer programming languages .
This is absurd !
There is a genuine need to amend and regulate , bringing about the necessary harmonisation , which can also be extended to the training of air traffic controllers .
I should like at this point to make an aside : I was an air traffic controller during my military service and am well aware of the difficulties caused by the lack of any coordination between airspace controlled by the military and airspace controlled by civilian authorities .
The issue of regulation is of the utmost importance and , in this proposal for a package of four regulations for the Single European Sky , the need for the power and independence of Eurocontrol , one of whose main functions is that of a public service designed to ensure the safety of airspace , is , therefore , undeniable .
The question inevitably arises , however , of the issue of creating functional blocks of cross-border airspace . It is also worth making crystal clear what these are and what purpose they serve .
These must be created with the agreement of the countries involved ; otherwise , the constitutions of some Member States would certainly be infringed .
To conclude , safety must be the primary concern of all parties involved in establishing the Single European Sky , followed by environmental and effectiveness issues .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President , I would like to start by apologising for my absence from the beginning of the debate , having arrived in Strasbourg only this morning .
All the things that have been gone through in detail should actually , I think , give us cause for rejoicing this morning , for we have come a long way , even if it took us three years to do it .
The Commission said in its first speech - which was in the summer of 1999 - that a single system of air traffic control is a typically European problem , and one that we must deal with in a European way .
The Vice-President then set up the high-level working party .
We MEPs were not entirely happy with that , but it was the right thing to do in that she was trying to take on board the concerns of the Member States , which feared ill-founded centralisation .
It was therefore right to set up the high-level working party , which submitted its report in 2000 .
Then , in 2001 , the Commissioner set out the proposals for directives .
Today , having had good debates in Committee , Parliament is to complete the First Reading stage , which means that we have come a very long way in three years and we should just rejoice in that .
Secondly , some philosophical differences remain , and that is only natural , but let us just give them some thought .
I believe that there are sufficient examples to demonstrate that military and civil air traffic control can be integrated and linked up , thus becoming more effective , including in the interests of military security .
This antithesis between military air traffic control and its civil counterpart is something we should overcome .
For another thing , we should emphatically reiterate that we are democrats and that democracy means that it is the government , monitored by Parliament , that has to come to a decision .
That is why Eurocontrol is , at the end of the day , something which we cannot get into bed with .
Eurocontrol is a board of civil servants whose technical expertise and function of providing services in specific sectors we acknowledge , but it is the European Union , the Commission , that must exercise a regulatory function , and be monitored in doing so by us , as it is we who are responsible for regulations enacted by the State .
Madam Vice-President , perhaps you could tell us in your response with what success the Council has met .
With the high-level working party you gave the Council every opportunity , and yet it was able to conduct negotiations in parallel .
Can we be certain that the Council will finalise the dossier with a Common Position by Christmas ?
Only if it does will we be able to achieve the objective by 2004 .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would firstly like to say that I am personally committed to implementing the Single Sky project for three reasons .
The first is related to the rationalisation of capacity and everyone agrees on this point given the explosion in air traffic .
The second is the introduction of safety standards of a high level , particularly prior to enlargement - and this , in my view , is a very important point . The third and final reason is the transformation of the Eurocontrol consensus into Community regulation .
These three factors are of quite major importance .
This matter is difficult because it got off to a poor start , due to two initial mistakes made by the Commission , which first of all wanted to present it as a power game between the Commission and Eurocontrol and which has probably also bowed down excessively to pressure from airlines in view of the commercialisation of control services .
But the Commission presented a second proposal which I believe constitutes a considerable shift , with the participation of Eurocontrol , the acknowledgement of services of general interest of air traffic control services , the character of natural monopoly and , above all , the fact that the Member States are integrated in a Single Sky and will have a say in the way the regulation works .
We also believe that there are still three questions that need to be answered .
First of all , the auxiliary services are still very vague : at times , there is a restrictive conception , at others , an extensive notion of these services .
I do not believe however , as shown by the unfortunate example of what was done with the railways in the United Kingdom - and we must learn lessons from this - that we must break up the chain of control by too great a degree .
Radar , radio and information technology are the eyes and ears of air traffic controllers .
We have , unfortunately , seen what can happen when they are lacking .
This does not mean that an integrated service is infallible , but it does mean that there is probably a minimum degree that services can be integrated and perhaps even a maximum that we can preserve .
Secondly , it appears that the interaction between Eurocontrol and the European Air Safety Agency is not clear .
The Agency is not mentioned in the draft texts , but it will come into being and clarification will be necessary .
Lastly , there is fierce opposition to the attribution of blocks of airspace and we must overcome this opposition .
In fact , if each Member State can appoint its provider and if two Member States do not agree on the provider , nothing is said about how to resolve the issue .
We shall therefore propose amendments to address this point , and hopefully they will be adopted .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by expressing my great satisfaction at the fact that this debate is being held today and that we have reached this stage .
I feel that thanks are due , in particular , to Commissioner de Palacio , Commission Vice-President , who is here today .
This result has been achieved thanks to her perseverance and to the contribution of many others , including the European Parliament .
As I said , this , for me , is reason for great satisfaction .
I hope that , just as she has succeeded in overcoming such great resistance , she will also be able to overcome the resistance put up by the Council and bring the project to a successful conclusion within the set time frame .
In particular , I would like to tell you that I have called repeatedly upon the Commission in the past not to let itself be stopped in its tracks by a privileged elite such as the air traffic controllers , who , I am sad to say , are more interested in preserving their privileged conditions than making a practical contribution to the safety of the entire population of the European Union .
Sadly , we have had proof in the past of the negligence and laxity of air traffic controllers , which have claimed many victims , and the fact that this is due partly to the lack of a single airspace shows how important and necessary it is to resolve the matter without delay .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to thank the people responsible for the reports and all the speakers in this debate , which I have found extremely interesting .
I would like to thank Mrs Maes for her report on the control of third-country aircraft , which has received the practically unanimous support of this House , and which will lead to an increase in general safety in the European Union , safeguarding not only the situation of the aircraft of the Union but also of those of third countries , especially those of the closest countries , of Eastern Europe , which are the ones we have the closest relations with .
In relation to the other reports , by Mr Fava and Mrs Sanders-ten Holte , on the Single Sky , I would like to conclude by making a few comments :
Firstly , the ' Single Sky ' proposal is clearly not going to put an end to all delays .
But 50 % of delays in the air sector are the result of problems in air traffic management , and the ' Single Sky ' proposal is clearly going to improve the management of air traffic and is therefore going to improve on that 50 % of delays .
Secondly , the intention is simply the rationalisation of airspace , harmonising rules , harmonising systems , introducing interoperability and simply creating a network - since these days everything is on a network - of air control systems in all the countries of the Union .
In that way we will put an end to a compartmentalised and fragmented system , which , far from increasing safety , actually reduces it .
The creation of a network , the integration of systems and offering industry greater possibilities to make technological progress will contribute to an increase in safety .
I do not want to indulge in demagoguery or take advantage of tragedies , but I would like to say one thing to you : in the case of the terrible accident that took place this summer , the German air traffic controllers realised what was going to happen , but they were not on the network , nor were they integrated with the Swiss air traffic controllers , and they had to resort to a telephone to call Swiss air traffic control and could not connect .
I cannot guarantee that with the Single Sky in operation this accident would have been prevented .
We do not know . What I can assure you of is that it would have been easier to prevent it .
And that is what we have to bear in mind .
We are not just introducing greater rationality but also greater safety , and that is the objective of this initiative .
After 2004 , we must maintain that objective and - to take up what was said by Mr Jarzembowski , Mr Ripoll and certain other speakers - we must demand a rapid solution from the Council .
I trust in the Danish Presidency to provide impetus for this issue , which I know is one of the priorities in the field of transport and in particular air transport .
Eurocontrol .
Ladies and gentlemen , nobody intends either to duplicate the actions of Eurocontrol or to cancel it out .
But we must be aware that Eurocontrol does not have the capacities offered by the Community method to carry out its activities .
I would like you to be aware that all Eurocontrol does is coordinate flights a priori .
When it comes to operation , when aircraft are under way , the air control operation for these flights falls to the corresponding national authorities on the basis of a generic coordination which has been carried out previously by Eurocontrol .
What we are saying is that in real time , during the actual flight , there should be this integration and harmonisation of systems which increases control .
Therefore , what we are doing is increasing safety and not taking competences away from an existing body .
Because that body , I insist , does not have those capacities , it does not have the Community method which means that what we agree here ( Commission , Council and Parliament ) becomes an obligatory rule with which the courts can demand compliance on the part of all the countries of the Union .
Privatisation .
I am rather tired of repeating the same thing .
I do not know if there is a lack of knowledge or a lack of trust here .
Read what the text says rather than the pamphlets of certain trade unions .
There is no privatisation here .
Air traffic control is a natural monopoly which must be regulated .
There is a Court of Justice judgement which clearly establishes that this control is outside the competition rules .
It is also laid down in the Treaties that the specific carrying out of that activity and the formula adopted for carrying it out should fall to each Member State .
What we are not going to do is change the Treaty by means of a Directive .
Ladies and gentlemen , we should keep in mind what our limitations are .
Clearly it is a natural monopoly and clearly the Court of Justice has given its opinion and nobody intends to change the status quo .
On the contrary , what we are proposing is to strengthen the situation of the public service and the common Community framework for this management of air traffic control .
Civil-military .
This is the most thorny and delicate element of the whole debate .
There is an extremely important report of the Legal Service of the Council , which firstly confirms the suitability of the legal basis on which the Commission 's proposal is based ; therefore , if any of the honourable Members have any doubt , read the report of the Legal Service of the Council which , as you well know , goes into great detail on this .
Secondly , we are looking into how we can overcome the difficulties resulting from the simple fact that the Union has limited competences ; on the one hand , we cannot go beyond the competences attributed to us , and on the other , in no way is it our intention to reduce the defence capacity of any country of the European Union or to get into areas of sovereignty beyond what is laid down in the Treaties .
I would therefore like Members to be aware that all of this will be carefully safeguarded and that , furthermore , the Council 's report provides a basis for clearly resolving this problem .
In this context , the question is raised of supra-territorial blocks .
I would say to the honourable Members that they should look carefully at this , that there are only cross-border blocks insofar as there is an agreement between the two States of the Union .
It is true that they do not exist in the event that there is divergence .
In this case there is no shared block , each country controls its territorial area and that is that .
I therefore believe that this premise will allow us to overcome this difficulty .
Thank you very much , Mr President , I would like once again to thank Mr Fava , Mrs Sanders-ten Holte and Mrs Maes for the magnificent work they have done on this air package which will increase safety and rationalise the air sector in the European Union .
The next item is the report ( A5-0269 / 2002 ) by Mr Blokland , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on the establishment of a Community framework for noise classification of civil subsonic aircraft for the purposes of calculating noise charges [ COM ( 2001 ) 74 - C5-0001 / 2002 - 2001 / 0308 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , I would firstly like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Blokland , once again for the magnificent report he is presenting us with today .
We are discussing the possibility of providing companies with economic incentives to take account of the noise nuisance caused by certain aircraft , in accordance with the principle of compensating the best and punishing the worst .
Although aircraft noise is already integrated into certain Community airport charging systems , the criteria used for the differentiation and quantification of noise nuisance vary widely amongst the different Member States .
It is therefore difficult to compare one system with another .
The present proposal deals with this issue , providing a common framework for the classification of aircraft noise which increases convergence and transparency , and allows us to anticipate the situation in each specific case .
The proposal is restricted to the minimum necessary to achieve its objective and leaves the Member States with sufficient possibilities to adjust to the specific parameters of particular airports , such as the level of the unitary noise charge , the characteristics of the fleet using a particular airport , or the variation between the highest charge and the lowest charge .
The responsibility for deciding whether to impose noise charges is left to the Member States .
There is no obligation to impose charges in all airports , since it is not necessary to establish them in airports with no noise problems .
I would like to thank Parliament for its support on this issue and at the end of the debate I will comment in more detail on some of the amendments , I will say in advance once again they we will accept the majority of them .
Mr President , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , I should like to speak about the report on noise charges at airports .
Although we have been contending with aircraft noise for years , noisy aircraft are still able to land at European airports .
One thinks of the so-called marginally conforming aircraft , which are equipped with hush-kits that only marginally comply with the standard for Chapter 3 aircraft .
Other aircraft too can generate a great deal of noise nuisance , certainly at major airports where many aircraft take off and land .
In order to counter the adverse impact of these noisy aircraft , measures are to be taken around airports , such as moving runways , installing noise barriers , moving residential areas , insulating houses and so on .
Clearly these measures will require considerable expenditure and effort , and it is such costs that noise charges are intended to cover .
Aircraft noise is already an element in some Community airport charging systems .
The aim of the report before us is to harmonise noise charges at airports .
It is , obviously , also the intention to promote the use of quieter aircraft .
Within the present common European framework , noise charges are calculated in a readily understood format , which enhances transparency , fairness of treatment and predictability and avoids arbitrariness .
I should like to underline that noise charges on the basis of measurements are impossible because there are also other noises sources and aircraft that land or take off simultaneously at airports .
This directive is therefore based on a calculation method , since this is the only option .
In order to prevent distortions of competition , the Environment Committee has decided to make noise charges compulsory at all airports .
There is , however , more room for flexibility .
The maximum variation between the highest and lowest noise charge within a given part of the day may be a ratio of 40 instead of 20 .
Moreover , it is stipulated that the noisiest aircraft should pay more for the greater nuisance that they cause .
The Commission 's proposal namely specifies that the noisiest aircraft should not have to pay a higher noise charge than the somewhat quieter category .
I am of the opinion that sufficient flexibility has now been built in .
It is therefore not necessary to make exceptions for airports that pursue a strict policy in the field of noise charges .
Within the framework which the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy has outlined , a very strict policy is possible .
I do not believe that airports exist whose polices are so strict that they fall outside of the framework .
If we give some airports special treatment , then this will generate arbitrariness .
As already indicated , the proceeds of the noise charges will be used to make investments intended to reduce noise nuisance .
However , the Environment Committee is of the opinion that other costs too , such as environmental costs as a result of noise nuisance , should be covered .
In addition , not all effects of noise nuisance can be expressed in money terms down to the last penny .
Examples of these are disturbed night rest or psychological effects of noise nuisance , which may be financially compensated .
In the final analysis , we should realise that the aim of the noise charges is to promote quieter aircraft .
Finally , I should like to make a comment on the amendments tabled by the Group of the Greens .
The use of noise standards to calculate the noise charges is wholly incompatible with this directive 's approach .
Moreover , we are yet to see whether these standards will ever be drafted .
For these reasons , I would advise against these amendments .
With the present report , I hope that noise charges will become fairer and more transparent .
However , far more important is that noise nuisance will decrease for our citizens .
.
( NL ) Mr President , I am speaking as a guest speaker on behalf of the actual draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , Mr Josu Ortuondo , who is , as you know , in Spain for political reasons .
The step from the European airspace to noise is naturally a simple one .
If we simplify this procedure , then we should put a whole ream of conditions and measures in place .
I would thank the Commission and the rapporteur , Mr Blokland , for the work they have done , but the problems are clear and evident .
Also , years of work have already gone into this topic .
I myself attended the debates on hush-kits in the previous session .
In principle , noisy aircraft should mainly be forced to become less noisy , in other words Chapters 3 onwards should apply .
This is , in fact , the object of the whole exercise , and the enforcement of this via these measures is of major importance .
Needless to say , comments have been made on the Commission 's report .
This should first and foremost address noise charges , the expenses involved and the relationship between the two .
It is about harmonisation , and these noise charges must naturally be the result of noise classification .
It is the noise charges , though , that matter most .
The problem with the Commission proposal is - and this is why amendments have been tabled in a number of committees - that it remains non-mandatory up to a certain point , because there is only a tenuous link between noise pollution on the one hand and levies on the other .
It is pretty well left up to the Member States how they want to deal with these levies and , as Mr Blokland has already pointed out to a certain extent in his report , this can have a distorting effect on competition in practice , but mainly fails to motivate the aviation industry in the sense that I referred to previously .
Also , it is very important , in my view , to stipulate - and this has been incorporated in a number of amendments - that better practices , insofar as these exist , which fall outside the scope of the directives and are simply better , should be maintained , and I therefore recommend supporting a number of amendments , mainly from the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
There is too little differentiation between the levies , and the link between the noise charges and the expenses is , in my view , an ambiguous one .
Allow me to make a brief comment on this .
As Mr Blokland already indicated , night rest , psychological effects and some of the environmental effects are difficult to verify , and there is room for improvement in this respect .
Once again , I do recommend the amendments on this point tabled by the Group of the Greens , namely Amendments Nos 18 , 19 and 20 .
I would state very clearly that we will certainly be retaining their amendments .
I am not saying this on behalf of the Regional Policy Committee , but I would , however , recommend them warmly .
Mr President , legislation addressing the noise nuisance experienced by many citizens around civil airports is of major importance .
At present , we see that there are still major discrepancies .
What is not possible in Maastricht is allowed in Bierzet , which is only 10 km down the road .
Day and night times vary .
Whenever night begins in Düsseldorf , we in the Netherlands only fly at dawn and dusk .
It is therefore high time we brought about harmonisation - albeit cautiously - by introducing a system of noise charges applicable to all European airports to promote the use of quieter aircraft and ban noisy aircraft .
I can inform you that most of my group will , in the plenary , be endorsing the amended proposal , as approved by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
We welcome the amendments tabled with the aim of making the Commission proposal more binding and , as a result , removing the inappropriate competition element .
Mr Blokland 's proposal to double the ratio of 20 as an upper limit for the levy to the ratio of 40 is also excellent , for indeed , by expanding the range from 13 to 16 dB , the noisiest aircraft will also be paying more for their nuisance .
I therefore support the rapporteur and all the effort he has made in order to reach agreement with everyone .
Since the Commissioner is here , I would like to make a different comment , still in connection with this debate .
I therefore venture an observation of a different nature , although it is related to aircraft noise .
Commissioner , although I respect the way in which you are trying to tackle aircraft noise , I should also like to hear from you - and if you were unable to respond straight away , you may be able to do so in writing - how we can prevent new sources of noise nuisance from emerging .
I would quote the example of Laarbruch at the German-Dutch border , in respect of which many questions have already been asked .
In Laarburch , a military airport is being converted into a civil one , and any input from outside is being categorically rejected .
In addition , there is no transparency in the conditions under which this airport will be established , the way in which the licences are granted or the question whether the daytime and night-time scheme is being maintained .
Commissioner , I would like to find out from you what concrete action you intend to take in order to reduce the incidence of this sort of thing .
Mr President , I am pleased we are now one step closer to achieving noise restriction in Europe .
I should like to single out four points of significance .
First of all , it is valuable to establish one basis for applying a system of noise charges which will prompt airlines to use quieter aircraft .
In our view , the proceeds should be ploughed back into infrastructural changes to restrict noise nuisance .
The introduction of one system would give the currently ambiguous system a dose of clarity .
Secondly , it is not compulsory to introduce this system at all airports , which is useful , since some airports may have natural noise barriers that could be exploited economically .
Thirdly , certification in accordance with the ICAO standard should be introduced .
It is important , to my mind , not to start using other standards , but it is certainly worth investigating whether this could be developed in future and it is useful to translate the actual noise pollution as experienced by the public into a noise classification .
Working with noise classifications is very complex as it is .
As Mr Blokland has already pointed out , there are always external effects intruding .
In future , I would like to see this further investigated , and this should then also be possible to implement and measure , but not now .
My final point concerns the ratio , in respect of which we , as the ELDR Group , adopt a different position .
In our view , the ratio of 1 in 20 on top of the other systems and on top of the landing rights already has sufficient impact on pricing and on the challenge on the part of airlines and industries to implement the tariffs .
A good balance has been struck , in our view .
Let us therefore introduce it .
Mr President , noise pollution has a significant effect on the well being of very many European citizens .
Noise in the areas close to airports often reaches a level that is unbearable for millions of our fellow citizens .
That is why it is absolutely essential to combine regulatory methods with economic instruments in order to minimise noise pollution .
The first measure that should be taken is to withdraw the noisiest aircraft .
This measure has only been partially implemented so far .
We are aware that many aircraft , which only just meet the standards described in Chapter 3 , continue to use airports in Europe .
It is now imperative that we supplement the regulatory measures with economic instruments .
Therefore , using charges and applying the polluter pays principle is certainly a good initiative .
We therefore welcome the Commission 's proposal , which seeks to introduce a system of charges in a harmonised Community framework .
The aim is to encourage airlines to use the quietest aircraft and , in addition , to avoid dumping between airports .
Noise dumping of this kind is obviously very harmful to citizens living close to these airports .
That said , although the Commission 's proposal is sound in principle , when it is examined in more detail , it can be seen that it is not sufficiently rigorous or effective , as the rapporteur has already pointed out .
According to this proposal , then , the introduction of charges is optional , which will inevitably bring about a dumping policy .
Moreover , the differentiation between types of noise pollution is insufficient .
Since the proposed ratio of 1 : 20 between the highest and lowest noise charge was insufficient , the rapporteur suggested increasing this ratio from 20 to 40 , which is wholly acceptable .
By and large , we agree with the proposals made by the rapporteur , but we added one element to these proposals that the rapporteur unfortunately rejects , namely to take into account the level of noise at night and the level of noise during the day / night / evening , which are two extremely important indicators of noise pollution which allow us to differentiate between charges .
We hope that the rapporteur reviews his position and takes into account the problem of noise at night because it is obvious that this problem is certainly the most harmful nuisance that one can encounter .
We are not going to solve the problem with charges alone , but in any case , this measure will help to improve the situation .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President , in principle , we transport experts among the Christian Democrats also support the Commission proposal on noise charges , as we have to use higher charges for noisy aircraft to give the airlines a practical stimulus to use quieter aircraft , and thereby protect the public from a needlessly high level of perceived noise .
Those of us who sit on the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism are not very happy with the Committee on the Environment , Health and Consumer Policy , as the Environment Committee has simply rejected the proposals that the Transport Committee had adopted by a large majority .
The Commission should reconsider how it might reintroduce our proposals , as the Transport Committee 's proposals were aimed at giving airports a far more sophisticated framework within which to calculate noise charges .
We want to make it clear in law that it is possible to spread the burden more widely and that aircraft are , as an alternative , to be liable to charges either according to certification or in accordance with the noise levels as actually measured .
We take the view that what we proposed in the Transport Committee is more environmentally effective , and that it maintains a higher standard .
In the EU , we have in fact always acted according to the principle that , where extensive and effective environmental protection systems are already in place and we lay down a minimum standard at European level , the countries and groups with more highly-developed systems do not have to reduce their standards .
You , Commissioner , are in a position to set at nought my concern that we might be using European law to lower existing noise standards , and you can do it right now .
A broad majority of us in this House has agreed on Amendment No 11 , which is to be added to the Blokland Report , by which we seek to make it clear that existing , more effective , noise charge systems may be retained , and thus that European law does not mean a step backwards for the protection of the environment .
To that extent , Commissioner , I look forward to your comments on Amendment No 11 with great expectation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Directive is a constituent part of a strategy to combat the noise nuisance at airports and in the areas around them - an issue very close to the public 's heart .
The strategy 's objective is that quieter aircraft must be brought into service and noise charges must become more effective in environmental terms .
That is already happening at many airports in the Community , but not by a long way at all of them .
The Commissioner is right to say that each Member State has quite different criteria for differentiating between charges and measuring the amount of perceived noise .
There is a real need for harmonisation .
Thus far , the Directive makes sense .
It will at one and the same time make for greater transparency and more equal treatment , and make the charges payable by the airlines more predictable , so that , as well as of course markedly improving protection against noise , it will have an incidental effect on competition .
The proposal for a directive does , however , have one grave defect , and now I want to sound the same warning note as Mr Jarzembowski in saying that it makes for downward harmonisation , albeit involuntarily .
For the proposal for a directive forces the progression to tail off to such a degree that it can no longer be called a perceptible incentive , and that cannot be the objective of our policy on noise and the environment .
Frankfurt , London , Paris , Munich , Amsterdam , Hamburg , Rome , Madrid , and Stuttgart have other systems of charging for noise , which result in markedly better protection against it , and these must be retained , yet it is precisely that which the Commission proposal would prevent if not amended to some degree .
Why is this so ?
There is no effective economic incentive unless noise charges increase markedly and progressively - and , I emphasise , markedly and progressively - in line with the increase in noise volume .
Quiet aircraft must therefore benefit and loud aircraft must incur substantial charges .
Whatever harmonisation is needed , our objective must still be to keep Europe 's standards of noise prevention as high as possible .
My group has therefore reintroduced three amendments , which make it clear that charging systems that are already in existence and are more effective in environmental terms , are to be retained .
I ask the whole House to support these amendments .
It would indeed be absurd to penalise airports that provide far better protection against noise than that which has hitherto been proposed .
Mr President , I would like once again to thank Mr Blokland for the work he has done .
The Commission cannot accept all the amendments proposed , amongst other things because , when it comes to regulating this type of issue , we have to ensure that there is a balance between the necessary harmonisation , which prevents everybody from going off in their own direction , and the room for manoeuvre of the various States of the Union and competent authorities , in other words , the principle of subsidiarity .
Ladies and gentlemen , we cannot accept the following amendments : Amendment No 3 , which proposes using noise measured at airports as a basis , rather than the certified noise of the aircraft , because that would significantly reduce the transparency of the charging system and also because it could cause discrimination as a result of the considerable differences between the noise measurement systems used in the different airports .
Amendment No 4 , which does not make it sufficiently clear that the concept of modulating charges must be applied , both in the case of a neutral framework , from the point of view of revenue , and when revenue is used to fund measures to alleviate environmental effects .
Amendment No 8 , which would oblige the Commission to prepare a report on the possibility of replacing the system proposed in the long term with a system based on noise measurement .
Since the Commission believes that this methodology would not guarantee sufficient transparency , as I said in relation to Amendment No 3 , we believe that it does not make sense to carry out the said study .
While we are saying that these amendments would increase the differences and therefore reduce the harmonising effect sought by the Commission 's proposal , I must say that nevertheless , we must reject Amendment No 9 , which establishes a minimum noise charge , because airports without noise problems should not in principle be obliged to impose noise charges .
Amendment No 10 cannot be accepted since it would not make it sufficiently clear that increasing revenue from noise charges is an option and not an obligation .
The same can be said of Amendments Nos 11 , 15 , 16 and 17 , because they are contrary to the main objective of the proposals , which is to achieve a minimum degree of harmonisation .
In this regard , I would like to say to Mr Jarzembowski that , if we leave what has been done already , I am afraid to say that we would have a much lesser degree of harmonisation .
Amendment No 13 cannot be endorsed , because it would oblige all airports to apply a system of noise taxes and Amendments Nos 18 , 19 and 20 are not only ruled out because the inclusion or reference to harmonised European objectives is outside the scope of this proposal , but also because they are completely incompatible with the method proposed for the calculation of charges on noise emissions .
Ladies and gentlemen , there are a series of amendments which are acceptable , but there are others which we cannot accept , either because they propose an excessive degree of harmonisation or because , on the contrary , they would excessively reduce the degree of harmonisation proposed .
I would like to thank the various Members once again for their speeches .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0253 / 2002 ) by Mr Beysen , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation on sales promotions in the Internal Market [ COM ( 2001 ) 546 - C5-0475 / 2001 - 2001 / 0227 ( COD ) ] .
First of all , Mr Bolkestein will speak on behalf of the Commission .
I would warn everyone that , given the number of speakers scheduled , we will obviously be unable to conclude this debate before the vote .
On behalf of the Presidency , I would like to apologise to those Members who will have to return this evening to speak .
Mr President , it is a great pleasure to introduce , albeit briefly , the topic of today , indeed of the moment , in the knowledge that I shall have another opportunity to explain the Commission 's opinion on this matter at the end of the MEPs ' interventions .
I should like to say the following by way of introduction .
The draft regulation on sales promotions aims to establish an internal market in the area of discounts , free gifts , premiums and promotional contests and games .
The Commission has established that the current regulatory fragmentation in this field hinders the cross-border provision of these services .
Parliament has , in this connection , requested swift measures .
The proposed regulation aims to respond to this request by harmonising information requirements and lifting obsolete national restrictions in this field .
I am delighted with Parliament 's motion for a resolution drafted by Mr Beysen .
Although quite a few amendments have been tabled on the Commission 's text , the result is in line with the planned modernisation and the internal market 's goals .
The proposal 's objective is to lift a number of limits on the value of sales promotions and to harmonise a series of information requirements at the same time .
This balanced approach must be retained .
In fact , the need for this is recognised in most of Parliament 's amendments , but the Commission is less impressed with the amendments in which a limit on the value of sales promotions is re-introduced , as in Amendment No 29 , or the amendments in which the information requirements are deleted , as in Amendments Nos 49 and 54 .
This proposal has caused concern in the following four areas : the handling of national bans on below cost resale ; the connection between this proposal and the Commission 's current activities concerning a much wider initiative with regard to fair trading practices ; the provisions governing promotional games , in which connection the Commission has been accused of encouraging illegal gaming activities ; and finally , the Commission was also criticised for making too much use of mutual recognition as a basis .
I should like to confine myself to these introductory remarks .
As I already mentioned , at the end of the MEPs ' interventions , the Commission will be given another chance to discuss these four major objections in more detail .
Before the Commission does this , it would like to hear MEPs ' opinions .
This would enable the Commission to give better responses this evening .
Mr President , Commission , ladies and gentlemen , allow me first of all to say a word of thanks to all my fellow Members of this House , and particularly the shadow rapporteurs , with whom I have worked closely in order to pilot the report on sales promotion into the plenary .
It has been a long journey with many obstacles along the way , which started in 1996 with the first publication of the Green Paper , followed by the Commission 's follow-up communication in 1998 .
Further to extensive consultation , the Commission introduced a pragmatic and clearly defined proposal in October 2001 , for which I was appointed rapporteur in November 2001 .
In the field of sales promotions , this draft regulation aims to eliminate obsolete measures and major discrepancies in the relevant legislation of the fifteen Member States .
These many discrepancies prevent particularly small and medium-size enterprises from breaking through on the various European markets .
It goes without saying that when enterprises cannot communicate across their borders , they cannot do any business at international level .
In addition , sales promotion has many facets and can be tailored to different circumstances .
It can be used to launch innovative products onto the market , to promote customer relations , to stimulate short-term campaigns by giving them a competitive edge , to react promptly to falling sales figures and as a means of effective stock management .
Furthermore , this regulation will also put the consumer in a considerably stronger position .
Not only will consumers receive far more information , but they will also , via the development of the internal market , be able to take full advantage of better pricing .
After all , a bigger internal market increases competition , which leads to lower prices , partly brought about by the euro .
This is why I consider this proposal to be a very important initiative for the internal market 's future development .
It is also a first step towards translating the fine words spoken at the Lisbon Summit into action .
After all , nobody can deny that two years after this much-debated summit , disappointingly little progress has been made .
Did Europe not want to become the most competitive knowledge-based economy ?
I believe that the time has come to make another step in the right direction with a regulation of this kind on sales promotion .
Its far-reaching consequences and the many interests involved have meant that this proposal has spawned quite a reaction , to which the Commissioner referred earlier .
I should like to underline the key challenges .
As far as the legal basis is concerned , I have always taken the view that a regulation , thanks to the swifter entry into force and its direct applicability , is a much more effective legal instrument than a directive .
The issue of sale below cost is being temporarily deferred because the positions in the different Member States vary too widely .
I have tabled a compromise amendment on this , in which I ask the Commission to carry out a thorough investigation into the subject .
The reason for tabling such an amendment is that I do not want the liberalisation of sale below cost to have a detrimental effect on small and medium-size enterprises .
I have therefore tabled an amendment with regard to the latter , which contains the explicit request to protect them .
In this proposal , mutual recognition or - in other words - the principle of the country of origin , is of major importance .
This principle is also the internal market 's keystone .
It simply means that Members have to recognise that they cannot apply their own national legislation to incoming promotions .
This mutual recognition of each other 's legislation is a flexible means of avoiding overregulation .
In addition , it is already a commonly used form of legislation in our Community legislation .
The television without frontiers directive and the e-commerce directive are two cases in point .
Finally , I should like to comment on the stipulation of an age limit for children .
I have always been in favour of the age of fourteen , unless specific products require other age limits .
Following extensive bilateral consultation with fellow MEPs from the various committees , I have managed to resolve these challenges in a pragmatic manner .
I am pleased with the outcome , even though I realise that further adjustments will need to be made in the course of further discussion on the motion for a resolution .
I hope that Parliament has bowled the Council an important first ball , and I look forward to this debate with great interest .
Mr President , the regulation on sales promotions is a problematic and controversial dossier , as has been made clear by what Commissioner Bolkestein and Mr Beysen have had to say .
I would like to thank Mr Beysen for such a useful result having emerged from such lengthy considerations .
That was really difficult , as the discussion was dominated by consumer protection , completion of the internal market , the bureaucracy that is to be found in the Member States , and the concerns of smaller enterprises .
The European treaties established the principle of an open market economy with free competition .
It is functioning markets rather than bureaucracy that best ensure the public interest .
Enforcing these competition rules is a matter for the Member States on the one hand and for the European institutions on the other .
It is precisely the introduction of the euro that makes it so necessary to harmonise in this area .
All but a very few of the members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs welcomed the basic line of the Commission 's draft regulation and delivered itself of an opinion that is more concerned with the Internal Market than is the final draft from the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
It was particularly with regard to the country of origin principle that we were more frank .
Admittedly , we wanted to retain the national cartel rules and the rules against unfair competition , but also to go one step further .
It is right that the provisions on cartel law in the Treaty establishing the European Communities and the essential national provisions on bargain sales should be maintained , as they protect smaller businesses against big groups of companies .
Derogations for specific areas such as lotteries , members of the professions , and medicines are to be laid down , and they are justifiable .
The explicit adoption of customer loyalty schemes alongside the customary discounts is likewise right and necessary , but the Commission did not take it into account .
The deletion of the rule prohibiting sales below cost price , as demanded by the Economic Committee and taken up by the Legal Affairs Committee , is right and proper .
On this , I want to expressly contradict Commissioner Bolkestein 's remarks .
The Commission proposed transparency obligations as a precondition for the planned prohibition of sales below cost price , and these bear no relation to current practice , are questionable from the point of view of competition law and would lead to agreements to fix the resale price .
That cannot be our objective , and so , Commissioner , I do not believe that you will find a majority in Parliament in favour of this scheme .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the least we can say is that the vote on this proposal for a regulation to liberalise sales promotions is taking place prematurely .
Once again , the Commission has put the cart before the horse without waiting for the European Parliament 's point of view .
The Commission has already favoured the open option in a Green Paper on consumer protection , which will not be examined by the House until several weeks ' time .
Therefore , in addition to the slightly incoherent character of the approach taken , one cannot fail to condemn the lack of attention paid to Parliament 's point of view , which has been reduced to a mere rubber-stamping of the policies that have been predetermined by the Commission .
The choice of legal instrument that makes up the regulation plays a significant part in this .
A framework directive leaving a margin of flexibility for Member States could have been better adapted , but it would certainly have sparked off debates at national level once again , debates that had been concluded by the choice of regulation , which is something that the Commission did not desire .
I would particularly like to emphasise the issue of mutual recognition , a principle recommended by the Commission to improve the way the internal market works .
The practical difficulties posed by applying this principle should be highlighted .
The consumer has no knowledge whatsoever of foreign law , just as a judge in a national court has difficulty when it comes to applying the legal rules of one country other than his own .
Secondly , there is a risk that mutual recognition will lead to deregulation that is harmful to both economic operators as well as consumers .
Operators that are put at a disadvantage by this principle will evidently be tempted to put pressure upon their government to align their national legislation with legislation that is more liberal .
This will therefore lead to a downward alignment of consumer policy throughout the European Union .
That is why I proposed replacing this principle , which , incidentally , has been worded in an extremely vague manner in the proposal for a regulation , with a formula which is , in fact , that used in the established case law of the European Court of Justice .
As for the rest , I believe that the text , as it appears following the votes in the relevant committees , still contains the vital part of what the Member States consider necessary for the protection of their consumers .
Nevertheless , the debate on a genuine European consumer policy has not been held and we certainly hope to hold this debate in the near future , when the Green Paper is presented to the House .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , 10 % more for the same price , a second pair of glasses for 1 extra euro , three for the price of two , a free gift with any purchase ? these are the usual signs of so-called sales promotions .
When you take advantage of this type of opportunity , you probably do not realise the subtlety of a phenomenon that is as economic as it is cultural .
The differences in the definition of free gift , bonus , discount and promotional game are extremely subtle , and what the French will consider to be fair will be unthinkable to a German , whilst the English will not understand why their neighbours are sticking to so many rules and will consider the consumer to be naive .
This report is a good example of how economic and cultural issues overlap , which partly explains the passionate response that it has evoked .
The initial response was to reject the report .
However , given Mr Beysen 's determined attitude and following a conciliation process that was no less determined in nature by my colleagues in the PPE-DE , we opted for a position that is in line with our commitment to the Community .
We therefore came out in favour of regulation which , in a market regulated by the euro , liberalises and makes uniform sales promotions , whilst ensuring , however , that the same regulation protects both consumers as well as small and medium-sized businesses .
From this perspective , we dismissed sales liberalisation and below cost resale , by asking the European Commission to carry out a more detailed study on this specific subject .
For the management of this Community promotion , we could only refer back to the principle of mutual recognition , which is fundamental and underpins the entire internal market infrastructure .
That said , in this specific case , we had to clearly redefine the scope of the principle , since there are significant differences between the various national legislations .
The proposed text originally contained more than 300 amendments .
These were finally cut down to 58 , which not only represents a considerable effort but also a Community will to forge ahead .
Do not forget that , at Lisbon , the Heads of State and Government made the commitment to make Europe the world 's most competitive nation .
We all needed to keep an open mind , to show great willing and to listen carefully to others , and a clear sign has thus been sent to the governments of the Member States .
That is why we recommend adopting the text in the form that was approved by the Committee on Legal Affairs and to reject the amendments tabled in plenary .
The internal market has enormous potential and we can overcome any difficulty if we have to will to succeed .
Mr President , we all agree on the need to allow companies across Europe to run the EU-wide sales promotions .
Sales promotions are key tools to marketing goods and services and we need to get rid of restrictions and barriers so as to allow business and consumers to exploit the opportunities of the internal market .
In the UK it is commonplace that consumers can and do benefit from sales promotions , for example coupon vouchers .
In 2000 , for example , 531 million coupons were redeemed in the UK ; between 1999 and 2000 there was a 122.5 % increase in consumer use of Internet coupons and promotions .
So they are popular and we need to regulate and open up this area for consumers and business .
It is , however , important that the Commission addresses some of the concerns of Members of the European Parliament and of my political group on the issue of sales below cost in particular .
We also tabled the amendment to require the Commission to come forward with a study in this area .
There are legitimate concerns , because sometimes sales below cost can be abused to squeeze out competitors by means of predatory pricing ; this does not help small business , nor does it help the consumer .
That is why , in the spirit of better legislation called for by Commissioner Prodi recently , my group will give the Commission conditional support for the regulation if it agrees to carry out an evaluation study to examine exactly how sales below cost can benefit both small businesses and consumers .
This study should also address the need to strengthen competition policy instruments to prevent predatory pricing and its unwanted side effects .
The internal market should not be a free-for-all for big business , leading to SMEs being squeezed out of markets with the result that consumers have less choice .
We must also make sure that the information requirements in the annex are clear .
It is important that business is clear about its obligations to provide information on promotions .
It is also important that consumers have sufficient information and legal redress , either through the law courts or through ADR systems .
The PSE Group has therefore tabled an amendment asking the Commission to work in consultation with consumer groups and industry to ensure the clear and unambiguous execution of the information requirements .
As they are currently drafted , they are misleading and have led both to business lobbying MEPs and complaining about the lack of clarity and to consumers letting us know that there are information gaps .
If this regulation is to achieve legal certainty then the requirements must be clear .
However , I agree with the Commissioner that the answer is not , as the PPE-DE Group has proposed , to delete those requirements and , like the Commission , we will be voting against those deletions .
The PSE Group has taken a strong line to protect minors against harmful promotions relating to alcohol and tobacco .
I hope those will be taken on board .
Finally , a very brief point on mutual recognition .
I personally believe that mutual recognition already works .
Every day on the Internet , cross-border sales and business are alive and thriving , using the principle of mutual recognition .
We cannot bury our heads in the sand and deny the fact that this is already happening .
Mr President , this is an important piece of legislation which will really help to improve and consolidate the single market by ensuring that we do not have excessive cross-border differences about sales promotion rules .
It is justifiably a regulation because it simply removes certain sorts of bans on sales promotions while leaving it to the states to pursue their own particular legal , economic and political preference in other cases .
So in this sense it is an important contribution to the consolidation of the single market and my group will support it in much the same spirit and also support much the same amendments as Mrs McCarthy has just done on behalf of the PSE .
I would like to stress a few points .
First of all , this is not an attack on consumer protection .
Indeed some of the amendments make it absolutely clear that we want to see the maximum liberty of sales promotions that is consistent with proper consumer protection laws .
Secondly , there is a degree of concern about the fate of small businesses faced with large retail organisations whose forms of sales promotion may be thought to encourage the closing down of the corner shop and the aggrandisation of the supermarket .
We are certainly against that and we underline in the amendments we support and in those we supported in committee that the sales promotion laws must be seen to be wholly in conformity with competition law and with the avoidance of abuse of dominant position in markets .
Given these safeguards , including the safeguards for minors , my group will with great goodwill vote for this measure today .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission 's proposal for a regulation shows that the obsession to make everything uniform with no regard for subsidiarity will affect those on the lowest incomes .
The elected representatives of the CPNT [ Chasse Pêche Nature Traditions ] group are not prepared to abandon small retailers and smallholders to the sharks of the mass distribution sector , which is free to embark on the anti-competitive practice of sales below cost .
Several national laws forbid this type of underhand behaviour .
The consumer will actually suffer on two counts .
Below cost sales is not an act of charity , but the taking over of a market share , which will have to be compensated elsewhere .
Citizens will also suffer from the closure of local facilities , which are already in great difficulty in rural areas and town centres .
The quality of the work carried out by our fellow Members in the Committee on Legal Affairs is not in question and many negative details have been eliminated , but there is a risk that the Commission , as on many other matters , will ignore this work and will , for the most part , stand by its original position .
To sum up , we believe that the only appropriate and responsible political option , as has been proposed to you , is to reject the Commission 's proposals , as this will be in everyone 's interests .
If you agree to let the rot set in , you should not be the first to complain when all goes wrong in the future .
Mr President , every freedom is based on a balance .
Economic freedom is based on a balance between the interests of consumers and that of entrepreneurs and distributors .
This freedom will certainly be lost if we establish an inequality that will benefit one or another party .
This is what the Commission has quite simply attempted to do under the misleading pretext , once again , of forced harmonisation .
By attempting to remove restrictions on sales promotions put in place by the Member States , the Commission is removing the essential safeguards that the national legislations had put in place in order to protect both the interests of consumers , of small producers and retailers .
Dangerous and irresponsible commercial practices would come about from resale below cost or the deregulation of sale periods and conditions , and our economies would eventually suffer .
Furthermore , the changeover to the euro should not serve as an excuse to increase prices .
Therefore , I can only welcome the amendments which were adopted in the various parliamentary committees that were involved in this text and which continue to observe national legislation in this respect .
Downward harmonisation , which is what the Commission appears to desire , runs counter to common sense and to healthy business for economic players , and in particular for the most fragile players .
Local businesses and small businesses are the driving force behind our economy .
I think it is necessary to emphasise this and to reiterate that , without them , the diversity of supply and the guarantee of quality would disappear .
However , they also play a role in providing a social and economic balance in our society .
Be careful not to disrupt this balance , this would not be in anyone 's interest , not in our capacity as consumers , nor in our capacity as politicians .
Thank you very much .
The debate is adjourned .
I shall now give the floor to Mr Harbour to move a point of order before we commence voting time .
Mr President , on a point of order .
I am sure I speak on behalf of all my colleagues in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , some of whom are still here .
Can I protest to you on behalf of all my colleagues working on this dossier about the quite unacceptable way in which this debate has been scheduled ?
We started this debate at 11.30 a.m ..
The session services knew it would not be finished and there are other debates scheduled later which you know from your computer system could have been slotted in there .
We now have to adjourn the continuation of this debate until 9.30 p.m.
Mrs Montfort and my colleague from the EDD have spoken under quite unacceptable circumstances .
This is not the right way to run a chamber that is supposed to be having a serious debate on these subjects .
It is not necessary to do this ; there is no reason to split debates .
You have the information and I suggest that it is not right to allow proper contributions while people are coming into the chamber .
I hope all colleagues will support me in saying we should seriously get a grip on how business in this chamber is run .
Mr Harbour , I have taken careful note of your complaint , which will be forwarded to the services responsible for scheduling our order of business .
Whilst you have been talking , your fellow Members have taken their seats and we shall now proceed to the vote .
Mr President , we have taken over ten minutes to get from the ninth floor down to the Chamber .
The lifts are absolutely useless - either that or the architects who planned them are .
( Loud applause )
My fellow Member sitting next to me has made a very good comment .
He said , ' We have the safest lifts in the whole of Europe .
They are so safe because they no longer work .
That way , nothing can go wrong . '
But perhaps they should do the job they were designed to do .
Mr President , on a point of order , the reason why the lifts did not appear to be working was that the security guards were standing at the bottom with about three of them blocked off , apparently for some delegation that is visiting Parliament !
Because this building is so badly designed , the lifts barely have enough capacity for Members as it is , without the security guards taking over two or three of them at precisely the time when everybody is coming down to vote .
The sessional services should get themselves better organised .
Mr President , I would like to say that I was stuck in a lift for 15 minutes , so the lifts really are not working .
We will have the services look into all of that .
The only assurance I can give you is that the President was not blocking a lift .
The next item is the vote .
Request , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , for consultation of the Committee of the Regions on the role of the regions in the process of European integration .
( Parliament approved the request )
Report ( A5-0268 / 2002 ) by Michel Rocard , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council decision amending Decision No 253 / 2000 / EC establishing the second phase of the Community action programme in the field of education ' Socrates ' ( COM ( 2002 ) 193 - C5-0188 / 2002 - 2002 / 0101 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the text )
Report ( A5-0260 / 2002 ) by Salvador Jové Peres , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council decision amending Decision 96 / 411 / EC on improving Community agricultural statistics ( COM ( 2002 ) 080 - C5-0064 / 2002 - 2002 / 0044 ( COD ) )
Before the vote :
Mr President , I will be brief .
Since 1996 , this Parliament has been arguing for the use of the administrative documentation resulting from the EAGGF-Guarantee payments for statistical purposes .
The Community policy which absorbs the most funds generates an enormous amount of information , which we do not currently take advantage of .
That information could provide a much more up-to-date result , and a much more up-to-date and reliable picture of Community agriculture , than many much more expensive and less reliable investigations .
Today we are dealing with the mid-term review of Agenda 2000 , and it would be desirable to confront it with more and better statistical information .
The reason why the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has withdrawn its amendments is that , during the debate , the Commission published a report on the creation of a database on payments made by the EAGGF-Guarantee , in other words , on the distribution of agricultural aid .
The Agriculture Committee believes that that report satisfied our demands since the Commission had committed itself to transparency towards Parliament and the whole of society .
The second point of the conclusions of that report lays down that the said database will begin to operate after 1 January 2003 , although this will not prevent the presentation of indicative figures before that date .
While repeating to the Commission that we need that information for the purposes of the mid-term reform of Agenda 2000 , I would like the Commission to answer a simple question : on what date will the database in question begin to operate , and when will the indicative figures be presented ?
The sooner this is , the better will be the work of our committee and the work on the review of Agenda 2000 .
Mr President , the answer to this question is that , as Commissioner Fischler has already indicated in various letters to Members of this House , in early autumn he intends to publish statistical information on the recipients of direct payments , classified according to the amount .
The statistics will cover 14 Member States , because figures for Greece are still not available .
This will , of course , be statistical information only and it will not contain any personal information on those recipients .
. ( FI ) Mr President , the Commission proposed that the European Community should approve the Joint Convention , but it wanted to put forward a reservation with regard to Article 27 .
The Article is important as it allows the signatories to the Convention to unilaterally ban the import of foreign spent fuel and radioactive waste .
Why , then , should there be a reservation ?
The Committee having deliberated on the matter , the following can be stated : an EU Member State may categorically and unilaterally ban the import of spent nuclear fuel from a non-EU state .
An EU Member State may also ban the import of spent fuel from another Member State when it is no longer intended for reprocessing but disposal in another country .
A country cannot unilaterally impose a ban on the import of spent fuel meant for reprocessing .
The reservation with regard to Article 27 that the Commission is proposing would not clear the way for an EU single market for the disposal of nuclear waste ; it would instead allow the EC to amend Directive 92 / 3 / Euratom to ensure compatibility with the Joint Convention .
Mr President , I propose to the House to adopt the text of Amendment No 33 without the words ' and training ' : this is because we have already added the case of rapid mobilisation to the many cases in which the Single Sky rules can be suspended .
Adding ' training of their armed forces ' would mean rendering all the legislation we are adopting on the Single Sky totally unusable .
This is why I am calling for the two words ' and training ' to be removed .
So far , the Socrates programme has made an important contribution to educational exchanges , but it is costly to run and smothered in red tape .
Technically , the Commission proposal responds to Parliament 's proposals for less red tape , but far more needs to be done before the smallest , remotest institutions will find it easy to take part in the programme .
The CAP accounts for almost half of the EU budget and it is only correct that every euro spent should be accounted for .
I fully support the need for efficient databases .
However , let us remember what the aim of such data collection is .
It should allow for a more efficient administration of the CAP and more efficient use of public funds .
Simplification is the key : not complication .
We do not need to create even more paperwork and administrative hassle for already beleaguered farmers .
If we want to encourage people to stay in farming - in particular young people - we must not turn farming into a career that is more to do with mountains of paperwork than producing food and taking care of the land .
We must take particular care to avoid duplication of effort .
There are a lot of data available , supplied by farmers in meeting the requirements of various programmes and schemes , available to national and European authorities .
Let the efforts be at an administrative level in terms of sharing information and statistics , making information systems compatible and so on .
Those who , like myself , represent large agricultural constituencies will surely oppose seeing any further administrative burdens foisted on farmers .
As can be seen in its explanatory statement , this report appears , in substance , to be trying to keep everyone happy : the Commission , which is implementing the deregulation ; the Member States which are - for the time being - responsible for ensuring safety ; the major airlines , upon whom there is no question of imposing overly restrictive - and , above all , excessively costly - regulations ; the low cost airlines , upon whom the report is seeking to impose certain minimum standards , as long as these do not affect their profits ?
This is undoubtedly an example of what the European authorities can do in this area : they are setting standards for work , rest and time on board for crews and commercial flight personnel .
These EU-wide standards may offer personnel a minimum of guarantees and that is why we did not vote against the report .
But this minimum is so minimalist that it is certainly the most that we could expect from the European authorities , which , above all , do not want to cause difficulties for employers in the air transport sector .
Today it is widely recognised that cabin crews bear a huge responsibility and are of increasing importance to passenger safety , given the current climate in civil aviation .
It is crucial that we harmonise flight times , working hours and rest requirements for cabin staff , not only in view of future enlargement but also , and especially , because we feel that there is an urgent need to protect these workers in light of the expansion of low cost airlines in the European Union .
This is why we support this report , which seeks to remedy a shortcoming on the part of the Commission in not including this matter in its proposal for a Regulation , which we can only deplore , all the more because various Members States still have no legislation on this matter .
Nevertheless , we wish to stress the importance of maintaining existing national legislation that is more favourable to workers than the proposal that has now been approved .
. ( PT ) This is a proposal concerning a very technical and detailed regulation , which is intended to harmonise , in the name of air safety , the rules governing flight times and crew rest time , in order to ensure that all operators enjoy similar working conditions and common safety standards .
Despite the broad support of the airlines , the pilots ' unions have not backed the rapporteur 's proposals , taking the view that the flight times are exaggerated .
The concerns of the rapporteur , who stated that he was happy to have concluded negotiations that had been dragging on for a considerable time , had the almost unanimous support of his colleagues in the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism .
Consequently , it is considered that the solution that has been reached is the best and perhaps the only one possible . I therefore share the rapporteur 's conclusions .

The eleventh UNRWA convention on improving the situation of refugees in the Middle East , who include some 4 million Palestinians in the Gaza Strip , Lebanon , Syria and Jordan , is ultra urgent given the tragic situation facing the Palestinian people today as a result of Sharon 's policy .
The increase in the EU contribution from EUR 120 million to EUR 237 million is also important , although this sum should be enhanced when the budget is drafted .
But most important of all , the ? U and the international community as a whole should call on the Sharon government in Israel to bear the full cost of restoring the infrastructure which its military action has destroyed , causing a sharp drop in the standard of living of the Palestinians living in the Gaza Strip and occupied territories .
We voted in favour of this report because , of course , we are not opposed to aid from European countries being granted to Palestinian refugees .
There is nothing , however , to boast about when you see the increase in the amount of this aid .
If you take the number of Palestinian refugees crammed into the countries of the Middle East , the sum being proposed only represents approximately EUR 40 per year at the most .
Furthermore , there is no guarantee that the full amount will go directly to refugees , and that , along the way , it will not grease the palms of European companies and suppliers .
Above all , however , how can we fail to mention the hypocrisy of the report which criticises the fact that ' refugees ' living conditions are becoming increasingly difficult ' and which has the gall to blame , in particular , the ' high population growth ' but which does not even mention the war conducted by the State of Israel against the Palestinian nation ? The report does not condemn the fact that , although thousands of Palestinians are forced to live in refugee camps , this is because the State of Israel , with the support of the most powerful nations , Europe included , is opposed to them being able to return to the land from which they were driven ?
The question of safety of nuclear fuel shipments is an urgent one .
At this very moment two shipments of nuclear fuel which were rejected by Japan because of the falsification of safety data by BNFL are approaching the shores of Europe , and will enter the narrow confines of the Irish Sea .
The movement of this dangerous cargo at this time is spitting in the face of the victims of September 11 .
These ships are not capable of withstanding a terrorist attack , and they are not capable withstanding a fire .
They are an invitation to terrorists to hijack material for the making of a nuclear bomb .
We now have the ludicrous situation of the nuclear industry shopping dangerous radioactive material around the planet .
The convention should not be seen as giving a green light to the nuclear industry for such trafficking of deadly material .
I urge the Irish Government to take action under the Convention to stop these shipments .
The Convention recognises that any State has the right to ban imports into its territory of foreign spent fuel and radioactive waste .
This should also apply to the coast waters of the Irish Sea which are already dangerously polluted with radioactive waste .
Mr President , Mr Deva 's report concerns the eradication of poverty and food security .
It contains many important proposals on how to eradicate poverty and guarantee food security , proposals which I fully support and which I was pleased to vote for .
However , Mr President , how many pensioners are there in the whole of the developed world who would still be able to teach and work in poor , developing countries , who could help to improve the economic situation ?
How little do we ourselves do in the European Union to help these pensioners , these elderly people who still feel able to be useful to society and would like to go and work in these developing countries ?
I hope that more will be done in future .
. ( NL ) There are various reasons why the Deva report has not received my support .
First of all , the proposal to abolish all subsidies in the EU is one-sided .
I am all in favour of removing barriers for products from poor countries , but there are also good reasons for retaining regional production or environmental subsidies .
The impact on the developing countries is , although essential , not the only consideration .
Accordingly , it would make sense for the WTO to make allowance in the trade rules for the extent to which the consumption of a specific product affects nature , starting with the production process and including transport to the country of consumption .
A second point of criticism concerns the implementation of ethical investment .
The report is making a step in the wrong direction .
It concerns itself with the internal organisation of the management where it prescribes the establishment of an internal committee and the sections of the company to which this is accountable .
It would be preferable to look into strategies which would allow ethical investment to be introduced on a larger scale .
There is particular room for improvement in measurability and reporting .
Finally , the plea to review the common policy on public health is inappropriate since the health policy does not fall within the Community 's remit .
. ( NL ) Mr Deva 's proposal is the best we can expect from a British Conservative .
He believes in capitalism , but also has consideration for the way in which the difference in welfare between Europe and the developing world has developed over the centuries .
He knows that our industry owed its rise to protectionism rather than to a laissez-faire attitude , and realises that the WTO Agreement on investment measures hinders the developing countries in their attempts to develop a local industry by promoting local products .
His views on a reliable legal system , the fight against corruption , transfers of technology , health care , women 's emancipation and land reforms , as expressed in his initiative proposal , receive my support .
I also endorse the EU 's tasks : a different contribution to the WTO , a reduction in export subsidies , no sale of unsafe food or of insecticides that are banned here , a ban on the trade in firearms , cancellation of debts and concrete measures against European companies and people involved in illegal trading in diamonds , oil and gold .
On the other hand , I do not share the rapporteur 's optimism about ethical investments by entrepreneurs and about the contribution of trade liberalisation to development , because the cheap acquisition of resources in the developing world remains an important ambition for many entrepreneurs .
. ( PT ) The Deva report acknowledges a universally positive aspect of the phenomenon of globalisation , which is that it contributes to the creation of economic , social and cultural wealth for the entire world .
He emphasises , however , that the poorest do not participate in this ' benefit gain ' which results from technological progress and the growth of international trade .
In order to free ourselves from the blind pursuit of globalisation , the rapporteur suggests emphasising the concept of ' maximising the advantages of the least advantaged section of the global community ' .
The report seeks , therefore , to reconcile the global principle of the positive aspect of trade liberalisation with the need to force multinational companies to adhere to the same types of regulatory , stabilising , and legitimising functions that are binding at national level , which is why I have voted in favour of the report .
Mr President , of course I voted for the report on recycling and on the recovery of packaging , which it discusses , but I have to say that , when I was discussing the report with a pensioner , Mrs Caterina Rossi , from Bergamo , she said to me , ' What a good report !
So packaging can serve some purpose !
Even the paper which surrounds packages , even wood and plastic can be reused and are good for something !
Why is it , then , that it is sometimes said that we pensioners are no longer any use ?
Do you mean we are less useful than packaging , than the paper which surrounds all the products sold ?
I hope that Parliament will pay more attention to pensioners and the elderly , at least as much attention as it pays to packaging , which - and this is good news - the European Parliament sees as so useful : let us hope that the pensioners and elderly people of all the individual States as well as the European State will be considered to be this useful .
Every year , the European Union produces more than 60 million tonnes of waste packaging .
And , despite the objective of stabilisation in the Fifth Environment Action Programme , despite the fact that waste prevention is the first priority of European environmental policy , the situation is more or less the same : the amount of packaging continues to increase in the European Union .
In the light of this growing mountain of waste , it is high time that we developed an ambitious strategy .
This strategy must involve enhancing the Commission 's modest proposal ; in other words , by introducing prevention and producer responsibility .
The European Parliament has already expressed itself in favour of raising recycling targets and improving prevention by introducing producer responsibility .
The Commission 's proposal has not taken this on board .
Yet , prevention is a genuine priority in the area of waste management , and could even become the cornerstone of the European environmental policy .
We have before us a real opportunity to move forward in terms of an integrated product policy and the thematic strategy of the Sixth Environmental Action Programme .
I shall support the report , which also emphasises two concepts that are key to a successful environmental policy : cooperation , which we need from everyone , and the fact that the impact we have on the environment should always , in future , guide our action .
. ( NL ) Packaging is what the consumer is left with when he buys a new product .
It has become more bulky over the years , not only to protect the content of boxes , but also , and particularly , to catch the eye of potential buyers .
Packaging material has become increasingly colourful , and contains , more than the simple cardboard boxes before , material that is harmful to the environment , including heavy metals .
It was high time that the European Commission proposed altering the Directive on packaging and packaging waste introduced eight years ago , but the proposed change leaves something to be desired .
The emphasis on generating energy by incineration is wrong , for this only allows the producers and processors of polluting packaging to carry on as before .
Attention should instead be directed to the prevention of waste and the reuse of material .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy is right to want to recycle at least 65 % of the weight , completely ban the use of lead , cadmium , mercury or hexavalent chromium from 2007 and to subject new packaging material to stricter requirements from 2004 .
I also welcome the initiative to produce 10 % less packaging waste in 2006 than in 1998 and to reassess national and European rules concerning the obstacles they constitute for reuse .
I wholeheartedly support this report which addresses the need to tackle the growing mountain of waste in the EU .
The original Commission text should be upgraded and tightened up to ensure a more ambitious strategy for countering this mountain of discarded packaging materials .
As such , I welcome the concepts of prevention and producer responsibility ; these will go some way in ensuring that the onus for implementing these measures is evenly spread across European citizens .
I also welcome the call for producers to have taken ' all necessary measures to minimise its environmental impact ' , whilst at the same time I recognise that it may be difficult to standardise such a measure .
Finally , placing this Directive into a broader context , to ensure that it is compatible with the Sixth Environment Action Programme , makes good sense and demonstrates that the EU is capable of joined-up thinking and a sensible approach to this matter .
Mr President , I would like to talk about Mr Fava 's report on the creation of the Single European Sky .
My colleague and right-hand man , Giuseppe Italia , from Cremona , an elderly pensioner , said to me as I was preparing to come here to Strasbourg , ' I advise you to vote for the report on the Single European Sky .
I am an elderly pensioner , and I will not take offence , Mr Fatuzzo , if you say in your explanation of vote that we pensioners are nearer to the sky than the other citizens .
Would it not be appropriate , given that we are already near the sky , for us to be eligible for discounted aeroplane tickets and for pensioners to be encouraged to travel by air with less expensive tickets in this way ? ' .
I voted against the ' Single Sky ' initiative , which resembles more of a manoeuvre by the Commission to increase its power ( with , as usual , the unconditional support of the European Parliament ) than an initiative that is genuinely designed to improve air safety and increase the flow of air traffic .
During yesterday 's debate , I drew attention to a major difficulty that is still to be resolved , that of relations with Eurocontrol .
I must now mention another : that of relations with the military .
The Commission has declared its intention , as soon as it gains the powers conferred by the ' Single Sky ' project , to alter the distribution of airspace between civilian and military use .
The objective is perfectly clear : to make inroads into military zones or even withdraw them , in order to facilitate civilian air traffic .
We are doubly shocked by this method , which essentially seems to assume that military uses are less important today in Europe , an idea which in turn assumes that we are enjoying a period of lasting peace .
This is a naïve and dangerous assumption .
As far as the procedure is concerned , let us reiterate that the Commission has no military responsibility ( which is fortunate , as is evident here ) .
This responsibility belongs to the sovereign States and Community procedures have nothing to do with this area .
- ( DA ) The June Movement does not agree with the entire content but has voted in favour of the report because airspace is a cross-border problem requiring common European solutions .
That is something we want to signal by means of our ' yes ' vote .
Although we cannot deny that some progress has been made with regard to the rules governing air traffic control , the will , re-stated by the Commissioner responsible for this dossier , to speed up the liberalisation of air transport services entails risks which have been clearly expressed by the relevant trade unions .
Unfortunately , they have not been heard sufficiently , not to mention listened to , except by a few left-wing Members .
We cannot , however , believe that the effects of liberalisation are solely positive .
We need only observe the sad deterioration of rail transport services in certain Member States since their liberalisation .
What was initially proposed was the introduction of competition separating service providers ( operators ) and regulators ( establishment of and compliance with rules ) .
Under pressure , the Commission has fortunately had to review its text , which is still mediocre and dangerous .
Air navigation services will , therefore , be liberalised , resulting in real safety hazards .
The Commission proposes , in connection with its efforts to achieve harmonisation at Community level , the introduction of a system of authorisations for the provision of air navigation services .
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
. ( FR ) I am bound , in the end , to lend my support to this report , which emphasises the importance of the Commission proposal to create a Single European Sky by 31 December 2004 at the latest .
Creating a Single European Sky seems to me to be imperative if we want not only to optimise the use of our existing airspace , to establish more stringent aviation safety conditions , and the safe and effective management of projected increases in traffic , but also to create conditions allowing European airlines to compete with others .
This proposal , which must allow a certain amount of harmonisation and interoperability of air navigation systems , is not , however , without its problems .
The definition of cooperation between Eurocontrol and the Community is one such problem , as is the definition of cooperation between civil and military authorities .
I am supporting this report to emphasise that the creation of a Single European Sky must not be delayed in any way .
A reduction in costs relating to air traffic control , fewer delays and increased system capacity are all at stake , as well as , in particular , a considerable improvement of the safety conditions .
On the pretext of wanting to create ' an integrated airspace governed by the same principles and rules ' , the Council , the Commission and the Fava report are actually proposing the establishment of a means of air traffic control in Europe based on economic criteria , in other words , a Single Sky market .
Was the air disaster in Germany last July an example of what we can expect from the Single European Sky ?
The air traffic control company Skyguide was a private company .
It operated in a functional airspace in which operator and regulator were separate .
Skyguide was so lacking in human and material resources that safety was affected .
Is this the path we should follow , as the Commission recommends ?
In any event , this accident should make Members of Parliament extremely prudent pending the results of the enquiries , and also in light of the consequences of the effective liberalisation of other means of transport such as rail transport in the United Kingdom .
That was the message of the major European strike by air traffic controllers on 19 June 2002 .
Instead of swearing by the market alone , we should favour cooperation , such as exists within the organisation for air safety , Eurocontrol .
We should pay more attention to public service and safety .
We should think globally about the intermodality of transport .
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
. ( NL ) There is a noticeable tendency to scale up in all areas in which the EU is involved , and it often results in a decrease in the democratic involvement of the people and a lack of sound , custom-made solutions .
This is why I generally view scaling up in a negative light .
I would make an exception for aviation , which , in most cases , involves cross-border connections and long distances .
To maintain national navigation systems and fragment the airspace into small areas would not be conducive to safety .
It would therefore seem obvious to hand over this task as a whole to the existing Eurocontrol that has monitored the airspace of the Benelux countries and western Germany for a long time .
This should also apply to military air traffic , which , particularly in France , is still able to occupy an unacceptably large part of the airspace .
It is a pity that , now of all times , we are missing the opportunity of having clear and safe management of the airspace .
The letting of airspace blocks for a fixed period of time will only perpetuate the old fragmentation in a different form .
Geographical fragmentation will make way for economic fragmentation .
This is something on which I shall expand when I speak on the report by Mrs Sanders-ten Holte .
.
( FR ) The Commission proposes , by means of these regulations , to dismantle the existing systems , the better to serve economic interests .
The sky is to be divided into functional blocks that will be sold separately to service providers .
All the services will be liberalised ( control , radio , radar , search and rescue and meteorological ) .
This ' Single Sky market ' goes against common sense and the principles of safety and public service .
The British rail service has clearly shown this .
Multiple operators and competition between service providers have been detrimental to investment in maintenance , to increasing safety and to improving staff working conditions .
What is needed is quite the opposite .
More cooperation is required between air navigation services , and safety must be ensured by means of integrated systems .
More public control over air transport is needed at European level , to make way for intermodal passenger and freight transport schemes .
The Commission proposals and the report under examination are not a step in this direction .
That is why we have voted against them .
. ( NL ) I have already indicated , in my remarks on the Fava report , that scaling up may be inevitable , but that unfortunately , the wrong choices are once again being proposed .
Mandatory tendering , for a limited period of time , for public tasks by private companies that compete among themselves - something which has been suggested before for public transport and ports - is now also being applied as a solution to organising air safety .
This means that each airspace block can end up with a different company , although in the long run , a near-monopoly is bound to emerge and will control the lion 's share of the airspace .
The neo-liberal ideology will then triumph over safety .
In this model , safety has given way to cost-cutting as a primary concern .
It is believed that costs can be reduced by the use of fewer staff , and under poorer working conditions .
Since these people are dotted around various companies with different interests , which are continually concerned about their chances of winning or losing the next tender , workers get the feeling that their work is no longer as vital as before , and this will inevitably lead to a drop in its quality .
Moreover , the military are still not ending their occupation of the airspace .
This approach gets no support from me .
. ( FR ) Naturally we are in favour of maximum air safety .
We have , however , abstained on this report as it only addresses this matter from the point of view of the airlines and airport management bodies .
As the rapporteur points out , it is also significant that the directive does not put forward a single measure with regard to the safety of communities living near airports .
The European Parliament and Council consider this to be a question , principally , of establishing a unified system that will allow the European Union to exclude less safe aeroplanes from its airports and also to prevent certain Member States from being tempted , for commercial or other reasons , to be less strict with regard to the necessary controls .
All well and good .
The rapporteur , however , sees this as a means of restoring a feeling of safety among passengers , which will greatly benefit the airlines .
At the same time , the European authorities are preparing to take serious safety risks with their Single Sky Project .
These same European authorities can take all the steps they like - that may well exclude African , Latin American or Eastern European planes - but with the Single Sky and their privatisation projects , conditions in the European sky are going to end up more like a third-world sky .
. ( PT ) Air accident rates vary from region to region , since aircraft built in Western Europe are amongst the safest in the world .
Eastern European airlines have a high accident rate , as do those from Africa , Asia and South and Central America .
Under the Convention on International Civil Aviation , responsibility for aviation safety is assigned to individual States .
The European Civil Aviation Conference applies the SAFA procedure ( Safety Assessment of Foreign Aircraft ) as a means of monitoring aircraft and , consequently , of increasing aviation safety .
I therefore support the European Commission 's proposal for a directive intended to formalise the SAFA procedure in the Community .
It is seeking thereby to guarantee coordinated action , together with an exchange of information that enables the early identification of possible problems , which I believe adequately reflects concerns about guaranteeing air safety .
In conclusion however , I should like to emphasise the importance of the proposal before us to restoring the safety profile of the aviation industry , in a period post 11 September 2001 , in which this profile has been and is still fairly depressed and whose restoration is crucial to the sector 's survival .
. ( NL ) Transport links with countries outside Europe mean that means of transport which do not comply with our environmental and safety requirements are travelling on our roads , in our ports and in our airspace .
I am talking about single-hulled oil tankers , ramshackle lorries and poorly-maintained noisy aircraft .
Smaller regional airports , which are the only ones willing to accept old , noisy planes carrying freight from Eastern Europe and developing countries , are particularly badly affected at the moment .
There is every reason for banning such means of transport from the territory of the EU , though we can of course understand that countries with a lower standard of living and less advanced technology still have no choice but to use them .
We would do better to help them achieve safer transport standards than to allow them to cause problems here .
Unfortunately , the proposal on the safety of aircraft from third countries does not go as far as this .
That is why I support the modest improvements proposed by Mrs Maes for the first reading .
She is right to emphasise the need for tighter random checks , even in cases where no suspicions exist , and to call for a ban on the transport of radioactive material on passenger flights .
Taking the complaints of people living near airports seriously is just as important .
. ( FR ) The Maes report should in fact be called the committee report .
The rapporteur 's work is not evident .
I do not think this report deserves to bear Mrs Maes ' name .
In fact , all the credit for the amendments and the coherence and reliability of the report belongs to the committee .
I have therefore voted for all the committee 's amendments ( which are logical and appropriate ) and I did not take part in the final vote .
That would amount to giving credit to the rapporteur when in fact this is the work of the committee .
' Render therefore unto Caesar the things which are Caesar 's ' .
. ( FR ) We support the broad lines of the Stevenson report , which advocates promoting the cultivation in the European Union of plant proteins necessary for animal feed ( soya , but also peas , beans , field beans , sweet lupins , and also , to a lesser degree , legumes , cereals , grasses , etc . ) .
It would appear in fact that we are currently highly dependent on imports ( more than 77 % ) , while the production of plant proteins is increasing in the world and we could do much better .
This reliance causes us serious strategic problems , but also public health problems , since it is difficult under these conditions to establish product traceability , which could lead us , for example , to buy GMO soya whether we want to or not .
What , though , has limited European production in this area ?
The Blair House agreements , which have also had another disastrous effect since they have in return led to the use of animal meal , which was the cause of mad cow disease .
These agreements must be urgently revised or circumvented .
Unfortunately the Commission does not seem prepared to do this .
Once again , we wonder which side it is on , and if the Community system is in fact , once again , going to make us weaker .
. ( FR ) Why not , when we are aware of the consequences of feeding bovines on animal meal , develop the production of plant proteins for animal feed instead ?
The report , however , is only concerned with the trade war against the United States , on which animal feed in Europe today is heavily reliant .
The real needs of the world 's population are not even addressed .
The basis of the food production system , however , is morally bankrupt , as it aims only to satisfy the needs of countries and social classes with high purchasing power .
In order to sell foods with a high added value that make the most profit to those with high purchasing power , we are wasting what could be used to feed the poorest .
Several kilos of fishmeal , for example , are needed to produce more expensive fish in fish farms .
This is a revolting system , because it contributes to raiding the resources of the poorest countries and starving part of the world 's population .
It is also in the name of profit that Europe funds set-aside land in order to prevent a fall in prices .
We did not want to support this entire system by voting for one option .
We have chosen to vote against Mr Stevenson 's report in its entirety .
There is no justification for the committee 's taking the ban on processing animal protein in animal feed as a pretext for demanding EU subsidies for lupins - would you believe - and other protein-rich crops .
Equally unjustified is the demand for a ' safety net ' or income-insurance scheme to benefit producers of oilseed and protein crops .
According to the committee , the Commission 's solution of using the world market almost exclusively , would make the EU vulnerable , ' particularly to climate change , harvest failures and even price increases from the main global suppliers ( USA , Argentina and Brazil ) ' .
We see nothing wrong or unnatural about that . On the contrary .
As liberals , we believe in globalisation , free trade and international solidarity .
We cannot therefore support Mr Stevenson 's report .
. ( FR ) While the EU is heavily reliant on certain suppliers of plant proteins , the Commission proposes continuing to depend on imports , prioritising a market opportunity over rationalising its various policies .
In doing so , it ignores the difficulty that farmers have already experienced in this type of situation and deprives the agriculture sector of new prospects .
The development of protein-rich oil plants would comply with the need to develop a diversified , sustainable agriculture sector , in response to consumer demand for traced products and consumer rejection of GMOs .
It would also provide farmers with new opportunities through the development of non-food prospects such as biofuels .
Lastly , these crops have an essential role to play at an agronomic and environmental level .
We must not sell this agricultural sector short .
Let us provide it instead with the means to realise its ambitions by establishing conditions for profitability comparable to those of cereals , by favouring the diversity of species , and more particularly those not affected by the Blair House agreement .
These efforts will be in vain , however , if our negotiators do not commit themselves to defending our agricultural production with conviction on the international scene .
Mr President , the British Conservatives today reluctantly voted against the Blokland report on the establishment of a Community framework for noise classification of civil subsonic aircraft for the purposes of calculating noise charges .
This is because Amendment No 8 was adopted , reintroducing the concept that Parliament rejected last year - setting noise target values and charges for airports rather than just for aircraft .
Whilst aircraft move around the European Union , airports clearly do not and therefore airport noise charges and related land planning issues are matters for Member States under the principle of subsidiarity .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.10 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

The next item is the Council and Commission statements on floods in Europe .
Mr President , in recent weeks we have witnessed a terrible natural disaster in Central Europe which has led to damage the scope of which is almost beyond comprehension .
Both Member States and candidate countries have been affected .
Particularly in this six-month period as we face enlargement , it has almost symbolic significance in reminding us that the Member States and the candidate countries have a common destiny and share the same problems which we shall do better to solve through joint efforts .
I should like to thank the European Parliament for this opportunity on behalf of the Council to express deep sympathy with the victims of the disaster .
Many millions of people are affected .
Some have lost relatives , and many their homes .
The material destruction will make itself felt in everyday life for a long time to come .
We must all do our utmost to help .
It is important , especially in the light of the importance of enlargement for the European Community , that the EU , which is also a community of values and of solidarity , should help deal with the extensive damage .
That was also emphasised in the letter received on 21 August by the President of the European Parliament and the Heads of Government of the Member States from the President of the Commission , Mr Prodi , Chancellor Schröder and Chancellor Schüssel .
The Presidency was closely involved in the deliberations which led to the letter 's being sent .
I should also like , on behalf of the Council , to thank the European Parliament and the President of the European Parliament for the commitment and good will which Parliament has shown in ensuring a rapid and effective response on the part of the Community .
The Commission is , in the same way , to be commended for the considerable vigour it has shown in regard to this difficult matter .
The Commission deserves praise for the fact that the EU has quickly been able to take the initiative regarding decisions that will benefit the affected regions in Germany and Austria , as well as in the Czech Republic and Slovakia , as candidate countries .
A number of actions have already been set in motion , and it will be possible to make a start on others in the very near future .
It is my understanding that there is broad support within the Council for making flexible use of existing instruments such as Structural Funds , agricultural aid and Trans-European networks , as well as for making exemptions and more rapid procedures available to the affected areas when it comes to state aid and invitations to tender .
The Council had a first opportunity to discuss the Commission 's statement at a meeting of the Permanent Representatives Committee on 29 August .
The Commission proposes , for example , that an EU disaster fund be established of which it will be possible to make use in connection with the floods in Central Europe and future disasters .
I should like most gratefully to thank the Commission for the proposal , which is being debated by the Council .
I am pleased to note that there was political backing for setting up the fund at the informal meeting of foreign ministers in Elsinore last weekend .
That is a good starting point for the intense discussions between the Commission , the Council and the European Parliament over the next few weeks .
The matter will be put on the agenda of the meeting of the General Affairs and External Relations Council to be held between 30 September and 1 October when we shall take stock of the matter and , if possible , arrive at some practical decisions .
The Danish Presidency is very keen that the Community should play its part in solving the problems created for our fellow citizens , both in existing and future Member States , by the severe flooding .
We must act quickly and effectively , and we look forward to constructive cooperation with the European Parliament on this important matter which cannot help but affect many of Parliament 's rules and procedures .
Mr President , Minister , ladies and gentlemen , we were all both concerned and moved by the extent of the flooding that so badly affected Germany , Austria , the Czech Republic and Slovakia a few weeks ago .

On 18 August , in the company of President Prodi and my colleagues Mrs Schreyer and Mr Verheugen , who are here today , I was able to see for myself the scale of this disaster in the region of Dresden in particular .
President Prodi and Mrs Wallström went with Mr Verheugen to Prague , and Mr Fischler was also able to observe the extent of the damage in his own country .
Ladies and gentlemen , today , first of all , I would like to offer my deepest sympathy to all the families affected , but I also wish to recognise in particular the civil defence forces , the thousands of volunteers we saw , and the local , regional and national political and civil leaders who have shown such admirable dedication in this situation .
On 28 August , the Commission announced a series of initiatives under the various Community policies to help the countries and regions concerned to cope with this disaster .
Not only has the Union shown its solidarity with the communities concerned , but it also intends to demonstrate its capacity to act and react quickly .
Mr President , all the Commissioners present were particularly affected by the proposals you made at the beginning of this part-session , and by Mr Haarder 's speech a few moments ago .
I would like to point out , with regard to natural risks , that two subjects always go hand-in-hand , prevention and repair .
Allow me , first of all , to say a word or two about prevention .
I know that prevention requires both funding and political courage .
For example , the desire to control land use planning , to avoid waterproofing excessively large areas , in short , to manage rather than to develop land use planning .
I also know , however , that prevention always costs less than having to repair the damage .
At Community level , it is clear that the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Funds act as a financial lever for prevention .
Allow me to give just one example . Many countries were affected by the Rhine and Meuse floods during the first half of the 1990s .
We then mobilised over EUR 140 million under the Interreg programme , and that money made it possible to develop flood-monitoring and warning systems , and identify risk areas , build flood control reservoirs and facilitate water run-off .
For the current period , 2000-2006 , many programmes also contain risk prevention actions .
This , for example , is the case of the objective 1 programme for Brandenburg , which lays down the construction of flood protection .
More than forty projects will be implemented within a budget of EUR 230 million .
This , for example , is also the case for the Austrian Tyrol .
Following the Galtur disaster of February 1999 , in which 31 people lost their lives , almost EUR 10 million are to be allocated to an avalanche prevention measure .
Ladies and gentlemen , I believe that these efforts , in their current form , are not equal to the risks we face .
Together with you , we have held discussions on the future of regional policy after 2006 .
When the time comes , I shall propose that natural , technological and environmental risk prevention should become a high , almost inevitable priority of future regional policy programmes after 2006 .
We can see that the frequency of these disasters is increasing , even if they are not all such serious ones .
Furthermore , regions such as Germany , which , with the support of the Structural Funds , have made considerable efforts to boost their economy after reunification , to restore towns and villages , have now seen their work wiped out in a few short hours .
That is why regional development cannot take place without natural , technological or environmental risk prevention .
The Commission , mainly on the initiative of Mrs Wallström , will propose a European risk prevention strategy by the end of this year .
To conclude this point , I would like to say that it is quite appropriate that we are discussing this subject at the moment , today , while the Heads of State and Government are meeting in Johannesburg .
It is plain that our planet needs global thinking and collective courage , as advocated by the Brundtland report at the end of the 1980s , before the Rio Summit .
It is also clear that global thinking , either at world level or at European level , must be implemented in practical and local terms , in the field .
That is the ecological challenge , the sustainable development-meets-regional policy challenge to which we have the obligation to respond .
Mr President , I am now going to talk about the urgent need to rebuild , to prove swiftly our solidarity with the German and Austrian Länder , but also with the Czech and Slovak regions that have suffered damage .
First of all , we need to mobilise all the instruments already available to us to address this challenge .
That was the commitment given by the Commission on 28 August , a commitment that led immediately to decisions in the first area , the agriculture sector , under the impetus of Mr Fischler .
The existing instruments , of course , include the Structural Funds for the Member States affected and the pre-accession instruments for the candidate countries .
For eligible areas and regions , Structural Fund credits may be reallocated among the various priorities of the regional programmes , and we are prepared to increase the cofinancing rates as much as possible .
Meetings will be held over the next few days with the national and regional authorities to specify the amounts that can be reallocated according to requests from the Member States .
We shall be as flexible as the regulations allow , in particular with regard to State aid .
I would also like to confirm that the disaster areas will not be penalised by the application of the N + 2 clause if , due to the floods , the credits are not used within the period stipulated by the regulations .
Here again , however , the instruments available to us have their limits .
The Structural Funds cannot be used outside the eligible areas .
Although most of the disaster areas in Germany can benefit from these Funds under objective 1 , this is not the case in Austria .
Furthermore , these instruments are governed by provisions with which you are familiar , which do not always allow the necessary aid to be quickly released .
That , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , is why the Commission proposes the creation of a disaster fund for the regions and States in case of a major natural disaster .
I would emphasise that this solidarity fund will be available to benefit both current and future Member States .
We considered it preferable to call upon a new , flexible instrument that could mobilise at least EUR 500 million in 2002 , and EUR 1000 million in future , which would be added to the Fund in case of a disaster .
The aim of this Fund would be , on the one hand , to help normal public life to resume , for example by repairing energy , transport and telecommunications networks , rebuilding or building temporary accommodation , and , on the other , to limit damage by consolidating preventative infrastructures , for example dikes and dams .
As you can see , this proposal is , therefore , different .
Both in the amounts in question and the type of interventions envisaged , it differs from the emergency victim aid system that existed between 1977 and 1996 .
I believe , however , that this Commission proposal fulfils the wishes I have heard here myself , in this very Chamber , over the past three years , for example following the disasters that affected Greece , the Azores , the Canaries , France and the United Kingdom .
In a few days , on 18 September , we would like to adopt a proposal for a regulation specifying the conditions and implementation methods for this disaster fund .
This tight deadline shows the Commission 's determination to act swiftly , just as you yourself , Mr Cox , clearly expressed your desire to act .
On behalf of the Commission and my colleagues here present , I would therefore like to thank the Committee on Budgets , its Chairman , Mr Wynn , your rapporteurs Mr Colom i Naval , Mr Podestà and Mr Färm , for the quality and speed of their cooperation .
This support and understanding are essential as our joint objective is to make this fund operational in the next few months .
The Ministers for Foreign Affairs , as you said , Minister , reacted positively to this proposal at Elsinore .
In conclusion , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to say once again that prevention is always more effective and less expensive than repair .
Sometimes , however , as is the case at the moment , urgency is paramount and it is important for the European Union to be able to provide help and practical solidarity to the affected communities and regions of Germany , Austria , Slovakia and the Czech Republic .
This shows that European solidarity , in conjunction with local , regional and national solidarity , is far more than just words . For the past fifteen years it has been the basis for cohesion policy .
It has a purpose .
And today , we are showing that this purpose is being confirmed , pursued and even consolidated .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner Barnier and the other representatives of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , Europe has experienced one of the most catastrophic floods in its history , and we express our sympathy to the families of those who have died in it .
Many people are still missing .
Not only in two Member States of the European Union - Austria and Germany - have we seen great destruction and devastation , but also in two candidate countries , Slovakia and the Czech Republic .
Mr Haarder and Commissioner Barnier - representing the Commission - and also our Parliament 's representative , have already had occasion to give expression to the present need for European solidarity .
Clearing up the flood damage is primarily , of course , a task for the regions and nations , but the events with which we have had to deal here have has such a dramatic impact that people have looked to Europe to give an expression of solidarity , and so , even though Mr Romano Prodi , the President of the Commission , is unable to be here today , I would like to express loud and clear my heartfelt gratitude to him for having been to the disaster zones with other representatives of the Commission , and for having represented the European Union there in a way that was right and fitting .
I attached great importance to this .
I have not been to the disaster zones and have only been in telephone contact , but many have told me that Mr Prodi 's presence - and the humanity he personally embodied - enabled them for once to perceive the Commission and Europe in a quite new way , and not as the distant bureaucracy they had always thought it to be .
His quite personal human presence on the spot meant a very great deal to all of us .
I kept in touch with President Prodi during this time and , on behalf of our group , told him - he was , I believe , in the Czech Republic at the time - that I supported him in so far as I could , and assured him that any commitments he might make would have our group 's support .
I want my expression of thanks to include the whole Commission , including Commissioner Barnier , who has just spoken , Commissioner Fischler , Mrs Schreyer , Mr Verheugen and all who have played their part , but also especially to the Danish Presidency of the Council under Mr Haarder , whose government , in its capacity as the Presidency of the Council , has shown such an open-minded attitude to this matter .
We are all of course aware that there is a constant tension between solidarity and subsidiarity , but , in this instance , it is solidarity that has had a challenge thrown down to it .
If the follow-up measures are now completed as promptly as they should be - and what the Commissioner has said gladdens my heart - then we have done our duty as the European Union .
Before turning to a number of somewhat practical matters , I would like to express my heartfelt thanks to those who gave assistance on the ground .
Mention of , for example , the fire brigade , often raises a smile in our society , as people think that the things fire-fighters handle are toys .
In a situation like this one , though , experience teaches us just how important it is to have a fire brigade , how vital are the soldiers who are deployed in a domestic emergency situation , how important the police are , how important civil defence is .
At any rate , I have seen , in Germany , the country from which I come , innumerable young people getting stuck in and giving help , and , at a time when anonymity and egoism often seem to be predominant , it is a good sign that it is young people who manifest this solidarity .

Turning now to certain aspects of the emergency aid , on which Mr Ferber will also have something to say , we take the view - admittedly in contrast to the Commission - that EUR 1 billion should be allocated to emergency aid .
I would like to express my gratitude to the six groups who agreed on this document - Mr Karas and Mr Ferber did so on our group 's behalf - for being willing to come to an understanding about a joint text .
Aid for agriculture had already been under discussion , then came the Structural Funds ' efficiency reserve , followed of course by the disaster fund that now has to be set up for the future , and there will of course have to be a flexible approach to the rules on competition .
Commissioner Monti and the Commission as a whole have committed themselves to this .
What people now expect of us - and here I am particularly addressing Mr Wynn , the chairman of the Budgets Committee - is that we now implement all this without delay .
If we now hesitate and spend weeks disputing among ourselves , we will be throwing away the goodwill that the European Union , especially in the person of Mr Romano Prodi , President of the Commission , has garnered .
I therefore ask that we act with decisiveness and commitment in setting the follow-up measures in motion .
Let me make an observation with only indirect relevance to this issue .
Deliberations are in progress on the subject of the Stability Pact .
Even in a catastrophic situation such as this one , the Stability Pact must not be jeopardised , for this is an issue of confidence in the European currency , of confidence in the ability of the European Union as a whole to deliver the goods .
I therefore urge us all - Commission , Council and Parliament - not to shake the foundations of the Stability Pact , but - to return to the catastrophe - to do our duty by the people who have been hard hit .
This European Union of ours will then enjoy far more popular acceptance than we often take to be the case .
In this spirit I commend cooperation to all the institutions concerned !
( Applause )
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , this summer we have seen a genuine environmental , economic and cultural disaster in Central Europe .
On 14 August , on behalf of the Socialist Group , I expressed our solidarity and the need for the Commission to act , and please allow me to mention the fact that President Prodi and the Commissioners not only put their boots on and walked around in the mud , but that , furthermore , Mr Prodi accepted the invitation from Chancellor Schröder , who took action from the outset to hold that extraordinary Berlin Summit , which I believe was a strong sign of will and action .
Other colleagues of mine will speak more extensively about the situation in Germany , in Austria , in the Czech Republic , in Slovakia and in Hungary .
But please allow me , on behalf of the Socialist Group , firstly to express our condolences , our concern for the victims and also our sincerest thanks to all the volunteers who have taken action , not only those who come from the regions in question , but also those from many others .
I have had the opportunity to see volunteers in my country from the Canary Islands , which are rather far away , who were on their way to Central Europe to lend a hand wherever necessary .
This demonstrates that there is a common spirit amongst us .
I believe that this is the time to point out that we must change our past behaviour .
Solidarity must be expressed equally towards everybody , and that is a lesson we must learn from the Azores .
We also learnt a lesson , for example , from the Greek earthquake and that is that joint action by Greeks and Turks allowed past barriers to be overcome .
It is at times of difficulty that will must be shown .
With regard to the decision taken by the House - I am glad that it is unanimous and that the Committee on Budgets has acted seriously - I believe that there must be decisive support .
Clearly disasters cannot be planned for in the budgets , but what we can do , as we have with ECHO and as we are now going to do with the fund , is try to create a system of safeguards which allows us to act .
I would like to point out , now that the Convention is under way , that the time has come to remove this absurd distinction between obligatory and non-obligatory spending .
It appears that we have to pay what goes towards cows and wheat but not what goes towards disasters .
I believe that this is an important political lesson .
This also applies to the stability pact .
The application of the stability pact can be discussed when there is a disaster , but what is not acceptable is that the stability pact is being discussed in countries which have not suffered disasters .
I believe we must be very firm about this .
Finally , Mr President , I believe that , in terms of our approach to sustainable development , we must be humble and respectful towards nature , which has a memory and may return to haunt us .
We must act more firmly on the way towards a policy of sustainable development and , above all , of strengthening solidarity between us .
Mr President , the floods that put Central Europe under such immense strain this summer were a huge natural catastrophe .
The financial losses were colossal .
The floods caused fatalities , injuries and distress .
In such circumstances the European Union also has an obligation to help .
For that reason , my group , the ELDR , supports the Commission 's actions and plans to help flood victims and help finance reconstruction , and is calling for a vigorous programme of further action .
The distribution of competence means the EU 's responsibility is greatest in the area of agriculture .
Thus , the measures the Commission has taken to bring forward payments of direct agricultural aid are right , as are their other plans .
The ELDR Group furthermore believes the following measures are also the right ones : the partial reprogramming of the Structural Funds , a temporary increase in Community funding , and channelling the performance reserve to the flood area .
There is also every reason to use the TEN funds for the reconstruction work .
Action to help candidate countries also has the support of our group .
It must be made possible to use the emergency aid reserve in the budget to repair the damage .
Our group is in favour of establishing a European emergency aid fund .
Technically it may be appropriate to establish it in accordance with a flexible instrument .
Its purpose would have to be clearly defined and the rules made clear .
Compensation would mainly have to come from the Member State 's national share and insurance companies .
Our group is prepared to promote the fastest possible implementation of legislation and technical preparation concerning this fund .
It is important that the European Union should make a more intensive effort to overcome climatic change , implement the Kyoto agreement and reduce greenhouse gases .
It is important to promote the use of renewable energy sources .
At the same time , we need to consider the risk of natural disasters , such as flooding , at different levels of the social structure , and try to reduce them .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Madam Commissioner , Commissioners , my group welcomes the discussion on the measures required at European level to cope with the unparalleled damage wrought by the disastrous floods in the Federal Republic of Germany , in Austria , in the Czech Republic and in Slovakia .
I would like to again express our dismay and our grief over the victims and express our sympathy to their families .
The immense material damage and the destitution of thousands of people call for extensive and coordinated aid on the part of the European , national and regional forces and institutions .
The members of the public , communities , businesses and faring installations that have been affected expect the European institutions to provide immediate and tangible aid to alleviate their need and also to deal with the extensive consequences of the emergency .
The European Union can do a great deal to polish up its image and reputation in the eyes of the public by acting speedily and without bureaucracy .
The remarkable wave of solidarity and unselfish mutual assistance that showed itself in the struggle against the floodwaters , must be supplemented by clear and substantial indications of the European Union 's solidarity .
The Commission has taken the right step in proposing the possible reallocation of European resources within the European funds , but this is not sufficient .
Alongside the Community Disaster Fund , which the Commission has proposed and which will mobilise aid money in the long term , there is a need for emergency aid supplied from the margin of as yet unused European budget resources .
Over and above that , we propose that , in the event of disasters , it should be possible to examine the legal option of reducing the share of national cofinancing , at the same time suspending the putting of contracts out to tender in order to mobilise local and regional enterprises .
This would make an effective contribution to supporting and promoting small and medium-sized enterprises in the region or local area affected by the calamity .
We welcome the European Investment Bank 's initiative , under which EUR 1 billion is to be made available in the first instance for the purpose of granting credits under special conditions , with the option of topping them up at a later date .
Making these interest-free would be a greater help to the recipients .
This brings us to the proposal that the European Union , using a specially created fund , could take on the cost of the interest incurred .
I would like to point out by way of conclusion that these disastrous floods are not an isolated and extreme natural occurrence ; the incidence of natural disasters in various parts of the world is increasing .
For us , this should be - indeed must be - a clear warning signal , calling on us to give environmental issues , in all relevant areas of Community policy , a far higher priority than we have done to date .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , it was with horror that we watched as the rivers of Saxony , Saxony-Anhalt , Bavaria , the Czech Republic , Slovakia and Austria , both great and small , became rivers of destruction .
Never before had the Elbe , the river that runs through Dresden , my home town , broken its original banks with such brutality .
It destroyed much of the reconstruction work of Germany 's post-reunification period , destroyed new homes , and , above all , took all the possessions of young people starting businesses and homes - they will be in debt for generations - and largely wrecked the newly-renovated city centre to a truly massive degree .
No words of mine could be equal to the task of describing the losses , the suffering and the despair of the victims .
When I refer to my home town , let it be taken as a symbol representing the many small towns that have also been affected as much as the great cities of Germany and its neighbouring countries .
For my own part and on behalf of my group , I would like to express my deep sympathy with all of them .
My desire is that this discussion may become a real sign of solidarity and that a disaster fund may come into being , founded in a spirit of solidarity with all regions rather than with only a few of them and including the candidate countries .
Both residents and visitors always had a healthy respect for the Elbe .
The city has come to terms with the spring floods , but now the newly-emerging plans for the trans-European networks will make it into a basin with fast currents endangering the people on the riverbank .
So I call on the Commission to reconsider whether their plans for the development of the Elbe and also of the Danube are still justified in the light of current experience .
There is a development plan for the Danube , one that is sustainable and will preserve the alluvial forests .
It is now for the Commission to deal with the question of whether they will finance this plan alone or enter into some sort of arrangement for the financing of dams .
As regards the Elbe , it is still an open question to what extent the Commission will take on responsibility for the plans that exist to develop it , which have been shown to be unworkable .
That they have not yet been implemented - which was a great good fortune , as the flood would otherwise have been even more torrential - is due to the initiatives emerging from civil society that have to date prevented these plans from actually coming to fruition .
The coming weeks , though , will see the question raised of whether it will be possible to preserve the important alluvial forests and their resources , and hence also to keep the waters back , or whether the Elbe development will proceed .
The same is true of the Oder , for which there are similar plans ; there are nature reserves near the Oder as well , and it threatens to flood villages .
The question facing the Commission is whether a new plan can be successfully drawn up and whether all existing plans can be reviewed , so that the Commission , too , may take full responsibility in this area .
Mr President , the motion for a resolution tabled by the UEN Group and the motions tabled by the other political groups seek essentially to create a credit line in the Union 's budget to help to deal with the damage caused by the natural disasters which have occurred recently in a number of Member States and in the candidate countries .
Moreover , the need for emergency Community action was blatantly obvious if we consider the exceptionally widespread effects of the atmospheric phenomena which have affected the whole of Europe .
When he visited the disaster areas , President Prodi himself could only , in expressing the Union 's condolences , declare its ready availability to intervene with both exemptions and financial aid .
In our opinion , there are other considerations which point to the need for the creation of a stable credit line .
Although many would not admit it , I am afraid it is becoming obvious that our world 's climate is changing , and it is not necessary to subscribe to the theory of alarmism to see this .
Of course , meteorological statistics through the years have consistently done their best to show us encouraging comparisons , making the scale of disasters seem less large , but it is not their - still large - scale which is disturbing now so much as the increasing frequency with which they occur , on the one hand , and the fact that they repeatedly occur out of season in Europe , on the other .
The creation of a stable credit line in the Union 's budget would , therefore , help the States to take the necessary action to address the damage caused by these events .
There is no doubt , however , that the other , more important part of the Community 's action must relate to prevention .
It is certainly useful to reconsider at both national and Community level agricultural production policies , forestation policies and policies for managing hydrological risk areas .
In any case , the key issue , the essential consideration , is certainly the greenhouse effect and its harmful consequences , which , I am sad to say , have been scientifically proven beyond all reasonable doubt .
We must reflect on the fact that the issue of the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions - addressed for the first time as early as 10 years ago in New York and for the second time six years later in Kyoto in the famous Protocol - is still far from being resolved in any significant way because of the failure of a sufficient number of States to ratify the Protocol .
The call for Russia to ratify the Protocol is certainly an important step , but it falls within the scope of the political and economic relations which are being established with that country .
We still have an unquestionable duty to insist more firmly that the candidate countries ratify the Protocol , starting with Poland .
Mr President , my group , the Group for a Europe of Democracies and Diversities , would also like to convey its condolences to the relatives of the victims of the severe floods in Europe , and we must find effective methods of helping the many people who are now in need of help .
I would , however , warn against having the EU take part in the aid work .
The victims of the hurricane in Latin America did not receive the money we had allocated .
The EU often contents itself with accepting the public relations benefits of a major appropriation but is in no position to take effective action .
That could also easily happen this time .
It would be wiser to pay a portion of the bill for the aid programme that has now to be undertaken by the local , regional and national authorities , and I personally am prepared to go a very long way down this road , for it is in times of need that friends show their worth .
We are wealthy in the EU , much wealthier than , for example , the badly affected Czech Republic and Slovakia .
We should now be resolute in showing our solidarity in practical , cash-down terms .
We ought also , however , to look at the causes and take the greenhouse effect and other human assaults upon the environment seriously .
France 's President Chirac is right , of course .
He deserves great praise for his speech in Johannesburg .
I am not yet in a position to assess the Danish Presidency of the Council 's contribution to Johannesburg , but it is scandalous both that we should continue to dump EU-subsidised goods on developing countries ' agricultural markets while refusing fully to open our own markets to those countries ' products and that it has not even been successfully agreed that 15 % of energy should come from sustainable energy sources by the year 2015 .
It is presumably by means of this absence of decision-making that we are laying the foundation for the natural disasters to come .
Thank you , Mr President , even though there is not a very great deal to express thanks for .
Mr President , it goes without saying that we welcome the Commission 's initiative to help those who have sustained damage in the flood disaster speedily and without bureaucracy .
We believe , though , that the aid measures put forward by the Commission at the present time will , unfortunately , prove to be inadequate to help the victims to a sufficient extent .
Moreover , the funds are to some extent granted on the basis of unequal criteria .
We are deeply affected by the extent of these disastrous floods .
In Austrian regions alone , over 10 000 homes have been destroyed , innumerable bridges and roads have been destroyed or have sustained major damage , with the infrastructure of communities and regions suffering serious consequential damage .
Hundreds of businesses were seriously affected by the floods , their plant and buildings badly damaged or wrecked .
In Upper Austria alone , thousands of jobs have been affected or put at risk by the flood disaster .
The overall extent of the damage is increasing on a virtually daily basis , as we get a better overview of the degree to which the regions have been adversely affected .
It is currently assumed that the total damage will amount to over EUR 800 billion , which means , as has already been frequently said , that the sum of EUR 500 million proposed by the EU as emergency aid will not be sufficient .
We are therefore working on the basis that at least EUR 1 billion will be allocated to emergency aid measures .
In this context , we would also remind you that a surplus for the year 2000 totalling EUR 11.6 billion has just been repaid to the Member States .
If billions are again repaid to the Member States in respect of 2002 , it will not look good from where we stand , as the people affected by the floods will take it as read that the EU honours the concept of solidarity more in word than in deed .
So I do believe that the Commission should indeed make up the cash and that this year 's surplus should be cut back accordingly .
It cannot be , or rather it should not be , the case that Europe 's poor are treated unequally .
I do not consider it right and proper for aid measures , in the final analysis , to be allocated according to the region for which they are destined .
The situation in Upper Austria is that many businesses are not in the target region at all and certain aid measures are therefore denied to them .
It goes without saying that we must also spare a thought for farmers , who should , speedily and unbureaucratically , have funds made available to them for the purchasing of feedingstuffs , be enabled to use set-aside land and should have cereals in intervention provided for them at cheap rates for feeding purposes .
It is obvious that we have to think of the thousands of private citizens whose homes were destroyed , and we should also , in a spirit of solidarity , make funds available for them .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let me express my gratitude to the Commission for the initiative that they launched at the end of August , inaugurated by a visit to the affected areas and then by last week 's special session of the Commission to fire the starting shot for the creation of the legal basis for aid to deal with this grave calamity .
Let me specifically mention in this connection Commissioner Fischler , who has rather less of a problem with budgets .
Not only does he have to make proposals , but he can at the same time take decisions via the Austrian Upper House .
It is a great help to the farmers affected by the floods that this has been done so quickly in the aftermath of the events .
Three things are needed .
Firstly , we must make emergency aid available , and do so quickly .
To do so is an expression of European solidarity .
I will deliberately emphasise that this must be quick and , indeed , immediate .
It will not be enough for people in the affected regions to be sitting in houses and dwellings that they have laboriously decorated , having put up a rough-and-ready Christmas tree , while we in this House are still discussing issues such as legal bases , reallocations and more of the same old thing .
Rapid emergency aid means that the procedure by which we act must be the speediest available - we in the PPE group propose that this be based on the procedure used in the 2002 Fourth Supplementary Budget - so that , by the end of October at the latest , funds of the order of EUR 1 billion can be on their way .
Secondly , the legal circumstances need to be created .
The Structural Fund - Michel Barnier has been mentioned - the law on subsidies and public procurement ; all this has to be taken into consideration .
What we have to implement here is a complete package of legislation , in order that European law does not stand in the way of rapid reconstruction .
Thirdly , we have to equip ourselves to face the future .
How can we set up a disaster fund for the future ? That is the question .
We ought to do that calmly and unhurriedly , in order to get everything right in budgetary and legal terms .
If we do these three things , aid will get to people fast , and Europe will discharge its long-term responsibilities to its people .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , representatives of the Commission , this House has already seen lengthy discussions of whether or not there ought to be an institution or fund with the specific purpose of giving aid in times of catastrophe .
It must be said in all honesty that many of us were sceptical , believing that it would prove to be a drain on our resources , but the great disaster over the past few weeks has , I believe , convinced us that solidarity is a proper response to such calamities .
This is not just about financial support for countries that suddenly find themselves faced with a gigantic task ; it is also - as already mentioned - a spiritual and moral issue , and also one on which this European Union of ours , which no longer evokes great enthusiasm , can gain added public support if it shows that it is acting in a spirit of solidarity .
My group is therefore unambiguously in favour of the creation of a new financial instrument with all the precautions that honesty requires that we take in a disaster situation .
Firstly , the disasters concerned must be of major dimensions , and we must not encourage the delusion that we can supplant the efforts of the nation states ; we can and must supplement them , but that is no substitute for effort at a national level .
I would like again to underline what Commissioner Barnier said with reference to prevention .
Not only must we - where this is possible - provide for a return to the natural state , but we must also put preventive measures in place using all our technical knowledge , as for example happened in my home city of Vienna , where we have again been spared disaster .
What this means is that the states cannot take it for granted that they will keep getting money when disasters strike , and then , for years on end , carry on with planning and population policies that have failed utterly .
The last point I would like to make has already been mentioned a couple of times , but it cannot be too clearly emphasised , namely , that we must help speedily .
I know we all have certain time limits to keep to and so on , but I see some plans which state that the present is perhaps to arrive before Christmas or only after it , when it is too late .
It is too late for people to have an experience of the European Union as a real help .
So I am asking everybody in Parliament , but especially the Commission , to prepare matters as speedily as possible and in so efficient a manner that both the Council and Parliament can give their prompt agreement .
If we can tell people that this has been done , then , I believe , it will be with greater enthusiasm that they will be able to say ' yes ' to this European Union of ours .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , first of all , I wish to express my and my group 's sympathy for everyone hit by the disaster .
The disastrous floods in Central Europe have been , and remain , appalling .
Something has happened to the climate .
Imbalances in the frequency of drought and rainfall are becoming more and more common , and winds are becoming more and more violent .
In Johannesburg , an attempt was made to find global solutions .
The country which causes the most pollution per head of population - the United States - does not wish to participate .
The way the world is at present , it is the EU which must now assume the leading role in bringing about a sound environmental policy .
The President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Haarder , stated that this will affect our processes and decisions .
I believe that that is the case .
Major issues have arisen within the EU which have required common solutions and have welded countries and peoples together .
That has applied in the cases of the Coal and Steel Union , agricultural policy , the internal market and Economic and Monetary Union .
I am convinced that we must pull ourselves together in order successfully to cope with the world 's future environmental problems .
The next major project for the European Union should be to create a common environmental policy that is both tough and directly binding upon countries and individuals .
In that way , it might be possible to raise the standard without anyone 's being able to lower it again , and the EU would be given the opportunity to play a leading role when it came to improving the global environment .
That is the most important issue for humanity and the EU combined .
Mr President , the most disastrous floods in living memory to strike those who live on the Elbe and on some of its tributaries have also had a grave effect on farmers and their businesses .
Although there is as yet no definite account of the damage , provisional reports from the Federal States of Saxony and Saxony-Anhalt , which have been particularly affected , give some indication of the colossal extent of the flood damage , the present position being that the damage done by floodwater to agriculture and forestry amounts to around EUR 287 million .


In Saxony alone , some 1 900 farms have been directly affected by floodwater , and another 640 in Saxony-Anhalt .
Far greater , though , is the damage done to residential property in the villages , to the infrastructure of rural areas and to the dikes on the rivers .
My home area , Prignitz , lies right on the Elbe , and damage there has been great ; even though it was possible to prevent disaster itself in the form of flooding or the breaching of the dikes on the Elbe , the inhabitants of thirty-eight Prignitz villages had to be evacuated , with some 20 000 head of cattle being rescued from the flooding - a massive achievement for neighbourly aid in the sparsely-inhabited Prignitz .
A massive amount of work was done in Havelland , where many thousands of helpers did their best to counteract the artificial flooding of Havelland even though the polder dikes had been burst .
The environmental and financial effects will become apparent only in late 2003 and 2004 .
It is my express demand that the advance payment of the EU 's 50 % per-hectare premium be proceeded with speedily , but I do ask Commissioner Fischler to review its payment to businesses , even though this is not within his remit .
The application forms that have come into my possession are drafted in the language of bureaucracy rather than that of solidarity .
There is , then , a need for additional money .
Special credit facilities and guarantee programmes may well be helpful , but many farmers no longer have it in them to get into debt again , as these programmes all have the characteristic that they become effective after a time delay .
We know that this year , EUR 1 to 1.3 billion of the EU 's budget will be left unused .
I ask as a matter of urgency that consideration be given to the possibility of the unused funds being used as non-repayable subsidies to benefit the farmers in all the affected areas which have suffered severe damage , rather than being repaid to the Member States .
When the EU implements its measures , it is subjected to intense scrutiny by its citizens .
What is needed , and in short order , is money , not sleight of hand or political evasive action .
With that in mind , I hope Parliament , and all of us , will be able to do the right thing .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like , as an Austrian MEP , to start by expressing my gratitude for the possibility of prompt and speedy help .
These sad events have brought us closer to achieving the proximity to our citizens for which we have often longed .
It has been possible to give Europe a slightly better image .
Brussels , that bureaucratic monster , seems to embody solidarity , and may that not remain merely an outward show .
Disasters have more than a merely national dimension .
European solidarity is called for , and the EU has come up with the right response .
Alongside the countless victims , whom we mourn , there are so many individuals and families on the brink of ruin ; we have businesses both small and large , farmers , the environment , agriculture , public services , historic buildings , art treasures , including in the candidate countries , in need of prompt and speedy aid , given on a joint basis and without strings attached .
It is of little interest to the public whence the money comes and how we do all the restructuring .
We have to tackle this promptly , speedily and swiftly .
Aid must be visible .
Turning to the follow-up measures and to the long-term measures , I would like to underline what my fellow-Members have said , namely that climate change has become a brutal reality .
Man-made climate change has arrived .
Mr Barón Crespo said that we must have greater humility where nature is concerned , but to do so demands more effective action , more effective political action , on our part .
Commissioner Barnier repeatedly emphasised the need for preventive measures .
Not only are these necessary and cheaper , they also take greater care of the environment .
I hope - and it is in these terms that I appeal to all the Member States , to the Commission and to this House - that these do not merely express pious aspirations , but will be implemented in all relevant policy areas .
It is in the light of this that we should give ourselves time to engage in detailed discussion of the Disaster Fund .
There is not much point in simply blundering into the rebuilding of what has been destroyed if we have not previously gathered all the available information we need , especially in environmentally sensitive areas .
We simply have to rebuild in a sustainable way .
Public expectations of this EU of ours , of this community of solidarity , have grown and will carry on growing .
So congratulations on these ad hoc measures ; we should be equally zealous in identifying the structures for the future , for our solidarity should be not only with those who are the victims now , but with everyone , and not only today , but also tomorrow .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by expressing my very heartfelt thanks for all my fellow-Members ' solidarity and sympathy , as this is a really difficult time for people in the affected areas of Central Europe .
The last time Austria experienced a flood disaster of this magnitude was over a century ago .
We are especially grateful to the Commission and the Presidency of the Council for their prompt action in response to this catastrophe .
I would also like to thank all the Austrian MEPs for the solidarity and cooperation which have been manifested without regard to party political boundaries , and also all the voluntary aid workers , the voluntary fire brigades , the Red Cross , the Austrian Federal Army for their tireless endeavours .
I am myself from an affected area in Lower Austria and have personal experience of their superhuman efforts .
It took no time at all for many livelihoods to be destroyed , with , for example , over 20 000 hectares of Austrian arable land inundated .
The damage done has been enormous , meaning , among other things , that harvesting cannot be completed in the areas where threshing is done late , and that many fields and meadows cannot be mown as they are still under water as a result of the continuing high groundwater level .
Machines and equipment are sinking into the fields , and shortages of animal feedingstuffs are to be reckoned with .
The Commission 's immediate authorisation of measures to help farmers is therefore a matter of life and death for us , and for it they have my heartfelt gratitude .
In a study , the Austrian Institute of Economic Research puts a figure of over EUR 7.5 billion on the damage .
The destruction of many businesses and of the infrastructure in these regions has set the areas ' development back by years .
Parliament and the EU as a whole must give aid , actively and with all speed .
The time has come to demonstrate this .
I see this as a chance for the Europe in which we share to prove itself .
I really do welcome the emergency aid that the EU gives , one of the most important features of which is , as many of the previous speakers have already said , the transparency of the process and the absence of bureaucracy involved .
This is an area where - to speak very frankly - the governments of the affected areas also need to make the necessary funds available without delay .
Emergency aid must find a place in the Supplementary Budget .
We have to set up an efficient disaster fund , give it sufficient funds and define criteria for it .
It must be possible to give this fund an endowment of a billion euros .
Disasters will happen over and over again , but our society is distinguished by the way we treat nature and live in harmony with it , and by our solidarity with those visited by misfortune , for we can all be in their position .
Mr President , honourable Members , I myself am from Saxony .
It pains me to even think about what has happened there and two minutes is far too little time in which to do so .
12 August marked the start of one of the worse natural disasters this country has ever known .
To give you just one statistic : on 12 August , the Erzgebirge had 360 litres of rain per square metre within 24 hours .
I think many a Member State would be quite happy with just a fraction of that rainfall in summer .
The swollen streams and rivers carried off everything in their path .
Thousands of people lost everything they owned within a few hours .
Retailers and tradesmen lost not just their shops and businesses but all their stock and materials .
21 people are thought to have died in the floods .
The floodwaters have receded and what are we left with : devastation and mud .
Initial estimates put the damage to infrastructure and public buildings in Saxony Free State at EUR 16.5 billion .
By way of comparison , the annual budget of Saxony Free State is around EUR 15 billion .
Saxony-Anhalt is complaining of damage in the region of EUR 2.1 billion , although I think that the final bill will be higher .
Emergency help is urgently needed .
The federal government has already reacted and will shortly be providing EUR 10 billion for reconstruction .
However , the European Union is also being called on to help .
It too has already reacted and this reaction has been welcomed .
But may I point out that , even if we single out the Structural Funds and give priority to certain measures , we cannot stop there .
There must be no let-up in subsequent Structural Fund support for Objective 1 areas in eastern Germany and I urge you to bear this in mind .
May I take this opportunity to thank everyone who has helped clear up and helped fight the floods .
I should also like to ask the Commission not to leave the Czech Republic and Slovakia out of its emergency aid plans .
They have suffered enormous damage and are perhaps not as well-equipped as Germany or Austria .
Mr President , Commissioners , President-in-Office of the Council , my greatest sympathy at this time is with the families badly hit or otherwise affected in the disaster-struck areas .
Respect and admiration are also in order for the huge response to the disaster and for the way in which thousands of people stood shoulder to shoulder in combating the masses of water .
It was unprecedented .
There must be no doubt that the EU Member States should pull together in dealing with a disaster like this .
It is therefore important to remember that aid is twice as valuable when it is offered promptly .
I would also draw attention to the fact that many people are looking to see how we help the Czech Republic .
The Czech Republic is a candidate country , and it is therefore very important that we deal with it in such a way that it , and thus the other candidate countries too , feel secure .
I would finally draw attention to the fact that agriculture in the affected areas is suffering losses twice over : firstly , this autumn 's harvest of coarse fodder has been lost and , secondly , the harvest of sown winter crops will not be ready for next year . I would therefore very much urge that there be no doubt about the fact that the losses sustained by agriculture in particular will be spread over at least two accounting years .
Mr President , on the evening of 12 August , my daughter bought a camera in my home town of Döbelin , population 28 000 .
Three hours later , the shop no longer existed .
The same applies to 1 425 homes in the district and 711 businesses .
And of course , schools , scientific establishments and , above all , public infrastructures were seriously affected and , to put it bluntly , agriculture is staring ruin in the face .
As we have already heard , 220 000 hectares were flooded and the provisional estimates of flood damage to farming are enormous .
Mrs Fiebiger has quoted the figures .
Worst of all is the loss of animal fodder , mainly as the result of the grain lost .
Governments and the European Union have already given a considerable sum of money in initial emergency aid .
And quite apart from that , the Commissioner responsible , Franz Fischler , with whom I am in constant personal contact , and again may I express thanks to him for that , has ordered EUR 560 million to be paid in the form of direct payments to farmers , although the final figure will be higher because , according to my information , regions in Mecklenburg and Vorpommern have now been included .
As you have already heard , set-aside areas have been provided , together with cheap grain for animal fodder .
My request , or rather my question is this : have these EUR 560 million really been available since 1 September ?
To hear that from you in person , my dear Mr Fischler , would be music to the ears of the victims .
Because make no mistake .
This is a national emergency and , although the regions affected must make every effort to deal with it , they will be stretched beyond their financial limits .
Dealing with this disaster in the short- , medium- and long-term is therefore the job of these regions , the national governments and the European Union .
And action must be taken quickly because the people affected are in urgent need of financial support .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I would like to add my voice to the messages of condolence and thanks to the honourable Members .
Europe has been affected in an incomparable way by the problem of flooding and must be part of the solution to this immediate problem we are facing .
Therefore , the urgency demanded by the honourable Members and assistance which goes beyond mere words are the two elements that are absolutely essential for this Parliament to demonstrate .
Mr President , fresh money is needed to provide aid ; not just the money planned for , but new contributions .
We must bear in mind that this House has contributed for many years to the 1.27 limit of the European Union 's budget never having been used and therefore a substantially smaller proportion than that has been used .
I believe that Mr Barnier has introduced some absolutely essential considerations and details .
I am a member of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism and it is clear that flexibility is fundamental in reprogramming , that the efficiency reserve must be used for this task , revitalising small and medium-sized businesses , which are the driving force for normalisation and recovery and that prioritising the defence of our infrastructures must be an essential element of the new priorities .
Mr President , I will end by saying that , while we have been able to save for many years , solidarity now requires that we be generous .
Mr President , honourable Members , as a member of parliament from one of the regions affected by the floods , I am very grateful that this debate is being held here today .
Here we are , worrying about how to get money to the victims .
That shows that , as a community , the European Union basically functions on the principle of solidarity .
I should also like to make a point of thanking Commission President Prodi for having visited the damaged regions in person .
His visit clearly demonstrated that the European Union is alive and well and ready to help and did much to raise the stock of the European Union .
The local citizens saw that Europe is a dynamic force for help .
I visited some of the damaged areas last week in preparation for today 's debate and spoke to citizens and those in charge .
The devastation is immense and the people are in deep despair .
But they draw hope for a new beginning from the overwhelming sense of solidarity already shown in Germany and from the support coming in from further afield , including from the European Union , because they cannot cope with these problems alone .
The bottom line - I have been told time and again - is that money is needed , and needed fast .
Apart from replacing personal property lost , we need , first and foremost , to ensure that infrastructures are restored as quickly as possible , so as to minimise the losses to business .
Apart from cheap loans , which the Commissioner has already mentioned , I think we need to do more to ensure the money flows quickly .
One way would be to provide funds from the supplementary budget or from the disaster fund which has already been discussed here today .
This money needs to be provided in the short term .
The second way of providing funds is through the Structural Funds .
I think both channels are important and are the right approach .
However , in the case of the Structural Funds , we need to bear in mind that , under current legislation , the Structural Funds can only be implemented if there is 50 % cofinancing .
This cofinancing is entered in the countries ' budgets in annual tranches and the corresponding funds are then earmarked .
Additional funds cannot be provided in the short term .
Which is why using the Structural Funds only makes sense if cofinancing is altered .
What we need is a reduction , and I do not mean by a couple of percentage points ; we need a drastic reduction just for this period , i.e. while funds are being used to repair the damage .
Nonetheless , the question of providing more money from the Structural Funds over coming years needs to be reviewed , as Mrs Krehl has already said .
I think that if we take this on board , we shall have a huge opportunity to help people and win their confidence in the European Union .
Mr President , with a peculiar sort of local chauvinism , I too must start by saying that my home region of Upper Austria and , more importantly , my home district of Perk have been devastated by the floods .
In my home district of Perk , we had a total of three flash floods and mudslides of unprecedented magnitude within a month .
The first , which , relatively speaking , was the mildest , hit my own house .
The time of trying to persuade ourselves that this is a one in a millennium occurrence - an unhappy combination of circumstances - is past ; we are sure that this is a catastrophe brought about by climate change and could strike again at any given moment .
It could strike again anywhere in Europe or the rest of the world at any given moment ; in other words , even as we deal with the emergency and repair the damage , we need to focus on prevention and on protecting the climate .
I am very grateful to everyone , including the Commission , which has put a really impressive package together and shown us how we can help at European level .
All of us from the regions affected have already said that this is a message which has been very well received by our citizens .
I also believe - which is why , of course , we are lobbying here for increased support - that help from the European Union should be in proportion to the damage .
The total bill in Upper Austria will probably be in the region of EUR 3 billion .
I have a special request to put to the Commission on behalf of my region , which is neither an Objective 1 nor an Objective 2 region and the places worst affected do not qualify for aid . It is a request for support in implementing restructuring measures within Austria , including these areas .
I should like to thank you , President Cox , for having taken an early initiative on behalf of the European Union and agreeing to open an exhibition of the damage in Germany , the Czech Republic and Austria which I have organised at 5 p.m. this evening , because I think this sort of solidarity is important .
I can also report that , in my region , even people who lost everything or almost everything are saying , the poor Czechs , they are even worse off , they will probably find it even harder to cope .
I believe we have seen an upsurge in cross-border solidarity .
I should like to use this platform to thank everyone who has helped in Austria , the army , the fire brigade , the Red Cross and all the volunteers .
Many agencies have been overwhelmed with offers of help .
In Austria , African asylum seekers have been helping and young Muslim associations have volunteered to help .
There has been a wave of solidarity , the like of which we have never experienced and which has taken many people by surprise and I should be glad to pass the message of heartfelt sympathy expressed here to the victims in my home region .
Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , the reason for my intervention is , of course , the various disasters that have recently befallen the Member States of the European Union - the devastating floods , droughts and fires .
This summer , the torrential rains that lashed Germany and Austria as well as the Czech Republic and Romania , have caused incalculable damage .
In human terms , first of all , with the loss of dozens of human lives and thousands injured or missing and families made homeless . There has been material damage too , with considerable damage to infrastructures , with roads and bridges destroyed , fields of crops flooded and the destruction of centuries-old cultural heritage .
First of all , and I feel sure that I speak on behalf of all my fellow Members , I wish to use this forum to praise the total commitment and the mobilisation of the emergency services , fire brigades , police , soldiers and volunteers .
On the eve of the gloomy conclusions of the Johannesburg Summit , the European Union is already facing the consequences of climate change and of the failure to comply with the Kyoto Protocol .
For me and for my country , the European Union means solidarity , both with the Member States , and with the candidate countries .
The European Union must , therefore , bring into play all the mechanisms and financial means at its disposal to help the affected areas .
Aid must be direct and immediate , because the victims will not be sympathetic to bureaucracy and administrative delays .
I wish , therefore , to state my unequivocal support for establishing , in the short term , an exceptional budget line to deal with this type of disaster , redirecting Structural Funds that have already been allocated , bearing the new situation in mind , and for freeing up credits granted under the pre-accession programmes .
In the medium term , I am also in favour of the Commission proposal to create a special assistance fund for natural , technological and environmental disasters with a value of no less than EUR one billion .
This fund would enable us to provide a rapid response in the event of disasters in the broadest sense of the term .
I suggest that the sums in this fund that are not spent during the current budget year be added to those of coming years , so as to strengthen it . There would consequently be a greater year-on-year ability to respond .
Furthermore , the size of the freed-up funding should take account of not only the extent of the disaster , but also of the prosperity of the regions affected .
Mr President , honourable Members , large-scale disasters such as that which struck a month ago are indeed ill winds of sadness , anxiety and pain but they often also bring some good .
That good may be that people feel closer , feel drawn together and that we are all pulling in the same direction .
Cooperation experienced in a European context does more in hard times than endless lofty speeches and we have seen here - and my congratulations first and foremost to the Commission on how it has kicked into action - that the European Union , which is often perceived as inflexible , is keen to show how flexible it can be by earmarking Structural Fund resources , by paying out aid to farmers , by implementing rules for funds available from Europe , by applying a flexible aid regime , i.e. where funds are not channelled directly , and by being flexible in its competition requirements .
And this sends out a good message , a message that , when it has to , Europe can get moving .
We have our work cut out for us .
The Council and Parliament now need to hand out fast , solid aid .
Fast aid because the dikes which have been inundated will not hold up forever .
Help is needed .
And solid aid because permanent help is needed and , may I say here loud and clear , that the proposed aid fund , which has our full and unwavering support , is clearly not designed to be a quick fix for a few months or a one-off incident .
Anyone who has witnessed how two countries which , economically , are usually among the strongest in Europe , have received expressions of solidarity from countries which are not among the strongest will never again be able to refuse these regions help if disaster threatens in the future .
I say that in the light of what we have done in the budget in previous years .
Unfortunately , there was never enough money available to really be able to help .
Basically , all we did was to raise hopes and then dash them again .
This must not happen with the aid fund and we shall need to act accordingly .
We need , however , to address a number of issues which go beyond these emergency measures .
We need to deal with these issues in the Committee on Budgets and we shall be looking here for close contact and close cooperation with the Commission and the Council in order to get things moving as quickly as possible .
But we also need to take account in our calculations of experience in formulating policies in other areas .
Satellite data on flood management need to be included in the framework research programme , as does seismic research , because we are not just talking water here , we are also talking earthquakes - think of the Azores .
We need to think about how to impose mandatory specifications to ensure buildings are stable .
We also need to think very carefully about straightening rivers and about flood plains .
And urgent help is needed .
In the medium term , we need to create a solid basis for future help from the European Union - including financial help - and take preventive measures across the whole of the political spectrum which concerns us .
Only then will help be credible , because only then will people take us seriously and , even then , we must not promise more than we can deliver .
I should like to thank everyone who has helped and I trust we shall pull together over the coming weeks and months in order to carry out the work in hand .
Mr President , members of the Commission , honourable Members , as you have already heard , my homeland , Austria , has suffered damage to the tune of EUR 7 500 million .
I personally have cleaned up , evacuated and shovelled in Upper and Lower Austria , as have many of us here and thousands , literally thousands outside this House .
Together we have witnessed the material need and mental anguish caused by this disaster , which has pushed people to the brink and wiped out houses , streets and businesses .
Many only realised just how bad things were once the fire brigade , the army and the emergency services had left .
I should like on behalf of a great many people to thank the authorities , the communes , the Länder , the governments of the Member States , the European Union and the volunteers and , as the chairman of a social organisation , the Österreichisches Hilfswerk , which is one of the eight organisations distributing donor money , to thank the thousands , or rather hundreds of thousands of donors .
Civil society has proven its worth and has come up trumps .
But its job is not yet done .
The Austrian Chancellor , Dr. Schüssel , estimated yesterday that 70 % of the damage has been recorded and EUR 65 - 70 million paid out directly .
The leader of the Austrian delegation , Ursula Stenzel , took the initiative of tabling a joint resolution by Austrian members , which has been included in the joint resolution by the European Parliament .
There is no need to define this disaster ; it has already taken place , which is why the European Parliament is calling for emergency aid of EUR 1 billion for the flood area .
We are calling for flexibility in the aid regulation , we are calling for Structural Fund resources to be reallocated , we are calling for the national cofinancing portion to be reduced , we are calling for national limits on aid to be lifted and we are calling for emergency aid to be paid out quickly ; we want specific dates , not just promises .
May I close by thanking all the honourable Members for the tone of this debate .
There has been no playing victims off against non-victims , north against south , Member States against candidate countries , budget figures against each other , projects against new plans .
It is clear from the debate that we need to act because we are all in the same boat .
It is a good example of political maturity and of a willingness to demonstrate that actions speak louder than words , to help ensure there are no delays , that action is taken in the short term and that a new approach is taken in the long term .
Mr President , I wish to say two things : the first is to express the profound and genuinely heartfelt solidarity of the Autonomous Region of the Azores ; the second is to praise the words and specifically the action of Commissioner Barnier , who , for several years now , has dedicated considerable attention and commitment to the problem of natural disasters .
What is needed now is to transform this commitment into a draft regulation that will ensure that these phenomena are dealt with objectively and impartially so that all citizens are treated equally , wherever they may live , be it in the mid-Atlantic or at the centre of Europe .
This must be done , furthermore , in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity and bearing in mind the spirit that has been demonstrated in this House ; the spirit that European solidarity is being built right now , in these times , which are extremely difficult for us all .
Mr President , it has been a quiet but stirring debate .
I am thinking of the eye-witness reports we have heard and also of the many expressions of sympathy and willingness to offer prompt assistance .
I think it can be concluded that Parliament , the Commission and the Council are united in wanting to help the hundreds of thousands of people affected , and not only help them but help them quickly .
We are looking forward to the Commission 's presenting practical proposals .
We think the Commission has acted well in this respect .
The Presidency should do everything to ensure that the Council deals with the matter promptly and , judging by what I have now heard , I am certain that matters can also proceed very quickly here in Parliament .
It is important to act speedily . As one MEP said , aid is twice as valuable when it is offered promptly .
I am convinced that , both in the short and longer term , we can establish an effective tool for helping all the people affected .
As I said in my introductory speech , the Foreign Ministers have given their support this weekend to our establishing a tool of this kind .
Our task now is one of reconstruction following the extensive damage but , as many MEPs have mentioned , we must not forget the work of prevention either , for the damage could have been less serious if we had been more far-sighted in the way in which we had dealt with European rivers .
A friend in need is a friend indeed , says an old proverb to be found in many languages .
I think it important that the solidarity of which today 's debate has been an expression should also extend beyond the existing or present Member States to include the candidate countries which would , in that way , be given a signal that they too were being considered in the context of what we were working on .
It is that spirit of community and solidarity with the new Member States which , later in the year too , we shall be using to carry through one of the most important decisions in the history of Europe .
Thank you Minister .
I want to thank all colleagues who have participated in the debate .
The tone of the debate and its content very much speaks for itself .
Owing to the different executive responsibilities of our colleagues in the Commission , it is important that we should profit from their presence at the end of this debate by inviting each of the Commissioners to make a short statement pertaining to the college in general and , specifically , to their own portfolios .
Mr President , honourable Members , fellow members of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I too should like to thank you all for your speeches and for the tone of this debate .
I think this really was one of the European Parliament 's finest hours .
I have no wish to speak at length ; I merely wish to answer the questions addressed directly to me .
The main question here is , how will the measures decided for farming now be implemented ?
The first measure decided was to use set-aside areas .
This measure is up and running .
These areas can already be used in the regions in question .
The second measure decided was to provide grain for fodder from intervention stocks in Austria .
This measure is also up and running .
Applications are already being received from the Austrian authorities .
The third and most comprehensive measure is to give priority to advance payments of 50 % of the area premiums in the current budgetary year .
Mr Goepel asked what the state of play is here .
The decision has been taken and will be processed , the money will be allocated using the normal allocation procedures used for premiums .
This is the quickest method .
In other words , the sums in question are released by the executive in each Member State .
May I add that this has since been somewhat extended and that these advance payments already total over EUR 900 million .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , honourable Members , I think that once again today 's debate has sent out a clear signal , a clear signal of solidarity and a clear signal that the European institutions are working very well together and are being supportive of each other in this situation .
I think this too is highly significant .
The Commission decided what help it could give in its executive capacity , what measures we could take directly , at its special meeting after the summer recess .
There is financial aid for farmers , pre-accession aid and , most importantly of course , the Structural Funds .
But we can also offer greater flexibility .
On this point , I should like to stress that we decided , as far as tendering rules are concerned , to allow maximum flexibility in the regions affected , so that swift action can be taken .
My colleague , Mr Monti , has made it perfectly clear that no objections under aid regulations will be filed against national aid to compensate up to 100 % of the damage sustained by businesses and that this aid may even include loss of earnings or orders .
I think this is a very important signal to the businesses affected in these areas .
As regards the question of setting up a fund to provide direct aid in the event of natural disasters , I am most grateful for the huge consensus in the House , a consensus which cuts across the party political divide and is in step with the Council .
As you know , we have had no such instrument , no aid fund for natural disasters in the past .
We need to set this fund up first .
That means we need agreement and a special contract between Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
The Commission will be tabling a proposal on this in the next few weeks .
We shall then have to create the corresponding legal basis , so that money from the fund can be disbursed .
I have a direct request to make of the European Parliament and the Council here : please remember the devil is in the detail when you formulate this legal basis ; bear in mind that we want to get the money to the regions affected quickly .
We should give the regions affected a lump sum in aid and , instead of waiting for projects to be specifically formulated , we should declare the aid as such for the region .
It would appear from the debate that the whole House agrees that we shall need aid of at least EUR 500 million to 1 000 million per annum .
We need to come to an agreement with the Council here , because the fund will obviously have to be financed by the Member States , even if we want to provide aid this year without calling up new funds .
However , we should also make it clear that aid from us is subsidiary aid . It is solidarity aid on the part of the European Union and we should not raise false hopes .
I also understood from today 's debate that the House agrees that the decisions in question , the regulations in question need to be passed post haste .
This being so , we shall have to set ourselves an ambitious timetable so that the decisions needed to set up this emergency aid fund can be taken by the end of October .
Thank you for your support .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , honourable Members , I should like to pick up on just one thought that has run through the whole of this debate , namely the fact that , in the midst of such awful disaster , comforting moments occur , especially when humanity suddenly shows its face where it was least expected .
I am delighted that we have been able to show the human face of European politics .
That applies not just to the disaster areas in Germany and Austria .
I can assure you that it was highly prized in the Czech Republic .
The speed with which we acted and the fact that we took it for granted that action was needed have left behind a far deeper impression than much we have done for the Czech Republic over recent years .
To know that , in your hour of need , you are in the same boat as your neighbour and to see help given in a spirit of solidarity has answered the question raised by a lot of people in this country : why exactly do we want Europe and do we need it ?
I am very grateful to the European Parliament that , like the Commission and the Council , it has not wasted time worrying about distinctions between Member States and future Member States when it comes to aid from the new emergency reserve .
We can choose our contracting partners , but we cannot choose our neighbours .
If it rains cats and dogs in Austria and Saxony and in the Czech Republic , which is in between the two , we cannot say we shall help Austria and we shall help Saxony , but we shall not help the Czech Republic .
And people in Prague noticed that this is the general view .
I was there on Thursday .
It seems to me - and I say this in all caution - that the flood has also washed away a number of recent political problems between the countries affected .
Mr President , as we reach the end of this debate , I would like to add a few thoughts to those of my colleagues .
It is telling that several Commissioners wanted to be present throughout this debate as we have worked together , and each of us , in their own sector , must contribute to a swift , effective response .

In particular , I would like to say to Mr Ferber and Mr Markov that we are really going to use all the margins for flexibility available to us on the cofinancing rate , invitations to tender and State aid .
What applies to the Structural Funds for EU Member States also applies to pre-accession instruments for the Czech Republic and Slovakia , as Mr Verheugen has already said .
I would reply to Mrs Krehl that we have no intention of excluding these two candidate countries from our solidarity .
Earlier , Mrs Schroeder spoke of the villages or regions bordering her home town of Dresden .
I personally will not forget the sight of the town of Wiesenstein , which profoundly affected me . This small town had only just been rebuilt and restored after the fall of the Berlin wall , and , tragically , it has now been destroyed .
We must not forget that aspect , in addition to the large towns concerned .
I would also like to respond to Mr Virrankoski , who mentioned the Fund 's methodology .
Very shortly , on 18 September , we shall present a proposal : speed , effectiveness and fairness for the distribution methods of this new Fund .
I am currently working on criteria that will make it possible to characterise a major disaster .
A major natural disaster , in my opinion , is a disaster that seriously affects a significant proportion of the population in one or more regions , in one or more States .
It is also a disaster that severely compromises the economy of that region , group of regions , State or group of States .
That is clearly the case of the floods that have recently affected many regions and four States .
It is in this spirit that we are working .
Mrs Berger has mentioned the regions that do not fall within the scope of objective 1 or objective 2 .
The point of this exceptional aid Fund that we are creating together is that it will be able to fund regions outside the objective 1 and 2 areas that have been affected or which could be affected in future .
Lastly , I would like to say to Mr Swoboda and Mrs Echerer and others who have spoken about sustainable development , as I myself did in my first speech on prevention , that there is no European competence for land use planning .
Town and country planning falls within the competence of local authorities , regions , or even the Member States .
The Commission is not claiming new competences , either now or within the scope of the Convention .
We do , however , have a responsibility .
I am consciously using this word in the same way as the expression ' political courage ' .
Our responsibility is to ensure , as in the case of the credits managed within the framework of the Structural Funds , that the credits we are going to allocate within the framework of the total appropriations under this Fund , are used in the field , pursuant to the directives on the environment , with the requirement for sustainable development and perhaps with an additional requirement from now on , concerning prevention .
This may be the case of the credits allocated within the scope of Agenda 2000-2006 .
I promise you that in the proposals I shall make on behalf of the Commission for future regional policy after 2006 , the emphasis will be placed on this obligation to take account , with regard to prevention , of the risk of natural and ecological disasters for the future programming documents in each of the regions that are to receive credits .
That is the commitment I am giving .
In conclusion , as Mr Karas said earlier , I have been struck by the tremendous dignity and high quality of this debate .
That is to be expected and basically demonstrates the action , rapid reaction and solidarity that must exist within the European Union and the neighbouring candidate countries - one big family facing their misfortune together .
Thank you Commissioner .
For the past two hours this has been a debate marked with a very particular character .
For all of the European institutions it demands the speediest and most substantial response we can deliver .
As mentioned in the debate , in times of crisis it shows that the European Union is indeed a union with a human face .
That is something perhaps more fundamental in its totality than the sum of all its individual parts .
I thank those who have contributed to the debate .
I received six motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 42 ( 5 ) .
The next item is the presentation by the Council of the 2003 draft general budget .
Minister Haarder will now speak on behalf of the Council .
I have the honour , on behalf of the Presidency of the Council , to present the 2003 draft budget of the European Communities , prepared by the Council on 22 July .
Both as Minister for European Affairs and former Member of the European Parliament , I am very pleased to note that the budget procedure for 2003 has so far been characterised by sound cooperation between the Council and the European Parliament .
In the draft budget I am about to present , account has already been taken of a series of agreements and common understandings resulting from the consultation meeting between the Council and Parliament on 19 July 2002 .
During the preparatory three-way discussion and consultation meeting in July , some single-minded work was done by the Danish Finance Minister , Thor Pedersen , Committee Chairman Terry Wynn and your fellow MEPs in the committee .
I am certain that this work has created a sound basis for the budget authority 's two branches being able to reach agreement on a satisfactory budget for 2003 .
I know that some MEPs have previously been disappointed about the fact that the European Parliament and the Council have had difficulty reaching agreement , but that has not been the case this year , which is something I am very pleased about .
I shall presently touch upon a number of challenges which have already been debated by the European Parliament and the Council and in connection with which agreements and common understandings have been reached .
I shall then provide a general survey of the main features of the draft budget prepared by the Council on 22 July .
I should first like , however , to refer to the debate we have just had in connection with the tragic floods .
We are all agreed that this new challenge requires prompt action to be taken .
It is heartening that the individual Member States have already , on their own initiative , been contributing to the reconstruction .
At the same time , the Commission has implemented a series of initiatives , which have just been discussed , and the Council is now to debate what further measures can be implemented .
I shall now return to the results of the meeting of Parliament and the Council on 19 July .
A common understanding and agreement were reached to the effect that the administrative preparation for enlargement is a key priority which the institutions must be given the opportunity to discuss from now on and right through 2003 .
A common understanding was reached to the effect that work must be done on securing funding for the common foreign and security policy in the light of important new tasks .
A common understanding was also reached to the effect that the restructuring of the Spanish and Portuguese fishing fleets should be financed and that the growth rate for the global appropriations for payments should be kept as low as possible .
Allow me firstly to say a few words about the administrative expenditure for 2003 .
The agreement reached by the two branches of the budget authority in July is a sound one .
The Council and the European Parliament acknowledge that the institutions must prepare themselves for enlargement of the EU in 2003 .
This will involve additional administrative expenditure .
For example , there will be need for more staff and more space .
By means of the agreement entered into , we have attached importance to securing funding for the pre-enlargement measures that are necessary for the individual institutions .
At the same time , there is agreement that the ceiling for the administrative expenditure in 2003 should be retained .
The flexibility instrument must not be used .
The two branches of the budget authority have agreed that , in particular , pre-enlargement expenditure intended to be applied in 2003 may , as far as is possible , be applied as early as this year .
This will make it easier for the institutions to prepare for enlargement .
For the moment , the purpose of this frontloading exercise is to finance the publication of the Community 's body of laws in the languages of the new Member States .
In this connection , there will , among other things , be a need to adopt an additional supplementary and amending budget for 2002 .
By means of an agreement reached as early as in July , the institutions will acquire the best possible basis for planning as they prepare for enlargement .
The agreement will secure a calmer atmosphere surrounding both the European Parliament 's and the Council 's budgets for 2003 .
Moreover , it is a good thing that we are agreed about following up the opportunities for increased interinstitutional cooperation indicated by the secretaries-general of the institutions in a series or reports .
A solution has also been found to the issue of the early retirement of employees of the European Parliament 's political groups .
Both Parliament and the Council accord high priority to the EU 's participation in external actions , that is to say the common foreign and security policy .
The European Union should have adequate resources for being able at any time to carry out the tasks consequent upon our position in the international community .
As I am quite sure MEPs agree , it is a question of the EU 's credibility .
At the consultation meeting in July , the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission agreed that , when required by the circumstances , the emergency aid reserve for humanitarian aid may also be used for civil crisis management .
It was also agreed that an attempt should be made to enter into an agreement concerning the appropriations to the common foreign and security policy .
This must happen as part of an overall agreement concerning the 2003 budget .
We must secure the appropriations to the CFSP in 2003 in the light of new and essential tasks .
We also concur about seeking an agreement concerning how best to involve Parliament in CFSP arrangements within the framework of the Treaty .
It is heartening that such good results have already been achieved in this field .
In its draft budget , the Commission has set aside an amount of EUR 40 million to the CFSP .
In this way , preparation has been made for taking over the policing mission in Bosnia-Herzegovina .
The Council welcomes this appropriation but believes that the overall appropriations are inadequate .
The Council therefore proposes a total appropriation for the common foreign and security policy of EUR 47.5 million for 2003 .
Above and beyond the policing mission in Bosnia-Herzegovina , the Council foresees , for example , measures involving specialist assistance to third countries in the fight against terrorism .
Moreover , there is a need for more appropriations for non-proliferation and disarmament measures .
I hope we can reach agreement on something corresponding to the Council 's proposal .
I shall touch briefly upon the Commission 's proposal to use the flexibility instrument for providing funding to the tune of EUR 27 million for restructuring the Spanish and Portuguese fishing fleets .
In this area , both the European Parliament and the Council have undertaken to find a solution before the close of the budget procedure .
In the Council 's view , the flexibility instrument should only be used in extraordinary circumstances .
On the issue of providing EUR 27 million by way of funding , the Council believes that all possible methods of funding should be investigated before consideration is given to the Commission 's proposal to use the flexibility instrument for this purpose .
Finally , a couple of words about the growth rate for the global appropriations for payments .
In this connection , I am pleased that Parliament agrees about the need to exercise budget discipline and sound financial management .
During the consultation in July , Parliament declared that the growth rate for the global appropriations for payments should be kept as low as possible .
At the same time , account must be taken of the Council 's first reading of the 2003 budget .
As politicians , all of us in this Assembly are well aware that significant refunds to the Member States of unused EU funds present the public with a poor picture of the EU .
We must show the surrounding world that we are in a position to engage in realistic budgeting .
The Council would like to request the Commission to state the anticipated surplus for 2002 so that this can be factored into the 2003 budget via a letter of amendment .
Allow me to go on to mention a number of key features of the Council 's draft budget .
The global appropriations for commitments amount to EUR 99 548 million , which constitutes an increase of scarcely 0.9 % on the 2002 figure .
Special account has been taken of the possibility of the appropriations in actual fact having been used up .
The global appropriations for payments amount to EUR 96 992 million , which constitutes an increase of 1.4 % on the 2002 figure .
This low growth rate must be seen in the light of the limited use of appropriations for payments in preceding years .
The first reading of the 2003 draft budget took place :
with due account being taken of the interinstitutional agreement of 6 May 1999 on budgetary discipline and improvement of the budgetary procedure
within the framework of the Council 's conclusions of 5 March 2002 concerning the budgetary guidelines for 2003 , and
with account being taken of the conclusions from the consultation meeting of 19 July 2002 between Parliament and the Council .
Particular care was taken
to maintain the annual expenditure ceilings established in the financial perspectives for 2000-2006
if possible , to leave adequate margins below the ceilings for the various areas of expenditure , except in the case of the categories relating to Structural Funds and pre-accession aid , in which the ceilings include expenditure targets
to set adequate funds aside for the EU 's various priorities .
I should like to emphasise a couple of the main points in the Council draft budget within the various areas of expenditure .
With regard to agriculture , the Council proposes an adjustment downwards of EUR 288 million .
Experience has shown that the appropriations for the common agricultural policy have often been set too high .
The Commission is now being given the opportunity to re-evaluate its estimate in connection with the autumn letter of amendment .
Due account can be taken in this context of the latest information concerning , for example , market conditions and the changing rate of exchange of the dollar .
In this connection , the Council joins with Parliament in noting that the Commission will also look more closely into whether the amount it has proposed for eradicating animal diseases is adequate .
When it comes to the appropriations for the development of rural districts , the Council has accepted the Commission 's preliminary draft budget .
Where structural arrangements are concerned , the appropriations for commitments have been fully charged to the budget .
This has happened in accordance with the conclusions from the European Council meeting in March 1999 in Berlin .
The Council has accepted the Commission 's proposals almost in their entirety .
There has nonetheless been a downwards adjustment of EUR 525 million in the appropriations to the Structural Funds in the light of previous years ' underutilisation of the appropriations .
Where the internal policies are concerned , the Council has accepted the amounts about which agreement was reached in connection with already adopted multiannual programmes .
In the case of programmes under discussion , the Council has adjusted the appropriations so that they reflect the Council 's common position or the result of the discussions in the Council .
These downward adjustments do not affect projects in connection with regions bordering on the candidate countries .
Allow me also just to mention that the Council has slightly increased the appropriations for funding the special Olympic Games in Europe in 2003 .
A margin of EUR 122 million has been left under the ceiling for expenditure area 3 , enabling the European Parliament to fund various priorities , at the same time as making it possible to cover future needs .
Where expenditure area 4 - external policies - is concerned , the Council has accepted the appropriations in the Commission 's draft budget almost in their entirety .
It is important , for example , to finance the efforts in Afghanistan .
Under expenditure area 4 , the Council has agreed to accept the appropriations to international fisheries agreements proposed by the Commission .
I have already mentioned the Council decision concerning the budget for the CFSP .
A margin of EUR 80 million under the ceiling for expenditure area 4 has been left , enabling the European Parliament to fund various priorities , at the same time as making it possible also to cover future needs .
I have already mentioned the administrative expenditure under category 5 .
I shall conclude my report on the various expenditure areas with expenditure area 7 , relating to pre-accession aid .
The Council draft budget makes no changes to the Commission 's proposals concerning the appropriations for commitments .
The appropriations for payments have , however , been adjusted downwards by EUR 300 million .
This must be seen in the light of the preceding years ' underutilisation of the appropriations .
All in all , I am pleased to be able to state that the Council draft budget for 2003 contains sufficient funds to cover the EU 's various priorities , as well as taking account of the agreements and common understandings we reached at the first consultation meeting in July .
You all know that this budget procedure is only just beginning and that there is still a way to go before the final adoption of the 2003 budget .
The prior conditions are present for our being able to obtain a satisfactory budget by the end of the year .
The draft budget prepared by the Council offers a sound basis for this .
The agreements and common understandings we reached at the meeting on 19 July are a positive sign that we have the will to reach agreement .
In conclusion , I would point out that I am certain that all three institutions present here today will do their best to contribute to a careful prioritisation so that the challenges of next year can be met .
I am also certain that we shall not forget that , in the last analysis , the EU budget is funded by the citizens of Europe .
That is why budgeting must be realistic and responsible - for next year too .
Thank you , Minister .
It is always interesting to hear a former Member of this House speaking as a minister .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , honourable Members . The previous debate on aid in the event of natural disasters clearly demonstrated what people 's expectations of the European budget are .
But if we look at the real national quotas , i.e. the ratio between the European budget and the European national product , then the picture looks slightly different .
It is almost the reverse , because the national quotas account for just over one per cent .
The Commission proposed 1.03 % of the European national product for the 2003 budget .
The Council cut this back slightly .
According to the financial perspective , i.e. the financial forecasts we have all agreed on , it should in fact be 1.08 % .
I think this should in fact be taken as a guideline , even though I am in favour of keeping certain reserves back for contingencies , just to be on the safe side .
The Council has now made across-the-board reductions , for example in the agricultural sector , but has disregarded the fact that we need to revalue in order to take account of the current value of the dollar .
But we are agreed that a new presentation of the necessary agricultural expenditure needs to be made in the autumn .
The Council has accepted a great many of the Commission 's estimates for the draft 2003 budget .
We welcome that .
We also generally welcome the fact that a consensus has been reached in the foreign policy area and that the so-called emergency reserve can also be used to fund civil crisis management .
I think that this should give us more chance to react quickly to crises and that this is an important step on the road towards a clear , efficient common foreign and security policy .
However , I must also seriously criticise the outcome of the Council reading .
For example , the question of how funds to restructure the fisheries fleet in Spain and Portugal or measures needed to support sustainable fisheries reforms shall be financed has still not been answered .
This question was broached but then put on the back burner .
And the Council has reduced funds to cofinance the trans-European transport and energy network by 15 million .
Member States already have high hopes in precisely this sector , which will now be discussed in connection with natural disasters .
I think this reduction should also be reversed .
I must also heavily criticise the Council decision on personnel expenditure , i.e. its approach to the personnel costs of the individual institutions .
The financial perspective allowed a 3.6 % increase for all the institutions .
And yet the Council has awarded itself a much higher increase .
Taking personnel costs alone , the Council has awarded itself a twofold increase .
And if you add in all the Council 's administrative expenditure , the Council has awarded itself an 11 % increase .
I must state quite clearly here , to paraphrase the words used with such gusto by the Ecofin Council , the Council of Finance Ministers , on another occasion : this Council decision on its own administrative resources does not fit into the budgetary landscape .
It has helped itself , at the cost of others , to be precise at the cost of the Commission , where the Council has suggested swingeing cuts .
Obviously , the Commission 's administrative expenses for the year 2003 will be very high , because this is the year we shall be preparing for the biggest enlargement in the history of the European Union and the Commission will need to start preparations in 2003 so that we can control new members right from the start .
For example , we shall need to control how environmental laws are being transposed , if competition rules are being complied with , what the situation is in the food law sector or the veterinary sector and whether European Union legislation is also being implemented .
These are just some examples of the Commission 's work .
Obviously , there is no point in starting to negotiate structural assistance or agricultural aid programmes with new members once they have already joined .
Preparations need to start now and that takes staff .
The Council has allowed itself 236 new posts in order to prepare for enlargement .
By contrast , it has questioned and reduced the funding of current posts at the Commission .
Parliament drafted a model here which was then enshrined in an agreement .
This model requires efforts to be made to frontload certain administrative expenses in 2002 , so as to have funds available for Commission staff costs in order to prepare for enlargement .
That only works , however , if all the institutions consider the model binding .
I must therefore insist on the Commission 's behalf that we take stock in October in order to ascertain whether this frontloading model is working or , if it is not , whether new decisions need to be taken .
Enlargement needs to be prepared so that it works right from the start .
The Commission is counting on the European Parliament , it is confident that the European Parliament will not state that it is satisfied with the resolution passed in July alone and will check to ensure the Council is also making an effort to implement this frontloading model .
I repeat , the Commission needs personnel resources in order to prepare for enlargement .
Otherwise we cannot guarantee that the work needed to make a success of enlargement will be carried out from the start .
Thank you for your attention .

Mr President , I welcome Mr Haarder and it is good to see him again in his new role .
He knows he is always welcome in this House .
Please send our regards to Mr Pedersen ; it was good working with him .
I do not want to go into detail on many of the issues because I will leave that to both rapporteurs , who have mentioned several items .
I would like to concentrate on one or two specific political issues .
One concerns the agreement that was reached at conciliation on Category 5 .
Whilst it left the Council very happy , we in Parliament realised that we had probably made an enemy of the Commission by agreeing to that deal .
But let me reiterate why we did so .
We were convinced that in no way , shape or form would the Council ever agree to the flexibility instrument being used for Category 5 .
Therefore we agreed to a deal that would bring benefits for Parliament and the other institutions and a sensible approach to Category 5 , not as the Commission wanted .
The things we have proposed about frontloading , the use of ramassage and so on are there to ease the pain of the Commission .
We know the Commission is going to suffer but we are trying to ease the situation slightly .
If there are problems with enlargement because of what has occurred , then the Commission needs to convince the Council , not us , of its needs regarding staffing levels , because some of us are actually convinced .
Having said that , we cannot be criticised for the help we have given the Commission in its staffing needs over the last two years .
Against the wishes of the Council , we have helped the Commission to increase its establishment plans by several hundred members of staff .
So any criticism can only apply to next year .
Please bear in mind that we have stood side by side with the Commission .
This is an attempt to make the reform a success and to ensure that the Commission has the right people to do the jobs that we expect it to do .
I say that because the deal was quite unique .
However , Mr Stenmarck and Mr Färm on our committee now have to determine what will constitute the global ramassage for this year .
That is the task of both our rapporteurs , certainly Mr Stenmarck , who will look at the other institutions to see what money there is left over in their budgets to be put into the pot to ensure that the Commission is not disadvantaged to any great extent .
We are aware that what we can find this year will be acceptable , but this leaves the problem of staffing next year , so whatever we can save for next year 's budget we will .
My other political point concerns the common foreign and security policy .
The President-in-Office mentioned it in his speech .
Let us be clear on our position .
We did not make an agreement on what the amounts are for the CFSP .
The amount in this year 's budget was EUR 30 million ; the amount in the PDB was EUR 40 million and the amount entered in the Council 's first reading is EUR 47.5 million .
We made no agreements on that and , as far as we are concerned , we stick by Article 39 of the Interinstitutional Agreement .
That figure as it stands right now should be EUR 30 million .
That is not to say that , come our second reading , the figure may well be EUR 47.5 million but , for the sake of this debate and to clarify issues , our argument is that the Council put the wrong figure in : it should be EUR 30 million .
There may be a legal interpretation as to when that disagreement was confirmed but , as far as we are concerned , it was confirmed at the conciliation meeting .
Let us not forget that there are problems in other categories also .
In Category 2 , the EUR 27 million entered for the restructuring of the fleet is not going to appear by magic .
We must be serious when we say we must find a way of solving that .
It would seem that the only way we can do so is by using the flexibility instrument .
The Council may have to have a rethink on that unless it comes forward with a better idea which we have not yet thought of .
That is all I want to say on the political aspects .
I will leave the rest to the rapporteurs .
Mr President , thank you ladies and gentlemen and , especially , a big thank-you to the Danish Presidency .
Just as Mr Wynn said , we really appreciated the constructive attitude we encountered at the July conciliation when , for the first time in many years , we in actual fact produced an agreement of genuine substance .
Why , then , did we come to this agreement where category 5 is concerned ?
Mr Wynn touched upon this .
We were subjected to strong pressure from the Member States and the Council and finally decided to agree to the flexibility instrument 's not being used .
There was one further reason , however , for we believe we must make the fullest possible use of all the available means for rationalising and prioritising what we do , moving resources about , increasing efficiency and creating modern management in the European Union too .
We must use the opportunities to the full , especially when we face so incredibly important a task as enlargement .
I nonetheless share the Commission 's view when it comes to a rather longer perspective .
It would be difficult in the long term to impose a lot of major new tasks upon the Commission without also providing the necessary resources in terms of staff and administrative resources .
This will probably become a source of conflict in the future , but I believe it was necessary this year to do things in the way we have .
How does the general budget situation look prior to the autumn budget procedure ?
Above all , we must discuss what Parliament has been calling attention to for quite a few years , namely the poor implementation in many areas .
Every year , the budget allocates major resources which are subsequently not used .
Mr Haarder drew attention to this July 's agreement to the effect that we must not increase the payments more than is necessary , and he even wants us to leave margins .
The problem , however , is that , through the commitments made in the budget , we have also decided upon a certain level of ambition to which we must try to rise .
That must also be a goal for the Member States and the Council .
The finance ministers cannot just sit and applaud when they are given back money that has not been used .
We have a political responsibility actually to realise the ambitions and implement the programmes we have decided upon in the European Union .
That is why Parliament repeatedly increases the payments .
We wish to signal that more must be done , and we must invest greater resources in order actually to fulfil the promises made .
I believe that we shall be conducting a debate along these lines in Parliament this year too .
It is not , however , certain that it is enough just to increase the payments , and we have had certain examples of its not being so .
Sometimes , increased payments do not after all lead to the Commission 's being able to use those resources .
As I have already mentioned , we must therefore discuss the Commission 's staff resources in a slightly longer term perspective .
We must also perhaps begin to discuss cutting back on our commitments .
In certain areas , where we see the Commission not at all implementing what we have demanded , we must perhaps even begin to discuss whether we should cut down on staff or , at least , hold them in reserve .
In the long run , staff resources intended for commitments of a certain level cannot be maintained when such commitments are not being met .
This problem of payments and implementation also looms very large when it comes to foreign policy and aid policy .
Year after year , we have seen how the Council has acquired more ambitions .
In 2000 , Kosovo was added to the list , and there was subsequently a slight loss of interest in fulfilling the earlier promises concerning Africa and Latin America .
In 2001 , Serbia was the new concern , whereupon there was slightly less interest in the former priorities .
New concerns for 2002 included the Global Health Fund .
This year , we are discussing Afghanistan , the Middle East and the police force for Bosnia .
In fact , we cannot add new tasks every year and simply forget the old ones .
There is a limit beyond which further resources must be provided if all our priorities are to be met .
This year , we shall have a lot of difficulty meeting our priorities where the Global Health Fund is concerned .
There are already huge cut-backs in the budget in connection with Kosovo , humanitarian aid etc .
That is unsustainable in the long term .
If new priorities are to be added each year , further resources must also be provided .
Allow me finally to say a few words about simplification .
We have studied Structural Funds and a series of different political programmes .
I have travelled around - most recently in Finland , for example - and learned that regional organisations and universities etc are giving up applying for funds from the EU budget because the process is so terribly involved .
That , I believe , is one reason why EU money is not in actual fact being spent .
It is time to take this state of affairs seriously .
Within the EU , we must sit down and go through our methods , documents and bureaucracy so that the process is made a little simpler for all those who need to use EU resources .
Mr President , I believe these are some of the most important aspects we shall be continuing to discuss in Parliament , in the Committee on Budgets and in future budget debates .
Mr President , allow me also to begin by thanking the Danish Presidency for its splendid cooperation so far .
Ever since early last winter , when we began work on the 2003 budget , my objective , as rapporteur and as a person responsible for next year 's budgets for eight of the EU institutions , has at any rate been to find a solution in which the EU 's administrative budget is balanced and in which we do not have to ask for extra money by making use of what is known as the flexibility instrument .
That has not been an easy task because we had predicted a very large deficit in this budget at the beginning of the year .
With the agreement made on 19 July by the EU 's two budget authorities - the Council and Parliament - it has nonetheless proved to be possible .
I would maintain that our having now achieved this objective is a very great success for Parliament .
We have obtained support for reforms that are necessary , especially in an enlarged EU .
The flexibility instrument must not be used for the EU 's administrative budget .
We must respect the ceiling for category 5 .
Following the conciliation , there is now a common commitment to solve the remaining problems in category 5 by means of what is known as frontloading .
Doing so is important in that a number of problems remain to be solved during the last months of the year .
I am nonetheless convinced that we shall also be able to solve them .
In this context , it would be very easy to allow one 's vision to be clouded by all the details , and the budget work is certainly extremely detailed .
Together , we have nonetheless created better basic conditions for proceeding further with the historic task of , in a few years ' time , welcoming MEPs from perhaps ten new Member States to this Parliament and to the EU 's other institutions .
As I see it , that is absolutely the most important outcome of the conciliation .
As early as the beginning of next year , these countries will be able to send observers to what will also become their own Parliament .
With the result of the agreement , we are complying not only with our commitments but also with the priorities decided upon by the Committee on Budgets and Parliament at the beginning of this year .
It is firstly a question of ensuring that the EU institutions are given the opportunity to prepare for enlargement .
Secondly , it is a question of implementing the necessary reforms .
Thirdly , the intention is that both objectives should be attained within the budgetary framework .
I want to direct my concluding comment concerning the agreement between Parliament and the Council to the Danish Presidency which , in my view , has worked in an extremely effective way and with the clearly defined objective of reaching an agreement .
The Danish Presidency has focused upon this task and been constructive and ready to compromise in a way that has made an agreement possible .
It has shown a readiness to listen that has not always been characteristic of the Council in this context .
I , and no doubt many others too , are grateful for this .
The Council has for a long time been criticised for not having always made the same demands of itself as of others .
The Council has not itself been prepared to implement the reductions forced upon others .
When the Council has cut back on jobs in other institutions , it has not cut back on jobs within the Council itself .
A rather more humble attitude may in actual fact be necessary in the future .
I hope and believe that , in this respect , the Danish Presidency has played a positive role which will have lasting effects in the future .
Thank you very much , Mr Stenmarck .
The debate is closed .
The next item is Question Time ( B5-0257 / 2002 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Commission .
Part I
Question No 35 by Francisca Sauquillo Pérez del Arco ( H-0541 / 02 ) :
Subject : Specific immigration strand for the MEDA programme
Judging from the information furnished in connection with the interview between Commissioner Patten and Prime Minister Youssoufi of Morocco on 27 June , the European Commission is in no doubt as to the scale of the problem of illegal immigration .
Does the Commission propose to devote a specific strand of the MEDA programme to immigration ?
Do any concrete projects exist in this respect ?
Are there any projects devoted to women immigrants ?
Mr President , the Commission pursues a global and balanced approach to immigration from Morocco .
Given the importance of the subject , migration is one of the five priorities of the country strategy paper covering the period 2002 to 2006 for financial cooperation with Morocco .
It is also covered by the Association Agreement between the EC and Morocco .
Our approach to migration is comprehensive .
Attention is paid both to legal and illegal migration and to the socio-economic dimension .
This comprehensive approach is also reflected in our MEDA programming .
Within this framework we will aim to help the Moroccan authorities to better organise legal migration .
A project to set up a migration centre is currently being prepared .
Morocco and the EC have also agreed to cooperate in preventing and combating illegal migration .
As a first step , a border management programme will help the Moroccan authorities to establish greater border security and to fight trafficking in human beings .
This programme , which is worth about EUR 40 million , will be committed in 2003 .
Furthermore , we are addressing the socio-economic causes of migration , in particular in the northern provinces of Morocco , which account for about 35 % of total emigration from that country .
This region also benefited from substantial MEDA funding and another EUR 70 million are programmed for socio-economic development in 2004 .
The majority of the existing projects in the northern provinces help improve the economic situation of migrant as well as non-migrant women , in particular through basic education for girls in rural areas , maternal and child health services , promotion of productive activities for women and provision of basic infrastructures .
In addition to MEDA , the Commission is financing projects under the budget line ' cooperation with third countries in the area of migration ' .
EUR 3.3 million have been committed for projects in Morocco , in particular in the areas of co-development , intergovernmental migration dialogue and the fight against illegal immigration .
Mr President , I simply wish to thank the Commissioner for the information he has given me and say to him that - in terms of the co-development he has mentioned , which could resolve the problem of immigration - I will be closely monitoring all these projects and programmes he has proposed throughout north Africa , including the north of Morocco , which I believe to be very important if we are to prevent emigration .
I should like to make three brief points in response to that .
Firstly , it is manifestly the case that one of the best ways of preventing illegal migration is by promoting economic and social development .
I have no doubt about that .
Secondly , Morocco and other countries face real problems , given that they are themselves the targets of illegal migration from the south and often find themselves the route through which illegal migrants pass on the way to Europe .
We must help them deal with that problem .
Thirdly , obviously it would help Morocco if we were to be able to move from informal discussions to formal negotiations about a readmission agreement . We recognise that Morocco has some concerns , which we hope can be satisfied , so that we can move on to that sort of formal agreement as soon as reasonable .
We sympathise with the problems that Morocco has to face ; we want to help Morocco deal with those economic and social problems , and we support the efforts it has made , not least in the area of gender .
Question No 36 by Emilia Franziska Müller ( H-0570 / 02 ) :
Subject : Relaxation of the ban on using meat-and-bone meal in animal feedstuffs
What does the Commission intend to do to ensure that any remaining stocks of meat-and-bone meal do not re-enter the animal feedstuffs circuit and , hence , the human food chain ?
What has the Commission done to date in order to have at its disposal at the earliest possible date validated and secure analytical procedures which could establish the presence of meat-and-bone meal in animal feedstuffs and the presence of risk material in meat-and-bone meal ?
How will the Commission ensure that , should the ban on using meat-and-bone meal in animal feedstuffs be relaxed , every possible danger to consumers from any remaining stocks of meat-and-bone meal and from risk material in meat-and-bone meal will be excluded ?
Mr President , the extended feed ban remains in force as a transitional measure until 30 June 2003 .
By that time , the feed ban should be reviewed .
The review will take into account the forthcoming animal by-products regulation , the correct practical implementation of measures to control the feed ban , evolving scientific evidence and the availability of control methods .
The Commission services are already carefully examining the potential impact of different options for revising the feed ban but it is too early to predict the outcome of that exercise .
The implementation of the feed ban in the Member States is being monitored systematically by regular inspections carried out by the Food and Veterinary Office .
The FVO reports highlight the considerable efforts made by Member States to implement the rules .
However , where any weaknesses are identified specific recommendations are made after each inspection to further improve the controls .
The Commission has on several occasions expressed its concerns about the safe transport , storage and destruction of meat-and-bone meal .
For this reason the adoption of the animal by-products regulation will be much welcomed .
It creates a legal framework for the safe disposal of meat-and-bone meal by incineration , burial or landfill .
It also lays down the rules for the safe use of meat-and-bone meal as fertiliser , in biogas production and in animal feeding .
At present , meat-and-bone meal can only be used in pet food or in feed for animals .
The new control framework created by the animal by-products regulation opens up the possibility of revising the present prohibition on the use of meat-and-bone meal .
The animal by-products regulation includes provisions on channelling and traceability which will ensure that the present stocks of meat-and-bone meal cannot fraudulently be reintroduced into the feed chain .
Specified risk materials must already be marked as soon as they are removed from the carcasses , stored separately and finally destroyed .
The Commission is co-financing a research programme with two main objectives : firstly , harmonisation of the feed ban controlled by classical microscopy as well as improving its efficiency and secondly the development and validation of new methods based on alternative techniques .
The Commission is following the results of this research programme as well as private initiatives in this field closely and will take the results into account when reviewing the feed ban .
Whatever the outcome of the revision of the feed ban may be , I can assure you that the Commission will not reauthorise the use of meat-and-bone meal in animal feed unless every possible risk to consumers and animals can be excluded and the provisions can be controlled properly .
Mr President , Commissioner Byrne , your main argument for relaxing the feed ban is the cost of disposing of animal by-products .
Now that is more of an economic argument or an environmental protection argument .
To hear this argument from you , the Commissioner for consumer protection , comes to me as something of a shock .
Should we not be setting the cost of disposing of animal by-products against what it will cost European farmers if there is a renewed outbreak of BSE in their herds or - worse still - if people start falling ill ?
If you could answer me that , I would be most grateful .
I still take the view that we need a total feed ban on meat and bonemeal at least until we can determine how infectious the prions responsible for the outbreak of BSE are and until we can define different types of bonemeal for each type of animal .
Only then will we be sure that the bonemeal in poultry feed , for example , does not come from poultry .
It is important that I make it absolutely clear that the primary consideration in the imposition of the ban on meat-and-bone meal is public health .
It is also the protection of animals , but essentially the scientific evidence available to us shows that the transmission of BSE disease to animals is through the consumption of meat-and-bone meal .
Ultimately that would put at risk humans eating the meat .
That is why we put legislation in place to remove this specified risk material from the food chain .
So there are two blocks .
The first is the question of meat-and-bone meal .
As I said , the fundamental consideration in putting in place the ban on meat-and-bone meal is public health and the protection of animals .
However , as you probably know , this is a controversial issue .
Some MEPs and others take the view that the ban is too extensive and should be revised .
I do not agree , because I believe that it is by no means clear from the tests undertaken and the research done at the instigation of the Commission in Member States , particularly the work being undertaken by the Food and Veterinary Office , that the controls in place in respect of meat-and-bone meal are sufficiently secure .
The need for these controls arises in circumstances where there might be a relaxation of the ban on meat-and-bone meal , but not for feeding to ruminants .
There can never be a relaxation of the ban on meat-and-bone meal for ruminants .
It might be relaxed for pigs and poultry , which cannot contract BSE and therefore the consumption of meat-and-bone meal is not a danger to them .
The problem is that if the rule on the feeding meat-and-bone meal to poultry , for instance , is relaxed , there is a risk that meat-and-bone meal intended to be fed to poultry or pigs might ultimately reach ruminants , creating the very danger that we are trying to obviate .
Therefore I do not see the ban on meat-and-bone meal being relaxed in the short term .
However , this can be reviewed in the context of the TSE regulation , in particular Chapter 4 , where an amendment can be made by comitology .
I indicated to Parliament when discussing the TSE regulation on a previous occasion that , although this amendment can take place by comitology , I have given an undertaking that I will come back to Parliament and , even though it is not strictly required under the legislation , discuss with Parliament what is the best way forward .
I want to make it absolutely clear to Mrs Müller that cost is not the consideration .
I am sorry if you have been led to that conclusion because I have not made myself clear .
The primary considerations are the protection of animals and public health and the ban can never be relaxed for the purposes I have identified unless we can be absolutely sure that the controls in place in Member States do not create the risk instead of obviating it .
Question No 37 by David Robert Bowe ( H-0583 / 02 ) :
Subject : Crohn 's Disease
As the number of incidents of Crohn 's disease increases , does the Commission support a recommendation that all pasteurised milk products in the Union require a minimum of 25 seconds of pasteurisation in order to decrease the risks of bacterium MAP which is thought to be a triggering factor for Crohn 's disease ? And if the Commission does not support this recommendation , why not ?
The current EC legislation lays down a minimum of 71.7 degrees centigrade for 15 seconds for the pasteurisation of drinking milk and / or pasteurised milk products .
This combination is known to be effective for foot-and-mouth disease and other known animal health , public health and zoonosis risks .
However , Directive 92 / 46 / EEC allows any equivalent pasteurisation time / temperature combination , provided it offers the same level of food safety .
The issue of possible links between Crohn 's disease and paratuberculosis was reviewed by the Scientific Committee of Animal Health and Animal Welfare in its report adopted on 21 March 2000 .
It concluded that insufficient data were available to determine epidemiological links between both diseases and no specific time / temperature combination for pasteurisation of milk which would inactivate the agent of paratuberculosis was recommended .
The scientific data available to the Commission indicate that no precise time / temperature treatment has been identified which would completely destroy MAP in milk .
In addition , the Commission has funded a project , SACROHN - improvement of prevention , diagnosis and treatment of sarcoidosis and Crohn 's disease , which commenced on 1 October 2000 .
The total cost of the project is EUR 3 million .
The Community contribution is EUR 1 639 151 .
The project duration is 36 months .
It is funded by the Life Quality Control of Infectious Diseases programme .
No concrete results are available from that source to confirm any link between MAP and Crohn 's disease .
However the consortium is heavily involved in developing new detection methods based on new molecular technologies and culture techniques .
Such technologies are being used by the research consortia to facilitate the detection of MAP in milk and intestinal biopsies of Crohn 's disease patients .
Efforts are also focused on using molecular typing techniques to establish any possible links between ruminant sources of MAP and the aetiology of Crohn 's disease .
The project continues until October 2003 .
Results will be made available at regular intervals .
More information can be found on the website .
In the event of new scientific data coming to light , the Commission would of course be prepared to take any necessary measures in response .
I should like to thank Mr Byrne for his very comprehensive and thoughtful reply .
This is an important issue , which is affecting more and more people .
It is a chronic health issue and has considerable effects on the quality of life of those who acquire this disease .
There is increasing evidence - though I agree , for the moment at least , with Commissioner Byrne that it is not conclusive - that there is a link between the presence of these bacteria in pasteurised milk and the incidence of Crohn 's disease .
I would ask the Commission to consider all the evidence , when the studies are completed , and perhaps hold a seminar or a wider discussion on what measures might be taken , as this is a disease which is increasingly of concern and it is spreading .
The most obvious step would be for the Commission to extend the period of pasteurisation from 15 seconds at the appropriate temperature to 25 seconds .
This may be the most simple and effective method .
I wonder whether the Commission would agree that those steps might be taken at the end of the studies ?
I am sure Mr Bowe will remember that previous discussions on these issues always centred around the need to have sound scientific evidence to enable us to justify decisions that are taken here and , in particular , to justify legislation requiring compliance .
As I have indicated in my previous statement , the project that is being undertaken at the moment will continue until 2003 .
It is quite clear from this that the issue is being kept under review and scientific evaluation is continuing .
Ultimately a report will be published and then will be the time to consider what further action can be taken .
The issue that Mr Bowe puts his finger on - the question of temperature - will obviously be seriously considered , but we should await the scientists ' advice .
However , it will be possible to look at the matter again at that time .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
We are now going to start the second part of this Question Time .
You know that we dedicate twenty minutes to each Commissioner .
The more we speak on each question , the fewer questions can be put and the fewer answers given .
There is a very well established relationship here .
Part two
Questions to Mr Bolkestein
Question No 38 by Bart Staes ( H-0525 / 02 ) :
Subject : Refinement of the rules governing motor-vehicle insurance in the internal market
In early June , Commissioner Bolkestein presented a proposal for a directive designed to refine the four existing directives relating to motor-vehicle insurance .
As a result of the previous directives , and in response to repeated calls from the Commissioner with special responsibility for the internal market , what is known as the ' bonus-malus ' system was abolished in Belgium .
That also spelt the end of the agreements on premiums concluded among the various Belgian insurers .
The possibility of being able freely to determine premiums undoubtedly constitutes good news for good drivers .
On the other hand , this will also increase rather than decrease the serious tensions caused by fragmentation .
The result thereof is the likelihood that we shall find more and more uninsured vehicles on our roads .
Will the Commission take into account that adverse effect during the further stages in the drafting of this proposal for a directive , or will it conversely authorise the Member States to take whatever steps they deem necessary to prevent any undesirable effects on premiums caused by fragmentation ?
As the honourable Member is aware , the principle of contract freedom applies to companies offering financial services .
In the field of insurance , the Third Non-life Insurance Directive put an end to the system of prior or systematic government approval of tariffs and pricing policy .
Compulsory no-claims bonus systems violate the principle enshrined in the directives .
I believe that free trade in insurance products is in the interests of the vast majority of motorists , as this allows them to choose insurance companies that reward good drivers with lower premiums .
Turning to the question raised by the honourable Member in connection with the possible increase in the number of uninsured vehicles , I should like to draw your attention to Article 3 , Paragraph 1 of the First Motor Insurance Directive .
That article states that all motor vehicles in the Community are required to have statutory liability insurance .
It is up to the national authorities to ensure that this obligation is respected .
The Commission 's recent proposal for a Fifth Motor Insurance Directive , to which the honourable Member refers , does not alter this provision .
This new proposal , the Fifth Directive , does not infringe the fundamental principle of tariff freedom .
Its main purpose is to revise the four existing directives on motor insurance .
The main objectives are to update and improve the framework of compulsory insurance to protect the victims of car accidents , to plug gaps and to clarify some of the provisions in the directives .
The Commission is doing everything it can to improve the efficiency of the internal market for insurance .
Its plans are set out in the Plan of Action for Financial Services .
The Commission is convinced that greater competition will lead to lower prices and a wider choice of products for the consumer .
Thank you Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , and thank you for answering at such length and in such excellent Dutch .
We are not always used to hearing you speak like that in this Chamber , so thank you once again .
You correctly stated that the Commission was aiming to abolish the Belgian no-claims bonus system and move towards a free tariff structure .
I have recently spoken to some representatives of insurance companies , who agreed that the new free tariff system could be beneficial to good drivers .
But they make the point : what about those who are more clumsy ?
What about young people who are often persuaded to take out high premiums ?
The insurance industry is convinced that the new regulations will increase the general level of premiums , and that accident-prone drivers in particular will want to slip out of the system , leading to a rise in the number of uninsured drivers .
I should therefore like to take this opportunity to ask the Commissioner once again , in the light of his proposals and current legislation , what the Commission can do to prevent insurance tariffs rising too high , excessive discrepancies in pricing and accident-prone drivers being squeezed out of the system .
What might the Commission be able to do ?
Is the Commission considering introducing a system based on ranges around a mean , where for instance the standard rate would be 100 , with good drivers paying 50 and bad drivers no more than 150 ?
Can the Commissioner give me an answer on this point ?
Mr President , I should like to start by thanking Mr Staes for complimenting me on the quality of my Dutch .
It would indeed be strange , Mr President , if I could not speak my own language well .
Secondly , I should like to make the point that the very function of competition is to ensure that prices are as keen as possible .
On the one hand this rewards good drivers in the form of low premiums , which Mr Staes seems to welcome , while on the other hand it makes bad drivers pay for their own errors .
No one other than the person who causes damage should have to pay for it .
Then competition between individual insurance companies should ensure that the rates everyone pays are in line with the insurance products market , and this has nothing at all to do with the Commission .
If the Commission were to do as Mr Staes requests , it would eventually encroach on the powers and responsibilities of the private sector , which it not at all its proper role .
Question No 39 by Michl Ebner ( H-0549 / 02 ) :
Subject : Derogations from the rules on competition for pilot projects
The operating concession for the A22 Brenner motorway between Modena and the Brenner Pass has not yet been granted by the Italian authorities , apparently because of reservations expressed by the Commission .
If , instead of concentrating on the measures generally required to combat distortion of competition , the Commission - and , in particular , the Commissioner with special responsibility for competition issues - were to study this matter in greater depth , it would become clear that a pilot project is involved here and not the normal granting of an operating concession .
Is it not therefore imaginable , and would it not be in the EU 's best interests in a sensitive area , for a pilot project , which would be limited in time to the duration of the operating concession and whereby some of the revenue generated from motorway tolls would be used for the upgrading of the railway line , to be promoted and supported rather than hampered on the grounds that it might distort competition ?
Mr President , the fact that this is a pilot project , as was rightly said , does not prevent the general rules on concessions from applying .
Indeed , the doubts which my services and I raised on the subject of the aforementioned project concern exclusively the extension up to 2035 of the motorway concession for the Brenner in the absence of any competition .
The Italian authorities themselves have recently taken a similar position while committing themselves to proposing solutions which could at the same time meet the requirements for development of the project and the need to comply with Community law .
With the aim of not disrupting the implementation of this project , the competent authorities and my services are in close contact in order to find an appropriate solution .
Mr President , Commissioner , this pilot project affects three countries , Germany , Austria and Italy and operates in a sensitive zone through the ancient Hauptkamm , where the Brenner motorway operators on the south side of the Brenner pass and now the equivalent organisation on the north side of the Brenner pass want to use the road to subsidise the railways , so as to prevent ecological damage and set up a pilot project .
But the project needs to run until 2035 . 2005 is not long enough , i.e. the Italian concession needs to be extended by thirty years .
The Italian Government sent a message of support through Minister Buttiglione , until recently a Member of this House , and it is to be hoped that this pilot project , which could set an example and which your colleague , the Commissioner for transport , thinks is a positive move , will be seen as such and an exception will be granted .
Though I have heard you make positive points I have not heard you say you are in complete agreement .
Could you perhaps comment on that ?
I have discussed this matter on various occasions with Minister Buttiglione and also with some Members of this Parliament .
May I add that this concerns an extension for quite a long time - about 33 years - and thus this project falls under the rules of public procurement and thus competition must play a role in the award of the contracts .
After all , competition means that prices will be lower than would otherwise have been the case and also that advantages will accrue to , I assume , the Italian public or at least the Italian State and therefore indirectly to the Italian public .
Therefore we should all be in favour of more competition in the award of such immense contracts .
The fact that there is a possible cross-subsidisation in favour of rail transport is an aspect which is perfectly defensible .
Therefore , when the terms of the contract that is to be awarded are framed and formulated , that condition will have to be included in the contract to be awarded .
Anybody who wants to obtain that contract will have to satisfy that condition .
There is nothing wrong with that .
The Commission firmly believes that public contracts must be awarded subject to the rules on public procurements and they basically amount to the fact that competition must be allowed .
Otherwise we open the door again to awarding contracts in an underhanded fashion and it will be the public who will suffer .
I am sure no one in this House wants that and , therefore , the Commission is right to follow this line .
Mr President , Commissioner , honourable Members , I agree with the Commissioner ; obviously , the routes across the Alps are in competition with one another .
But , as we all know , these routes are in a highly sensitive zone .
If one motorway company has saved money over a number of years in order to be able to offer a better solution , then my question is , why can we not leave it to the motorway companies to decide if they wish to offer technical alternatives in order to improve traffic across the Alps ?
I would be interested to know what you think about this and whether we should leave it to the companies involved to decide the technical alternatives .
Mr President , the Commission does not have the knowledge to enter into the details of any public contract and moreover that is not part of the Commission 's role or responsibility .
We must leave it to the awarding authority , which it is assumed is the Italian State or part of the Italian State , perhaps provincial authorities , to formulate a contract .
The Commission 's only responsibility is to see to it that , whatever the nature of the contract , whatever it may say about , for instance , new technical solutions or cross-subsidisation , competition is allowed and other economic actors have the chance to bid for the contract .
If the present contractor were allowed to continue his concession until the year 2035 , there would be no competition and that would damage the true interests of the Italian people .
Mr President , I am very pleased to inform the House that a particularly important personage , not just for Italy but for Europe as a whole , is in the public gallery : the national chairman of the Italian association of persons incapacitated or injured as a result of accidents at work , who are calling upon Europe to provide security , preventive measures and rehabilitation and to ensure that structural obstacles are removed .
This morning , we had a meeting with Mr Medina Ortega and other Members , Vice-President Podestà and President Cox .
I hope that their presence will lead us all to reflect seriously on the matter .
Mr Ferri , although I hope your point of order does not serve as a precedent for other speeches , I would reiterate your greeting on behalf of the whole of Parliament .
President .
Mr Ebner , you know that the question cannot be put again , but , since it is a point of order , I would ask you to be brief .
Mr President , I thought we were allowed two supplementary questions ?
Mr Rübig has asked one .
We are not .
Thank you .
Not even an explanation as to whether or not I am satisfied with what the Commissioner had to say ?
No , since you are asking me , I suspect that you are not entirely happy , but in any event you still have the opportunity to speak to the Commissioner in the corridor .
Fine .
Thank you , Mr President .
I am not satisfied with what the Commissioner had to say .
Question No 40 by Paul Rübig ( H-0579 / 02 ) :
Subject : Non-recognition of European standards relating to solar thermal collectors and systems
Uniform European standards for the testing of solar thermal products have been in force for about a year now .
For solar thermal collectors and systems manufactured in other countries to benefit from public solar energy subsidies in France and Spain , they must be tested for compliance with the respective national standards and verification procedures , despite their having already been certified in accordance with European standards .
The national verification procedures are not exactly in line with the European standards .
What is more , such double verification involves significant costs and bureaucratic obstacles and requires additional time .
Verification certificates issued by accredited institutes in other EU Member States are not recognised .
That makes market entry considerably more difficult , and undertakings in other EU Member States are put at a considerable competitive disadvantage vis-à-vis domestic manufacturers .
What is the Commission 's opinion of the situation outlined above , and what will it do to remedy it ?
The Commission would like to stress that solar thermal collectors and systems are not regulated at Community level .
The EN standards applying to these products are voluntary standards .
Any national regulations that require compliance with national standards and testing procedures if subsidies are to be granted must be assessed in the light of Articles 28-30 of the Treaty .
It follows from these articles , as interpreted by the Court of Justice , that the principle of mutual recognition applies not only to technical manufacturing specifications , but also to any testing procedures to which products may have been subjected in another Member State of the European Union or in a state that is a signatory to the agreement on the European Economic Area .
This principle also applies to any certificates issued for products following these testing procedures .
Here I refer to the judgment of 17 December 1981 , concerning biological products .
There is another judgment dated 28 January 1986 concerning type approval for woodworking machines .
Then there is the judgment of 11 May 1989 known as the Bouchara judgment .
The jurisprudence is consistent and clear .
This means that Member States may not needlessly require technical or chemical analyses or tests if the same analyses or tests have already been carried out in another Member State and the results are available or may be obtained on demand .
On the basis of the information which the honourable Member has provided , the Commission will launch an enquiry into this matter and , if necessary , will initiate proceedings against the states in question under Article 226 of the Treaty .
Should an infringement be established , the Commission would also examine what conclusions should be drawn in the light of Articles 87 and 88 of the Treaty .
Mr President , Commissioner , honourable Members , I think making the principle of mutual recognition our focal point in Europe sets a good example .
I thank the Commissioner for his clear analysis and for clarifying the intention of the Commission , in its capacity as Executive , to really assert itself here and help this principle gain acceptance .
During the course of harmonisation , we do of course come up against limits which people are not always willing to accept .
We have also spent a great deal of time discussing test marks issued by independent certified institutes which test products .
Is there pan-European recognition for products tested in one country ?
Are these test marks recognised as such in other countries ?
If they were , that would increase the safety of products considerably in the future .
Does the Commission have plans for any initiatives here ?
I hear that Mr Rübig is pleased with the attitude of the Commission .
That is a good thing .
Once again , the essence of this problem is mutual recognition .
The jurisprudence is completely clear and consistent .
The Commission will initiate an investigation of these cases which have been brought to its attention by Mr Rübig .
If necessary , the Commission will initiate proceedings .
Since the time allotted to questions to the Commissioner has elapsed , Questions Nos 41 and 42 will be replied to in writing .
If anybody has a point of order , they can put it .
Do you have a point of order , Mr Savary ?
Mr President , I am sorry not to be able to ask this question , as Mrs Bérès asked me to put it very directly to Commissioner Bolkestein .
With regret , however , I accept the constraints of the Rules of Procedure .
Yes , and lack of time .
The twenty minutes for the Commissioner have passed and we have no option but to move on to the questions for Mr Verheugen .
Questions to Mr Verheugen
Question No 43 by Alexandros Alavanos ( H-0537 / 02 ) :
Subject : Cyprus - expiry of the deadline for a political solution to the problem
In June 2002 the deadline that had been set for a political solution to the Cyprus problem , to be achieved by means of talks between the two Cyprus communities under the auspices of the Secretary-General of the UN , expired without producing a result , because of Turkish intransigence .
Could the Commission assess any results attained by the talks so far ?
Could it outline the next steps leading up to the accession of the Republic of Cyprus to the European Union , together with the nine other applicant countries ?
Mr President , since direct talks began on 16 January 2002 , the leaders of both communities have tabled proposals on the four core issues .
However , the parties have been unable to broker a comprehensive solution in keeping with the relevant United Nations resolutions .
As the direct talks are confidential , the Commission is unable to evaluate the results and has to rely on regular evaluations carried out by the United Nations Security Council .
The talks have reached a watershed now that the parties ' self-imposed deadline of the end of June 2002 has passed .
Accession negotiations with Cyprus are proceeding as planned .
The Commission will be tabling its regular reports on 16 October of this year .
They will contain a detailed analysis of what progress the candidate countries have made in meeting the accession criteria and will be the basis for the Commission 's recommendations on the countries which meet all the accession criteria .
These recommendations and any outstanding issues arising out of the negotiations will be examined at the European Council in Brussels at the end of October this year and accession negotiations should be concluded on the basis of these recommendations before the European Council in Copenhagen in December 2002 .
Accession agreements should be signed in the spring of 2003 and ratified by the national parliaments in the following months .
Before accession agreements are signed , the Council will decide on the accession of the candidate countries after consulting the Commission and after receiving the assent of the European Parliament , as required under Article 49 of the Treaty on European Union .
I thank the Commissioner for his reply and the stand which he has taken on this matter .
I should merely like to point out that , with the Commission reports just a few weeks away and enlargement just a few months away , this huge question mark still hangs over the Republic of Cyprus .
I would be grateful if the Commissioner could confirm to us that , while the European Union and the Commission will support every effort to find a political solution , the main stumbling block to which , as we all know , is the intransigence of the Turkish and Turkish Cypriot side , the Republic of Cyprus will not be barred from the first wave of new countries to join the European Union if no solution can be found .
I agree with the honourable Member that time is now of the essence and that it is most regrettable that no decisive progress has yet been reached on the Cyprus question .
The honourable Member is also right in stating that the European Union is doing everything in its power to help bring about a solution and it shall continue to do so in the future .
We shall endeavour to reach a solution right up to the last day .
It is very difficult to answer your question about the attitude of the Turkish Government , especially now the political climate has changed in Turkey .
I shall be speaking to the Turkish Foreign Minister this week and perhaps then I shall have a better idea as to whether we can expect a decisive and constructive attitude from the Turkish side in the time ahead .
For the moment , all I can say is that I am no more able than you to predict how Turkey will act on this question , but I should like to take this opportunity once again to make an urgent appeal to Turkey to recognise that it is the Turkish Cypriots who stand to suffer if no solution can be found to the Cyprus question .
They stand to gain the most from a political solution and the accession of Cyprus .
But they stand to lose the most if no political solution can be found .
I would say to the honourable Member that my reading of the situation is slightly different from yours .
I agree that I have said nothing new .
But that is because there is nothing new to report .
Which is something we both regret .
Responsibility for the political process , i.e. the process which should resolve the whole problem of the future , lies with the United Nations .
Neither the Council nor the Commission nor the European Parliament has any competence in this matter .
You should be very careful not to undermine the authority of the United Nations here .
Which is why it is the established policy of the European Union - and that applies to everyone , Council , Parliament and Commission - to support the efforts of the United Nations with every means at our disposal .
The most important instrument which we can give the United Nations and which we have given them is the accession process .
The fact that it has come to direct talks at all is only because Cyprus has accession prospects and because the Turkish side now understands that the European Union intends to keep to its enlargement timetable .
So I think that the best way of exerting pressure on Turkey - and believe me we shall do so - is to ensure that it knows that the enlargement timetable is non-negotiable .
Question No 44 by Konstantinos Hatzidakis ( H-0574 / 02 ) :
Subject : Cyprus and accession negotiations
What is the Commission 's view of the progress of negotiations on the accession of Cyprus , and how might the inter-community dialogue on the Cyprus issue influence them ?
My dear Sir , Cyprus is at an advanced stage of accession negotiations .
Of the 31 chapters , 28 have been provisionally closed .
No more can be done at this stage of the proceedings .
As far as discussions with the aim of finding a political settlement under the aegis of the UN Secretary-General are concerned , I have just expressed full support for this process , as has the EU on numerous occasions .
As for the question as to how the dialogue between the two ethnic groups may affect accession negotiations , the Commission 's approach is dictated by the conclusions of the European Councils in Helsinki in 1999 and in Seville in 2002 .
The Union has stated that it wishes a united island to accede .
However , it has also pointed out that a political solution is not a sine qua non to the accession of Cyprus to the Union , if the Cyprus question has not been settled by the time negotiations come to an end .
The decision will be taken by the Council , taking account of all the relevant factors .
There is still a chance that we shall achieve our objective of political solution before accession , which is why the European Council has called on the leaders of both ethnic groups to step up the talks .
If a political solution is reached , the accession agreement will reflect the agreement reached .
As the European Council in Seville recently declared , the European Union is prepared to include the terms of a comprehensive settlement to the Cyprus question in the accession agreement .
We have emphasised that we feel that Cyprus should be able to speak with one voice and that Cyprus needs to be able to apply Community law throughout the island .
If a settlement is reached and Cyprus accedes as a united country , the European Union is prepared to make a huge financial contribution towards the rapid development of the northern part of the island in the run up to accession .
Mr President , Mr Hatzidakis , you are quite right .
The Commission will table a report on 16 October containing its appraisal of whether the candidate countries with which we are currently engaged in negotiations are ready to accede .
As you know , ten countries have been named , including Cyprus , with which we hope to complete negotiations by the end of this year .
The Commission will then state on 16 October whether or not this judgment still applies .
Naturally , this will include a clear statement on Cyprus by the Commission .
Question No 45 by María Izquierdo Rojo ( H-0538 / 02 ) :
Subject : Enlargement , women and fundamentalism
With regard to the enlargement countries and with a view to averting situations where religious organisations encroach upon areas that are the competence of the public authorities , what measures will the Commission apply to prevent human rights being restricted as a result of pressure from fundamentalists and to ensure that women can exercise their rights freely ?
Mr President , as the honourable Member knows , meeting the Copenhagen political criteria is the sine qua non not just for concluding but even for starting accession negotiations , which is why no country can join the European Union unless it meets all the political criteria .
The question which you have put refers to religious organisations which you , Madam , say are usurping powers which belong to the state or that there is a danger that they will do so and that , as a result , the human rights of women in candidate countries might be restricted .
The Commission takes the view that future Member States have achieved a good level of democratic stability and that human rights , and that includes religious freedom , are respected in future Member States .
Religious freedom is guaranteed in all future Member States , meaning that religious communities do of course have the right to take part in social debate in their countries .
That is perfectly normal and it happens in every Member State .
Religious communities are part of civil society and , like every other social organisation , they are entitled to take part in social debate .
In some countries to a greater degree and in some countries to a lesser degree .
Governments , the state authorities , are required to watch very closely to ensure that social groups do not exercise powers to which they are not entitled and which , for example , might have an adverse impact on fundamental rights .
In theory , as far as equal opportunities for women are concerned , we have made considerable progress from a legislative and institutional point of view in all future Member States , but obviously more needs to be done to foster economic and social equality for women .
But that does not just apply to future Member States ; it also applies to the majority of current Member States .
We cannot say that all the deficits have already been rectified , which is why the Commission will of course continue to monitor developments closely in this area and will include an up-to-date appraisal of the situation in the report which I have already mentioned and which is due to be published in October 2002 .
Mr President , has the Commission ascertained on which issues and in which countries these invasions of the public sphere by ecclesiastical powers are taking place ?
Secondly , I would also like to ask the Commissioner whether he would be prepared to schedule information campaigns to increase awareness of the advantages and benefits of the Community acquis for women .
I have also heard references , Commissioner , to the existence in certain Parliaments of departments in which ecclesiastical powers carry out controls and monitoring of the activities of parliamentarians .
I would be grateful if this could be verified .
Mrs Izquierdo Rojo , no knowledge such as you have just described has come to the Commission 's attention .
I would therefore be most grateful if you would let me have a copy of the information which you obviously have at your disposal .
However , I must reiterate that the Commission does not consider it unacceptable interference for religious communities to join in political debate as part of civil society .
I know of no cases in which human rights are being violated as a result of action by religious communities .
If you have specific examples of this , we shall of course be glad to look into them .
As far as the information campaign is concerned , I can confirm that we are conducting such campaigns , especially on the subject of equality for women .
It is part of the communication strategy which we are implementing together with Parliament in order to make citizens in future Member States aware of all aspects of future Community law , especially human rights and the rights of individuals and groups .
Question No 46 by Jonas Sjöstedt ( H-0543 / 02 ) :
Subject : Future accession treaties for new Member States
It is possible that the Irish electorate will vote against the Treaty of Nice for a second time , which would also render the new breakdown of votes on the Council and seats in Parliament under that Treaty null and void .
Would it not then be possible for the Union to act as it did at the time of the accession of Finland , Sweden and Austria , i.e. negotiate and reach agreement with each of the applicant countries separately on seats in Parliament and votes in the Council in the treaty of accession ?
The Treaty of Nice would not then be needed as a basis for the accession of new Member States .
Is this not an appropriate procedure to use for the enlargement of the Union should the Irish people vote against the Treaty of Nice once again ?
Mr President , honourable Members , the Commission sees no point in speculating on what will happen in the hypothetical event that the Treaty of Nice is not ratified .
As you know , bringing about the ratification of the Treaty of Nice is the common aim of the European institutions , as the European Council made perfectly clear recently in Seville in June 2002 .
The Treaty needs to be ratified because , otherwise , it will be very hard to conclude the enlargement process by the planned dates .
The Commission would remind the House that the European Council in Seville in June 2002 welcomed the Irish Government 's determination to get the Treaty of Nice ratified in Ireland .
This issue was aired this weekend at the meeting of foreign ministers in Denmark , the main item on the agenda of which was enlargement .
The Member States and the Commission again agreed that we should not interfere in the opinion-forming exercise in Ireland by making statements about what we would do if the second referendum again had a ' no ' majority .
Mr President , Commissioner Verheugen , I note that I was not really given an answer to the question asked because it was of a hypothetical and speculative nature .
At the same time , it is , anyway , surely the case that those who think in political terms must always think of different possible scenarios .
We are not , moreover , concerned here with the distant future but with something that will take place quite soon and that will have a major effect on the development of Europe as a whole .
It therefore surprises me that the Commission really is not thinking rather more about alternative courses and reflecting upon what might happen if the Irish people were to vote ' no ' once again .
I am certain that the Commission must be thinking along such lines .
I also believe that this is a question of practical importance .
If the Irish people vote ' no ' , that cannot be allowed to be decisive for the whole EU .
There must be a practical solution .
In my question , I pointed out that Finland , Sweden and Austria in actual fact negotiated their way to a practical solution to the problems before these countries were Member States .
The same method could no doubt be adopted with the new candidate countries .
Might that not after all be a possibility , legally and practically ?
Mr Schmid , once again please read my lips . There is no plan B and we are expressly prohibited from engaging in this sort of deliberation .
It is perfectly straightforward . If I were to say here and now that the Commission is considering an alternative or that the Commission has an alternative , before we knew it Irish voters would be asking , what is the alternative ?
We should very much like to know what it is because then we might not need to ratify the Treaty of Nice at all .
So if we say there is an alternative , then all we are doing is making sure the Treaty will never be ratified .
And we do have a reason for insisting on the ratification of the Treaty of Nice because , not only does it contain the technical requirements for concluding enlargement negotiations in the institutional section , it also contains political requirements for concluding the enlargement process which are indispensable to a whole series of Member States .
The reason why we did not opt for the simple procedure in this enlargement round and simply write the institutional rules into the accession agreements was that most Member States felt that both institutional and political changes were needed before this very radical change in the nature and state of the European Union .
These changes are enshrined in the Treaty of Nice and I advise you to take account of them .
For a whole series of Member States , the Treaty of Nice has to be taken in its entirety .
The seemingly convenient alternative , whereby if there is no Treaty , then we simply lift out the institutional sections and write them into the enlargement agreements , is unacceptable to a whole series of Member States and , as far as I am aware , to the majority in the European Parliament .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are completely out of time for questions to Mr Verheugen .
In any event , various Members have raised supplementary questions and I am going to give the floor in chronological order .
First Mr Crowley and then Mr Seppänen .
Mrs McKenna , I am very sorry , but you are neither the first nor the second to have asked .
Do you have some special right and can you explain it to me ?
Mr President , on a point of order .
This issue relates to the Irish referendum .
I indicated that quite clearly , so it would be extremely unfair to discuss the Irish referendum and not to allow speakers to put both sides of the argument on this issue .
On this occasion it is crucial .
I must be very brief : you must realise , Mrs McKenna - and I would ask you to be reasonable , as I intend to be - that we have Rules of Procedure for Question Time , and we are allowed two supplementary questions .
This is not a debate on the Irish referendum .
If you propose a debate in plenary session we will probably have one .
They are two supplementary questions , and not for or against .
I have the Rules of Procedure in front of me and furthermore we all know them very well .
The first supplementary question is for Mr Crowley , and I do not know whether he is for or against .
I know that he asked to put a question .
If Mr Seppänen will allow you to speak in place of him , then that is another issue , but he has the right to speak .
Mr Crowley has the floor .
I just want to ask Commissioner Verheugen whether he could reaffirm what I believe he said through the interpretation : that it is absolutely necessary for enlargement to be completed under this process , that the Treaty of Nice will have to be ratified by Ireland .
A yes or no answer will do .
Yes , it is absolutely necessary for the Treaty to be ratified by all the Member States .
Since Mr Seppänen has very kindly given up the floor , Mrs McKenna has the floor .
Commissioner , I am very interested in what you said .
You said , first of all , that you should not get involved in telling people what you will do if the Irish people vote against and that , if there was an alternative , the Irish people would want to know what that alternative was .
So you are saying you would keep the Irish people in the dark and bully them into voting ' yes ' .
It is interesting to hear the Commission say that they should not get involved .
We have already had Commissioners such as Patten , Byrne and others telling the Irish people they must vote ' yes ' .
Mr Prodi said that the Treaty of Nice is not legally necessary for enlargement .
Giscard d 'Estaing said the same thing and that if the Irish people vote ' no ' other solutions will be found .
But really the strategy here is to pretend that there is no alternative and to try to force the Irish people into saying ' yes ' to something they have already said ' no ' to .
As you said yourself , you do not want to propose alternatives because you do not want the Irish people to ask what those alternatives are .
How democratic is that ?
My dear Madam , it seems to me that you are trying to draw something out of me for political reasons which is not there to be drawn .
I repeat , the Commission knows of no legal or political alternative to the Treaty of Nice .
As the time allocated to the Commissioner is at an end , Question No 47 will be answered in writing .
Questions to Commissioner Vitorino
As the author is not present , Question No 48 lapses .
Question No 49 by Manuel Medina Ortega ( H-0546 / 02 ) :
Subject : Measures to restrict illegal immigration into the Canaries
On the basis of the agreements adopted at the Seville summit , what measures does the Commission propose to restrict the massive influx of illegal immigrants into the Canary Islands .
In particular , what measures are proposed to curb this irregular form of immigration at the places of origin , in order to ensure the safety of the immigrants themselves ?
Mr President , the June European Council in Seville was particularly important to the debate on combating illegal immigration , establishing deadlines for the implementation of the most significant operational measures in this fight laid down in the global plan proposed by the Commission and adopted by the Justice and Home Affairs Council on 28 February 2002 .
Of particular importance to the Canary Islands is the recent effort made to contain illegal immigration by sea .
The Justice and Home Affairs Council asked the Commission to undertake a viability study on this matter , in order to work out how to improve monitoring of the European Union 's maritime borders .
The main objective of this study will be to provide an exhaustive analysis of the legislative and / or operational measures to adopt .
The results of the study will be available at the beginning of 2003 .
It should also be pointed out that the Community is supporting various projects in third countries , intended to combat illegal immigration .
Of particular interest to the Canary Islands is the major programme designed to assist the Moroccan authorities in better controlling their maritime borders on both the Atlantic and Mediterranean coasts .
The Community has contributed EUR 40 million of funding to this objective , to which the Moroccan authorities will add a further amount .
It should , furthermore , be mentioned that the Justice and Home Affairs Council of 13 June approved an integrated approach in this field , which means that all the relevant instruments of the European Union 's external relations structure will be used .
It has been decided to implement a series of operational measures , including systematic cooperation and joint investigation teams to fight against organised trafficking and contraband networks .
The Danish Presidency attaches particular importance to progress in the field of illegal immigration with regard to relations with third countries and to repatriation policy .
This will certainly help to speed up the implementation of future measures in this area .
Mr President , I am aware of the efforts being made by Mr Vitorino to achieve concrete measures for the control of illegal immigration throughout the European Union and especially in these outermost regions such as the Canary Islands .
The problem is that the situation is deteriorating , it is getting worse all the time , and an increasing number of immigrants are entering our regions .
And not only are they entering illegally by sea on boats , but they are also coming by air , in other words , many immigrants are coming to our region from other countries without any control whatsoever .
I have taken note of his observations .
He referred to Morocco , but he said absolutely nothing about Mauritania ; and I do not know whether the Commission is aware , for example , of the discovery of an illegal immigration network operating in Mauritania and on Spanish territory , and acting jointly .
My concern is that , while I think it is right to carry out studies , I have the impression that the Council is not currently supporting the initiatives of Commissioner Vitorino , aimed at a rapid solution to this problem .
I fully share the honourable Member 's view that the entry of illegal immigrants into European Union territory is not only taking place by sea , but also by land and via airports .
We have therefore collaborated with the Italian Government to produce a viability report on the control of European Union land and air borders .
The current study on sea borders is specific , since it complements the other one which has been produced by the Italian Government .
My hope is that , when the study phase is completed , the governments will feel that they have more support in terms of the application of concrete measures and the action plan to combat illegal immigration .
The Commission Communication on the control of external borders contains a very long list of concrete actions .
Finally , I would like to say that we are naturally prioritising the issue of Morocco , but I have taken good note of the information the honourable Member has given me on the issue of Mauritania and I am going to investigate that as well .
Question No 50 by Esko Olavi Seppänen ( H-0565 / 02 ) :
Subject : TEAM experts
At the beginning of July , the Commission adopted a large information programme which included a plan for continuing and developing the activities of the network of TEAM experts .
How were these people selected , and how much is spent per annum on their training , expenses and appearance fees ?
TEAM Europe was created by the European Commission in 1989 with the aim of providing a network of independent conference speakers whose expertise covers all fields of activity of the Union in all working languages .
Currently TEAM has about 550 members who can participate in conferences , seminars , debates and training sessions on issues relating to the European Union .
They speak in their own name and not on behalf of the Commission .
The members of TEAM Europe are selected by the representations of the Commission in each Member State on the basis of criteria that include experience , in-depth knowledge of European issues , languages , media training and availability .
They are organised in national groups .
The members of TEAM Europe are not paid by the Commission .
However , they can accept expenses from the organisers of the event in which they are participating and even some appropriate payment .
The Commission does , however , provide them with regular training sessions .
In 2002 the Commission organised three training seminars in Brussels specifically for members of TEAM Europe . There was a two-day seminar on the external relations of the European Union in which 80 TEAM members participated ; a three-and-a-half-day seminar on enlargement in which 60 TEAM members participated ; and a two-day seminar on the future of Europe , the post-Nice process and the European Convention , in which 103 TEAM members participated .
This training is provided in the Commission , using speakers and interpreters from either the Commission or the other institutions and occasionally outside speakers who do not receive payment .
Question No 51 by Bernd Posselt ( H-0588 / 02 ) :
Subject : Visa exemption for Macedonia
Has the Commission any plans to introduce a visa exemption for Macedonian citizens who wish to enter the EU , particularly since in answer to a similar question the Council has said that without a Commission proposal it is unable to take a decision on this matter , which is of such vital importance for the stabilisation of Macedonia ?
. ( PT ) Mr President , Regulation No 539 / 2001 , adopted by the Council on 15 March 2001 , includes the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia amongst third countries whose nationals must have a visa if they wish to cross the external borders of the Member States .
The introduction of a visa exemption for Macedonians would require the regulation to be amended , which only the Commission can propose , pursuant to the provisions of Article 67 ( 2 ) of the Treaty establishing the European Communities .
The criteria for the inclusion of a country on the list of third countries for whose nationals a visa is mandatory or on the list of those nationals that are exempt from visa requirements are defined in the fifth recital of Regulation No 539 / 2001 .
These are criteria covering the dimension of illegal immigration from these countries , reasons of public order and security , external relations , regional coherence and the principle of reciprocity .
These criteria are not immutable .
The extent and the persistence of certain developments with regard to one particular country or another can lead the Commission to propose that the regulation be amended .
In this field , the Commission makes an ongoing effort to detect such changes and to make a precise assessment of their relevance .
In order to undertake this task , the Commission makes use of a range of information from very diverse sources , paying particular attention to the data and statistics from the States Members that it collects from actions undertaken by certain specialised working groups in the Council .
In this context , it should be pointed out that the Seville European Council of 21 and 22 June asked the Council and the Commission , within the scope of their respective competences , to give absolute priority to certain measures in the fight against illegal immigration .
Amongst these measures is the re-evaluation , before the end of the year , of the list of third countries whose nationals are required to have a visa and of those that are exempt .
In this exercise of revising the regulation , the Commission will certainly take account of all information relevant to the situation in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , in light of the criteria laid down in recital 5 of the aforementioned Regulation .
Mr President , Commissioner , my question refers back to Question Time with the Spanish Presidency , when the Spanish Presidency told me that the Council could not address this issue because the Commission had not taken an initiative .
This may be a game of pass-the-parcel between the Council and the Commission - I have no idea - but that was what the Council told me .
Hence my question to you .
Of all the new states to come out of the former Yugoslavia , which never needed a visa , there are three countries with which the EU has association agreements , namely Slovenia , Croatia and Macedonia , of which Macedonia is the only one which has to have a visa .
Even the neighbouring states of Bulgaria and Romania do not need visas , despite massive security problems , which is why this would be an important message for this country .
They feel humiliated , being at a disadvantage to the other associated countries .
It is the only associated country which has to have a visa !
I understand Mr Posselt 's concerns perfectly .
There is , however , a difference , in that Romania and Bulgaria are both candidate countries for accession to the European Union , while Macedonia is not .
In any event , I acknowledge , on behalf of the Commission , that Macedonia has made a considerable effort to improve its external border control and the quality of its travel documents .
I even believe that Macedonia is currently adopting legislation on visas that is very similar to the legislation in force in the European Union , which is a significant and positive factor .
In order to gauge the progress made by Macedonia , however , we sent a delegation of experts last June as part of the regional CARDS programme .
The conclusions of this delegation and the report on the regulatory framework and its implementation with regard to granting visas and the control of Macedonia 's external borders will be available in October 2002 .
It is then that the Commission will assess the situation in Macedonia , in light of this report and the criteria of recital 5 .
Only then shall we be able to take a decision on our initiative to review EU legislation on visas .
This is not , therefore , a game of table tennis , but it is essential to observe procedures .
For now , I am unable to tell you what our assessment will be after receiving the report by the group of experts , which will be sent to me next month .
Question No 52 by Camilo Nogueira Román ( H-0599 / 02 ) :
Subject : Visa requirements for people entering the EU from countries which have a special relationship with the Member States of the Union
A significant proportion of the EU Member States have a special relationship and cultural ties with countries outside the Union , for example Portugal and Spain with the Latin American countries .
Many people have dual nationality , which means that this relationship forms part of their character , alongside their belonging to the Union .
How is this situation to be dealt with in view of the decision of the Council of Europe in Seville to revise the list of countries whose citizens will require a visa to enter the countries of the Union ?
How will the citizens of Latin American countries be treated as far as Spain and Portugal are concerned ?
Mr President , Mr Nogueira Román , each Member State of the European Union lays down its own conditions for granting nationality .
Any citizen holding nationality of a Member State has the right to move and settle freely throughout the territory of the Union 's Member States , under the provisions laid down in Community law .
In the case of dual nationality , citizens can invoke laws arising from citizenship of the Union .
The Commission takes the view , therefore , that the existence of cases of dual nationality in relations between Spain , Portugal and various Latin American countries is covered by existing legislation .
With regard to visa policy towards Latin America , Regulation No 539 / 2001 lays down the lists of third countries whose nationals are subject to visa requirements or who are exempt from such requirements .
Following up the conclusions of the Seville European Summit , the Commission sent a questionnaire to the Member States , in the aim of re-examining the lists of third countries annexed to the aforementioned regulation .
The Member States ' answers can provide a number of suggestions , on the basis of which the Commission will perhaps be able to present a proposal for an amendment to the regulation .
The criteria used to determine the lists are defined in the first phrase of the fifth recital of the regulation .
Determining which third countries ' nationals are subject to visa requirements and which countries ' nationals are not is undertaken by means of a detailed assessment , on a case-by-case basis , using various criteria , particularly concerning illegal immigration , public order and security and the Union 's external relations with the third countries . At the same time , account is taken of the implications for regional coherence and of the principle of reciprocity .
Any decision by the Council in this field is adopted by qualified majority , once the European Parliament has been consulted .
Mr President , Commissioner Vitorino , I cannot imagine that one day , in Spain and in Portugal , and even in the European Union , Brazil could be considered to be a third country for the Portuguese or Argentina a third country for Galicians or the Spanish .
Although many people with dual nationality live in these countries , many children and grandchildren of Portuguese , Spanish and Galician citizens are not considered to be European .
I consider , however , that this extremely close family link that exists between Portugal , Spain and Galicia and Latin America must be given very special treatment in the solutions that the Commission proposed for the visas discussed at the Seville Council .
I hope that the Commission does not forget our family in Latin America .
Thank you very much , Mr Nogueira Román , but I could not agree with you more , for all of the reasons you have given and for one more , which explains why we are speaking almost the same language .
In any event , I wish to draw your attention to the fact that the countries you have mentioned already enjoy exemption from visa requirements and that the only countries in Latin America that are subject to these requirements are Colombia and Peru .
As the time allocated to Question Time is at an end , Questions Nos 53 to 81 will be answered in writing .
That concludes Questions to the Commission .
( The sitting was adjourned at 7.15 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Mr President , the Commission has today adopted a communication on the rationalisation of the coordination of economic and employment policies .
This coordination , at Union level , creates a framework within which the Member States define their own policies .
It also contributes to progress on the ambitious Lisbon objectives .
We all know that the general coordination framework has become an increasingly more complex framework .
Too often new elements have been added as they became necessary and this situation has helped neither the coherence of the guidelines for the different policies nor the understanding of them .
You , as Parliament , have presented us with various proposals to improve the situation and , while working on the basis of existing legislation , we have tried to take them into consideration .
Rationalising coordination is not restricted simply to improving timetables and organisation , as it may seem at first sight .
We have tried to fundamentally change the coherence of policies and the evaluation of their implementation , thereby contributing to progress in the increase in growth potential , the creation of more and better jobs , an improvement in social cohesion and sustainable development .
With all of this in mind , the Commission makes concrete proposals in its communication to increase efficiency and coordination , to improve coherence and complementarity amongst the different processes and instruments , to stimulate our commitments and our ' ownership ' in relation to a greater involvement by Parliament and social partners , and increase the transparency and understanding of policy coordination and therefore its visibility and effects .
These important political improvements will increase the Union 's capacity to achieve its ambitious economic and employment objectives .
I would like to mention two key points : firstly , the Commission proposes a better structure for the cycle of policy coordination based on three points : execution , political orientations and guidelines .
These will be the key points which will make the coordination cycle more transparent and improve its effects .
The cycle will begin with the preparation of the spring European Council .
At the beginning of each year the Commission will present a package on the evaluation of implementation which will accompany the spring report and that package will present both the development of progress in the various areas involving the implementation of the broad guidelines of economic policy and the draft joint report on employment .
The spring report will therefore focus on the points on which progress must be speeded up and will propose key political guidelines for the spring European Council .
On this basis , in the middle of March the spring European Council will produce some general political guidelines and at the beginning of April the Commission , with these guidelines in mind , will present its guidelines which will include both the broad guidelines of economic policy and the employment guidelines .
Finally , the competent departments of the Commission will adopt this raft of guidelines once they have obtained the support of the European Council in June .
The second key point of the proposals presented today by the Commission is improving the efficiency of coordination .
In this respect , we suggest that we focus more on the medium term when it comes to drawing up guidelines .
The raft of guidelines will adopt a more differentiated medium-term perspective and will be reviewed in their entirety just once every three years .
In the intervening years the changes will be restricted to those necessary to take account of the most significant events during that period .
The more strategic approach will give stability to the guidelines on the different policies and allow them to be better monitored .
Furthermore , coherence will be improved by greater clarity in the contents of the respective instruments and their synchronisation .
This better complementarity will strengthen the basic political messages .
The Commission suggests that this rationalisation be implemented quickly and the first raft of new guidelines should be updated at the spring European Council of 2003 , with the Commission presenting its first implementation assessment package at the beginning of 2004 .
Consequently , the new cycle will be completely under way before the elections to this Parliament .
In addition to these improvements which will begin to operate by the 2003 cycle , the Commission has proposed a series of amendments relating to the law currently in force in the Treaties , aimed at the coordination of economic policies .
I am not going to get into this issue today ; I simply wish to point out , as I said at the beginning of my speech , that these issues are linked to the process of streamlining we are discussing today , since , as I said , we are working on the basis of existing legislation .
I would like to end by stressing that the Commission appreciates Parliament 's contribution of policy coordination and we eagerly await your suggestions on the guidelines we are going to propose and on this rationalisation process .
Your contributions and participation are a sign of your commitment to the common guidelines for the different policies and to an improvement in economic and social results .
My colleague Anna Diamantopoulou will comment on certain further elements relating to this coordination process which we have both presented jointly today .
Commissioner Diamantopoulou , Commissioner Solbes , thank you both very much .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Commission for today 's communication .
I do , however , remain concerned about two points .
The Lisbon Summit foresaw a key coordinating role for the European Council itself .
Although it remained unspoken , one of the main reasons for that was to avoid the whole procedure being dominated by Ecofin .
In the procedure in this communication there is a fundamental breakdown , following the June Council .
We then have the separate competitiveness , employment and Ecofin Councils making the final decisions in their respective areas .
It is at that point that Ecofin will become dominant and will hamstring the other two Councils .
That is a fundamental flaw in the whole procedure .
My second concern is that the first and last mention of Parliament is in May , in relation to the employment guidelines .
If the Commission as an institution is serious about the involvement of Parliament , it should be joining with us in calling for an interinstitutional agreement to give Parliament a formal say in the preparations for the spring Council .
Mr President , thank you for that information we have received from the Commission .
It was brief , as it presumably needs to be in this context .
I should nonetheless like to address two more matters .
First of all , it would be interesting to know more about the way in which the European Parliament and the national parliaments are to be able to arrive at a joint position .
Mr Hughes has already addressed this matter , but it is important for it to be clarified .
The point might be made that it is at present quite unclear how the European Parliament and the national parliaments are to participate in this process .
The second matter I want to mention is the processes .
I support the idea of these processes needing to be coordinated .
Two processes are discussed , but I believe that three processes need to be talked about , namely the economic process , the employment process and the process of social inclusion .
All three have their particular value and something special to contribute .
It is therefore extremely important for these distinctive features to be retained when the processes are coordinated . Otherwise , there will be a decline in their overall value .
I wonder therefore what thought has been given to the way in which , when the processes are coordinated , it might be possible to retain the special character of each particular one .
Mr President , Commissioners , a couple of brief comments .
On a number of occasions - most recently during the informal Council of Ministers in Kolding - we have , on behalf of Parliament and the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , made the point that we would welcome coordination of the employment and social policy cycles .
We want this to happen for a reason : because it is very clearly stated in the Treaty that employment policy guidelines must to some extent be aligned with economic guidelines .
I hope that we will see interaction between these two elements .
That we do not focus exclusively on employment .
That we do not concern ourselves merely with the quantity of jobs , but also with their quality .
That we do not think just about jobs and phrases like labour market flexibility , but that we also give some thought to security on the labour market and the social implications of this .
In other words , all the elements that could contribute to interaction , and my question is whether that is the intention of this entire policy mix event .
Mr President , I am going to try to respond quickly to the problems that affect me most directly and leave to Anna Diamantopoulou the problems which fall more within her competence .
Firstly , is there a split in relation to Lisbon and is there a lack of coordination in terms of the decision making at the spring Council ?
I believe that there is not ; I believe that the situation is precisely the opposite .
In fact , we will go to the spring Council with a position on guidelines for the different processes .
The Lisbon Council will take this decision - which of course must be consistent in all the guidelines - and subsequent Councils will then have to work on that basis .
Therefore , what we are achieving is the opposite : that the various Councils work in a direction which has already been previously defined .
Not only are we acting coherently with Lisbon , but I believe we are going further than what had initially been foreseen .
Secondly , something which concerns many of you : what is the role of Parliaments - European and national - in the process ?
From the point of view of the broad guidelines for economic policy , we are working with existing laws , as I said before .
We are not therefore talking about a modification of the Treaties or other aspects which can be raised in the Convention .
Nevertheless , we believe that the new procedure allows Parliament to take two types of action .
Firstly , the debate on the report on implementation of the broad guidelines for economic policy .
Parliament will have much more time than it did previously to hold that debate , and will also have more opportunity to take its own positions on the broad guidelines of economic policy , as we have been introducing into practice over recent years .
In this respect , we believe that the situation is clearly improving .
The position of national parliaments must be decided by each Member State , although the Commission advocates the idea that , both in the broad guidelines for economic policy , and in issues relating to the stability programmes , the national Parliaments should be involved .
Finally , it is true that there is basic coordination between the broad guidelines of economic policy and employment , but also with the Cardiff Process and the other processes which can affect economic policy .
These are the essential issues I wanted to comment on .

Mr President , I should like to respond to two points . ? he first concerns distinct policies and whether we can achieve them .
Without doubt , this proposal sets specific objectives , together with procedures and dates for achieving them .
One clear objective , as I said , is that these two policies should be independent .
So that we have clear , specific guidelines on employment , within the framework of the general guidelines , with objectives and procedures attached to them .
I do not know if anyone can say for sure that we shall achieve this objective .
But one thing is clear and that is that the political will is there and that the procedures are being designed so that we can move in this direction .
I think that we now all have a political responsibility to achieve this both for political reasons and because we need distinct employment policies in the European Union as a whole .
The second question concerns Mr Bouwman 's position on employment , which of course means more than just job numbers .
Within the framework of the guidelines and in Parliament we have said time and again that we need to include directions and guidelines on the quality of employment and this is what we are working towards .
My initial reaction is rather positive , as I believe that the Commission proposals are along the right lines .
We cannot ask for better coordination of the Member States ' economic policies without also calling for an improvement in the coordination process for economic , social and sustainable development policies at European Union level .
I believe that all processes relating to the BGEP , namely the Luxembourg , Cardiff , Cologne , Lisbon and Stockholm processes , and any others , for that matter , need to be rationalised .
The experts are beginning to lose the thread , and the citizens are completely lost .
Rationalisation is therefore required , provided , of course , that the European Parliament and the national parliaments are involved in the said processes .
If I have understood Mr Solbes correctly , in future we will have coordination for the medium term , with a complete review every three years .
Three years is a long time , however , for a Parliament with a five-year mandate and a Commission that also has a life expectancy of five years .
Some legislatures would , therefore , only hold one major debate on the broad guidelines .
In addition to this , three years is a very long time in economic terms .
Three years ago , Mr President , the world stock markets were all bullish . Two years ago , however , the bubble burst , causing substantial collateral damage .
Therefore , and this is my question , can you envisage not adapting the guidelines to the development of the economy and of life in society ?
Mr President , Commissioners , you started , Commissioner Solbes , by mentioning that you are working on getting the Treaty changed .
I should like to ask you straight up : exactly what changes are you working on ?
How will the European Parliament and codecision and joint competence fit in with these changes ?
And for my second question .
We all talk about growth and employment .
We have the stability and growth pact .
We have the internal market .
We have the Lisbon process .
What potential for coordination in these three agreements has still not been exhausted and how does the Treaty prevent these orders from being fulfilled ?
Mr President , I am pleased to hear that Parliament will be receiving documents before we are supposed to be drawing up our reports - that is something positive .
The question I want clarified is : where does sustainable development fit into this ?
In his introduction Commissioner Solbes talked about sustainable growth , which is not the same as sustainable development - some growth can destroy the environment and jobs and is not particularly sustainable .
So where is the sustainability element going to come from ?
How is this going to be determined through a qualitative analysis of growth , and how is this going to fit into this coordination which we are hoping to see in future ?
At the moment this is a missing element and yet it is supposed to be a key element of the spring summits as decided at Göteborg ?
Mr Goebbels , in order to clarify the position we have presented the issue very quickly .
We produce broad guidelines every three years , but this will not prevent us from having an annual modification and an annual debate .
I will give you an example : at the moment , the broad guidelines for economic policy have the essential aim of strengthening growth within a framework of economic stability in order to increase productivity and employment .
This type of principle is going to be general for a long period .
Clearly , the results produced each year , and the modification we will have to introduce bearing in mind what is happening in the economy , will have to be debated each year , and we will have to make annual modifications , but on the basis of a fundamental model which will be in force for three years .
Mr Karas , I believe that either I did not express myself well or the translation has not been entirely correct .
I have said twice that our intention with this Communication is to rationalise and coordinate the instruments of economic policy without changing the law .
Therefore , this document contains no modification of the Treaties .
We are talking about how to take better advantage of the possibilities offered by the Treaties .
I would like to make two comments in this respect : the European Parliament 's participation is clearly defined in the Treaty in relation to the general employment guidelines and we are implementing a system for participation by Parliament - not in a co-decision procedure since we are not talking about legislative regulations - which , since there will be more time to work on the application reports of the previous year and - Parliament 's cooperation will be necessary here - the times for decision making on the broad guidelines for economic policy will be improved , will allow Parliament to increase its participation in the process , which is what we all want to see .
The third element : to what extent can Lisbon be improved and applied further ?
I believe that that it was what we are trying to do : to achieve the best possible result from Lisbon .
A final comment in relation to sustainable development : sustainable development is included this year as an objective of the broad guidelines for economic policy , and these include certain elements relating to sustainable development .
Mr President , I think that the Commission has made a laudable attempt at achieving greater continuity and coherence , but please allow me to say that I do not think the attempt goes far enough towards the optimum goals .
I should first like to say something about continuity .
I think working in the context of the longer term is fine , but adjustments must remain possible from time to time .
The communication from the Commission takes account of this .
I have a question on the timetable .
The timetable now provides for new guidelines to cover a period of three years : 2003 to 2006 .
This would take us beyond the Commission 's and Parliament 's mandates ; I had hoped that this would be more of an induction programme , linked to the political mandates of the Commission and Parliament .
Can the Commissioner comment on this ?
Secondly : the global economic guidelines are mentioned as key implementation instruments , as they also contain the lines of force of the employment strategy .
My fellow MEP Stephen Hughes has already commented on this in the context of the Ecofin Council .
Employment is part of those economic guidelines , but it had already been decided that they would also contain the consensus view on matters such as coordination of pensions and healthcare .
I should like to know what has happened to these topics , as I see nothing about them in the notification .
Mr President , I too would like to thank the Commission for its proposals , but I would also like to draw attention to a subject which is inextricably linked to the improvement of economic and employment policy coordination , and that is the debate , which is quite heated in some Member States , on the Stability Pact and the flexibility thereof .
I would like to ask the Commission how it intends to respond , to distinguish between the attitude of certain Member States , of certain governments , which would like to revise the Stability Pact and make it less rigid - in some cases for the simple reason that they are having difficulty keeping their public finances under control but want to keep promises they have made to cut taxes at such a difficult economic time - and the attitude and position of others , which are putting forward what I believe are sensible proposals to turn the Growth Pact and investments to good account , making good use of the golden rule that the most fruitful public investments have to be incorporated into and integrated with the Lisbon strategy .
Lastly , how will this be coordinated with the proposals the Commission has presented this evening ?
Mr President , I should like to ask the Commission how it intends to guarantee that economic , social and employment policies will be coordinated , as defined in the Lisbon process , and pursued in a democratically legitimate manner if it rejects changes to the Treaty within the framework of the Convention .
I would firstly like to answer the question on the relationship between the processes of the Commission and of Parliament .
Of course we could consider a long-term programme - five years - but , in our opinion , this period of time is excessive .
If we do not talk about five years , the problems the honourable Member mentions will always exist .
It is either one year or any figure greater than one year presents us with these problems .
However , I believe that the concern is that two or three years raises the problem , as does four years .
It is either five or one .
Five is too much , one means that we have less room for manoeuvre .
In any event I believe that it is a false problem .
Because the necessary modifications can be discussed annually and therefore this does not cause any difficulty , as I said earlier to Mr Goebbels , and if a change in circumstances or an institutional change requires the problem to be reassessed , this can clearly be done .
The second point : what happens with the Employment Ecofin and to what extent may contradictions arise ?
Contradictions in the process are precisely what we are trying to prevent , for a very simple reason : the process starts with the Commission , with a position which must be consistent ; that position must be decided on or approved by the European Council ; the Ecofin Councils and the Employment Council will have to work on the guidelines produced by the spring European Council , and it will be the June European Council that finally accepts guidelines which must be consistent amongst themselves and consistent with what the European Council itself has proposed .
Therefore , this type of incoherence should not arise .
An issue which I believe to be totally outside today 's debate is the Stability Pact .
I am not going to say too much about this .
The Stability Pact is part of Community legislation .
My position is very well known : I believe that the legislation has to be complied with and therefore my position is that the Stability Pact must be applied as laid down in the legislation currently in force .
This does not mean that the Commission is insensitive to the experience which the Pact has provided us with and that it has not proposed - the Commission itself - a series of interpretative elements in accordance with economic developments , including such important elements as , for example , taking account of the cyclically adjusted budgets in order to assess the reality in terms of the possibility of achieving the nominal objectives laid down in the stability programmes .
I still believe that the Stability Pact is an excellent instrument and that we must naturally draw the best possible conclusions from the reality of the situation so that the Pact may function better , but not so that the substance of the Pact is affected .
My final point : the legitimacy of the process , raised by Mrs Randzio-Plath .
I believe that the process has all the legitimacy available at the moment ; in fact it has even more , given that not only the sectoral Councils are involved in these decisions , but also the European Council at the beginning and the end of the process and , secondly , not only is the current commitment maintained , or the current participation of the European Parliament , but the intention is to increase it .
The honourable Member raises another problem : what type of modification of the Treaty can be considered in the future with a view to greater participation by the European Parliament in this process ?
This Communication says nothing about this issue .
This is an issue under discussion in the Convention , and the eventual result will depend on the negotiation at the Intergovernmental Conference .
Mr President , I should like to comment on three points .
First , as we have already pointed out , the whole proposal comes within the framework of the current Treaty , which does not need to be interpreted differently or more widely or changed in any way .
Secondly , this proposal is just one step .
We cannot update the Lisbon procedures in one fell swoop .
So , to come back to what Mrs Van Lancker said about other policies , such as pension schemes or policies on other social issues or the problem of exclusion which we discussed recently , I have to say that all these procedures are in a state of flux and that our final objective is to coordinate them within a common framework .
The third point raised by a number of honourable Members is just how medium-term or short-term the timetable should be .
I think that the success of this proposal lies in the fact that it sets medium-term objectives - I mentioned 2010 .
This is very important because , with employment in particular , policies have to be structural .
They leave cyclical changes out of account , which is why medium-term objectives are much more significant and help governments to focus their efforts and apply specific objectives .
At the same time , however , we propose that procedures should be monitored annually , meaning that a debate will be held in Parliament once a year on the basis of the Member States ' reports and , as Mr Solbes Mira just said , if specific incidents occur or unexpected circumstances arise , we can obviously review the new proposals .
Thank you Commissioner Diamantopoulou and Commissioner Solbes .
The debate is closed .
The next item is the continuation of the debate on sales promotions in the internal market .
Does Mr Harbour wish to speak on a point of order ?
Mr President , I wanted to catch your eye before Mr Folias started , because I believe that all of us here would like to write into the record before the debate that we are recommencing this debate ten hours - I repeat , ten hours - after it was first started .
I , and I am sure my colleagues , in particular the rapporteur , consider this is a quite unacceptable way of planning our business as a serious parliament on this most important subject .
I shall look forward to contributing later , but I wanted that on the record now , because it is very important that you as President understand how seriously we regard the way this has been handled .
I have taken good note of what you have said , Mr Harbour .
Mr President , I should like to endorse what my honourable friend Mr Harbour has just said .
I feel that the legislative work of this House is not properly reflected in the order of business and that we are still prone to the resolutionitis which we suffered from in 1979 .
The PPE group had a really hard time with this Commission proposal , in part due to the fact that the Member States have very different approaches to competition law .
We took great pains to broker a compromise , including with the rapporteur in committee , and I should like to report to plenary today that the PPE group firmly backs this compromise , which is identical to the report by the rapporteur for the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market . I think this is a remarkable announcement to plenary by so big a group .
There was not one dissenting voice within the group .
This compromise includes a statement to the effect that we agree with the compromise and that we agree with the Commission 's idea of using a regulation .
We believe that , in principle , a regulation is the right way to tackle the problems addressed here .
However , the Member States will need time to adapt , so we have suggested a later starting date , namely 1 January 2005 .
Mr Folias has addressed the problem of small and medium-sized businesses .
They were in fact a crucial factor in our debate .
To give just two examples : numerous Member States have banned below cost selling in their fair trading legislation , partly in order to protect their small and medium-sized enterprises .
We have amended the Commission proposal by expressly allowing for such an eventuality .
We have also ensured that tariffs for fees for the liberal professions can be maintained without restriction .
On the other hand , we have achieved the required degree of harmonisation .
I think that excesses in competition law such as we saw at the start of the year in Germany , when a firm wanting to offer a 20 % discount was prohibited from doing so by a court order , will be a thing of the past .
Thank you for listening .
I am afraid I must leave now .
I have another meeting at 9 p.m. and trust that the honourable Members and the Commission will excuse me .

Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Beysen , very much for his thorough work and for his attention to all the issues which , as the previous speaker , Mr Lehne , pointed out too , have been the subject of a great deal of debate in the Commission .
I believe that it was a good idea to present the proposal in the form of a regulation , for I feel that a regulation is genuinely the most suitable vehicle for laying down uniform rules on specific , clearly-defined issues , for guaranteeing price transparency and for increasing legal certainty , and that it is the best way to meet the need for uniform rules now the euro has been introduced .
Above all , the regulatory approach makes it possible to create a legal framework on the basis of which the consumer and other market actors can obtain sufficient information to be able to make informed decisions .
The text before us , which we are to vote on tomorrow , is , in any case , the result of thorough analysis in committee and in the committees responsible for drawing up opinions .
It amends and improves many important aspects of the original proposal relating to the provision of protection and guarantees for consumers , minors , small and medium-sized enterprises and healthy competition , and the introduction of the subsidiarity mechanism .
Indeed , an amendment introduces the principle of subsidiarity , on the basis of which the Member States can partially limit trade communications on grounds of consumer protection , safeguarding competition or the protection of providers .
I feel that the provision adopted in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market - increasing protection for minors , particularly as regards personal data and potentially dangerous free samples and premiums - is especially important .
In addition , the consumer is also safeguarded as regards the court or out-of-court settlement of claims .
All in all , I feel this is a well-balanced proposal which takes into account both the need to make the international market fully functional and the need to protect the consumer .
Mr President , Commissioner , rapporteur , I believe that the draft regulation currently before Parliament is to be welcomed because , although it is true that promotional sales are a topical issue and represent a very considerable share of the market , it is also true that there are still national laws in force imposing restrictions on promotions , particularly on discounts , which , in actual fact , jeopardise the consolidation of the internal market .
I feel that the Commission has presented us with a well-balanced text which will provide an appropriate solution to the problem of the absence of a genuine internal market for promotions and promotional sales and of the market being governed by a variety of different laws which ban in some countries behaviour which is permitted in others .
I fear that some of the amendments tabled by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market are in danger of diminishing the effectiveness of this text .
I refer , in particular , to Amendments Nos 29 and 32 , which , although intended to safeguard the principle of subsidiarity , are , in actual fact , in danger of rendering the regulation 's provisions and proposals on the specific case of discounts ineffective .
I believe there is one thing that must be made clear first of all : competition authorities exist at both Community and Member State level .
Competition laws and laws on all cases which can be classed as unfair competition exist , and so cases of discounts which would appear to be an example of fair competition are prosecuted via this channel too .
Competition authorities do exist but , in all other cases , not only are discounts not negative , they are positive .
They are clearly positive for the consumer , who can buy goods and services at a very advantageous price , and it does not matter whether for a limited period of time or not .
It is not true , in my opinion , that discounts are necessarily harmful for small businesses : quite the opposite , small businesses often offer discounts to launch a product or a commercial activity , not having a great deal of financial resources available for large-scale or even , often , small-scale promotional campaigns .
I feel we are in danger of doing consumers and businesses a bad turn here .
Another brief point : the issue of inflation .
I am thinking of Italy , but other countries are in the same situation : penalising discounts until it is impossible to offer them in practice , as has happened in Italy , has contributed in equal measure to the creation of the conditions for a less competitive market and , therefore , a market which is at greater risk from price inflation .
Mr President , I warmly welcome , on behalf of my colleagues in the United Kingdom Conservative Party , this very elegant and simple proposal for reform of the single market .
It will perhaps surprise colleagues that the regulatory content of this regulation before us occupies eight clauses and three pages and yet we had 200 amendments .
Part of the problem - I say this particularly to the Commissioner because I know he is sympathetic to this - is that despite the fact that the single market is at the centre of economic reform of the Lisbon goals , when a simple proposal for reform is put forward we are in the extraordinary position that a significant number of Member States oppose it and , indeed , Members seek to change and dilute it .
We have reached an acceptable compromise , thanks to the heroic efforts of Mr Beysen .
I am confident we will get a strong majority for this tomorrow and it is absolutely right that we should .
How can we justify in the single market today a position where people shopping in Antwerp will get entirely different deals , offers and conditions to people who shop in Rotterdam , only a few miles away ?
That story is repeated across the European Union .
The purpose of this regulation is to empower consumers to make choices in the single market , by giving them information and allowing them to exercise their choice .
A lot of the proposals and a lot of the amendments by the Socialist Group , which I am sure we will reject tomorrow , reflect the old mentality of trying to tell consumers what is best for them .
That world has gone !
We are talking about an Internet world where people can shop all over the European Union and where businesses can put out offers to them .
This is a crucial measure .
In conclusion , I want to thank the Commissioner for the remarks he made in the commercial communication , where he said Parliament comes to rescue the internal market .
This side of the House and this committee shall continue to do that .
We shall also rescue Europe 's consumers from the over-interference that some colleagues are proposing .
Mr President , we must welcome the courageous study that the Commission has undertaken on sales promotions in the internal market and the legislative approach it has chosen and most of the solutions found to the regulation we are now considering .
However , no fine intention to improve the functioning of the internal market and to make best use of competition rules - as the Commission would like to see , and rightly so - can hide the irrationality of allowing sales below cost .
As has already been said in this debate , no one gives anything away for nothing and there is no such thing as a free lunch .
Nevertheless , selling below cost is a commercial stratagem which will , sooner or later , be tolerated by consumers .
The fairness of commercial practices is an essential and absolute value for the construction and development of a healthier , fairer and more cohesive economy .
The predatory practice of pricing below cost is incompatible with these values .
Indeed , when this practice is widespread , it imposes unacceptable pressures on the production system in a field with a dominant position , destroying legitimate profit margins to an unimaginable level and , consequently , the survival of small and medium-sized enterprises , which are thereby bound to make all types of concession and are subject to every type of moral pressure .
This practice is also responsible for promoting impulse purchases , which obviously present no advantages for consumers , and instead threaten their interests and change their scale of priorities .
The ban on irresponsible selling must , therefore , be maintained as a principle crucial to fair commercial practice .
Furthermore , we have seen that the commercial strategy of predatory pricing is not controllable simply by applying the general rules on unfair competition .
The European Parliament must , therefore , table amendments to the Commission regulation , respecting the principles that I have mentioned .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by warmly congratulating the rapporteur on his report .
The text approved by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market is the result of skill and a spirit of dialogue , which has allowed broadly accepted compromises to be reached .
The result is a text which has been rebalanced in order to increase consumer protection , especially with regard to the information they are to be provided with , complaint procedures and the situation of minors , amongst others .
Also excluded are practices which are not of a commercial promotional nature , such as the operation of games of chance in the apparent form of sales promotion operations or sales at a loss or below cost .
I repeat that the latter is not a genuinely promotional practice , since its aim is not so much to protect the consumer as to eliminate market competitors , which at the end of the day benefits neither consumers , competition nor the good operation of the market .
For this reason , it is considered an illegal practice in the majority - not in the minority - of Member States .
Furthermore , several of them - since the competition rules are insufficient - have had to reintroduce these provisions .
And this , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , must be taken into account when the Commission produces its article 7 report and when we try - as we are trying - to implement the common market .
Because the common market cannot be a means for extending practices which the majority of Member States consider to be prejudicial , for good reasons .
The impact of a liberalisation cannot be measured in purely economic terms , but we have to take account of all the factors that affect the common good , and consumer protection is something which cannot simply be left to the predatory practices of certain large companies .
We therefore feel that the solution adopted is appropriate and consequently the enormous majority of our Group - which is not ultra-liberal but rather is in favour of a social market economy - is going to support it .
Mr President , Commissioner , if our aim is to produce both legislation providing full legal certainty and , at the same time , rules which will allow the citizens to derive maximum benefits from the internal market , then the regulation before us is certainly a step in the right direction .
We have worked hard on this regulation , and the number of amendments cited by my colleagues and the debate in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market too are evidence of the importance of what we consider to be a road that Europe must take without fail and which we want to build .
The internal market needs rules , and the rules must be evaluated in the context of everyday life .
The regulation broaches a number of extremely important issues .
I will not go back over those which have already been mentioned by my colleagues .
There is one point , for example , on which we would like there to be greater reflection and that is the settlement of disputes .
We would also like to try experimenting with self-regulation in this new world in which consumers enter into dialogue with the market .
Still on the subject of the disputes which are never absent from commercial relations , we call upon the Commission to expand this pilot stage of the European Extra-judicial Network .
Moreover , once again as my colleagues have recommended , we would like to see an increase in the activity of the Expert Group on Commercial Communications .
This group , set up in the dim and distant past in 1998 , now needs to be adapted to deal with the increasingly urgent development of the internal market .
Then there are a whole series of points already mentioned which we fully support .
In conclusion , we feel that this is the right way to promote our ideal of Europe through the internal market .
Mr President , I should first like to thank Mr Beysen for agreeing to act as rapporteur .
He gave our group sufficient opportunity to express the essence of our views in the report .
As a consequence , not only did we gain the support of 90 % of the members of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , but we were also able to ensure that the proposal as a whole is now more balanced and shows the human face of the internal market .
I have two questions for the Commissioner .
I should like to hear the Commissioner 's opinion on the amendment in which we want to maintain the national provisions banning sales below cost , or in any case giving the Member States the opportunity to do so .
I wonder whether the Commissioner understands our preference for preventive action over ex-post appeals to national or other competition authorities .
I wonder whether the Commissioner is fully aware that not all Member States have a legal culture that facilitates appeals to the competition authorities in order to resolve such problems .
I wonder whether the Commissioner comprehends that sales below cost are an instrument that can not only be abused by a dominant player to vanquish its rivals within competition law , but that it also enables an integrated distribution company to exploit its stronger financial position vis-à-vis specialised SMEs that have less financial clout .
The other question I should like to put to the Commissioner relates to consumer protection , on which a number of announcements have been made .
Are we to expect anything more ?
If so , what ?
What else does the Commission have up its sleeve ?
Mr President , Commissioner , honourable Members , I too should like to start by extending my warmest thanks to the rapporteur of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , Mr Beysen , and congratulating him on his report .
It was thanks to our excellent working relationship that we were able to put what started out as a highly disputed Commission proposal on sales promotions to bed .
Advertising in the individual Member States and , more to the point , cross-border advertising in Europe , is a difficult and tricky business nowadays .
One hardly dares launch an advertisement nowadays without checking with a lawyer first .
There are all sorts of restrictions and bans on advertisers in the Member States .
To bring you up to date on what is happening in Germany , which Mr Lehne also used as an example , the euro discount offered by a clothing chain at the beginning of the year was prohibited by the courts , early riser price discounts have been prohibited by the courts and classic customer loyalty schemes such as Air Miles have been banned under German law .
Consumers are treated like ignorant , uninformed children .
We have to put a stop to this , which is why I and my honourable friends in our group welcome in principle the Commission proposal to help out here .
With the amendments by the Committee on Legal Affairs , it will certainly do a great deal to help the cross-border marketing of goods and services in Europe .
The Committee on Legal Affairs has proposed important amendments to the scope of the regulation .
A number of sensitive areas need to be exempted , especially national advertising bans for members of regulated professions such as lawyers and notaries , and bans on the advertising of pharmaceuticals .
In addition , national rules on aggressive advertising practices or the exertion of psychological buying pressure need to stay in place .
Seasonal and clearance sales are also exempted from the regulation , as are fixed-prices for books and , last but not least - and this has already been addressed - the thorny issue of below cost selling .
We were right not to include this in the scope of the regulation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , this proposed Regulation on sales promotions in the internal market will allow European companies to take better advantage of the removal of borders in order to carry out their economic activities .
I therefore believe that the proposal is very appropriate in order to humanise the national provisions on the communication of sales promotions .
This proposal has given rise to a very important debate in this Parliament 's Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy on a very specific aspect , namely , once again , sales at a loss .
I am glad to see that the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market has included the views of the Environment Committee in its amendments , and I therefore congratulate Mr Beysen , rapporteur for the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , and Mrs Patrie , draftsperson of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
It is reasonable that sales at a loss should be regulated at national level .
At the moment , the majority of Member States prohibit this practice : Germany , Austria , France , Ireland , Greece and Spain , amongst others , and it is not an arbitrary prohibition .
I am going to be the last speaker to say that sales and re-sales at a loss cannot be considered commercial promotion practices , because these practices distort the principles of fair competition and in particular prejudice small retailers , who do not have the margins to compete in such a situation .
Furthermore , they create a false alarm in terms of consumer information , harm the image of the brand and seriously alter the planning of manufacturers and suppliers .
Specifically I support Amendments Nos 27 , 28 , 29 , 30 and 32 and I trust that the majority of this House will approve them and that the Commission will accept them .
Mr President , in my introductory remarks this morning I explained that the objections of this Parliament and of other groups in society concentrated on four different sectors , four different aspects of this subject .
On behalf of the Commission I should now like to address those four aspects .
Almost all MEPs who took the floor this morning and this evening have mentioned sale below cost .
In discussing national provisions banning sale below cost , Mr Beysen , Mr Langen , Mrs Fourtou , Mrs McCarthy , Mr MacCormick and many others expressed concern at how SMEs would be affected if these national provisions were to be abolished .
I think the resolution before us offers an acceptable solution as it asks the Commission to undertake further investigation before proposing a Community-wide solution to this problem .
The authors of the resolution agree with the Commission that varying national rules in this area make cross-border purchasing and price strategies more difficult , and that action at European level is necessary for this reason .
The Commission finds the compromise acceptable .
I should also like to emphasise that the Commission does not agree that such prohibitions on sale below cost are needed to maintain clearance sales .
After all , seasonal clearance sales of this kind operate well in the seven Member States that do not have such provisions .
It is for this reason that the Commission cannot accept Amendment No 30 tabled by Mrs Thyssen .
I am happy to clarify , though , that the study which the Commission has promised to carry out into selling below cost will take proper account of the consequences of deregulation for SMEs .
I should now like to turn to the second topic which I mentioned this morning .
With regard to the comments made by Mrs Patrie on consumer protection and the link between this initiative and our activities on fair trading practices , Mr Beysen 's report fortunately does not take the view that this proposal will have a negative impact on our ongoing study into the need for an initiative on fair trading practices .
That confirms the statements made by my fellow MEP Mr Byrne and myself on a number of occasions , namely that these two initiatives are entirely complementary .
The Commission therefore regrets that it is unable to accept Amendment No 28 tabled by Mrs Ghilardotti and the second part of Amendment No 12 tabled by Mrs Niebler .
The information requirements in the proposal offer a high level of consumer protection , which is why the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 41 and 50 , which would undermine the level of consumer protection .
On the issue of alcohol , the Commission does not consider Amendment No 80 to be proportional since the Member States restrict the sale of alcoholic products to minors .
On the third point , promotional games , I can tell you that in view of Parliament 's strong opposition to the Commission 's present approach to this subject , the Commission accepts the compromise solution put forward in Mr Beysen 's report .
For that reason the Commission cannot accept Amendment No 8 as it is currently worded .
Amendments Nos 20 , 21 and 22 tabled by Mrs Patrie and Mr Lehne are now redundant since the link between taking part in a promotional game and the sale of a product is no longer possible .
Fourthly , I should like to address the issue of mutual recognition .
I should like to point out that this principle serves to allow free movement in sales promotion activities even without excessive harmonisation .
As Mrs McCarthy and Mrs Fourtou have clearly indicated , the principle of mutual recognition is the cornerstone of all our work in the area of the internal market .
As we already know , this applies to the Internet as well .
Amendments designed to remove this principle from the proposal , such as Amendment No 72 tabled by Mrs Patrie or Amendment No 79 tabled by Mr MacCormick and Mrs Hautala , are therefore unacceptable to the Commission .
The same applies to Amendment No 73 tabled by Mrs Patrie which makes the application of this principle dependent on further cumbersome notification procedures .
The Commission also rejects amendments that undermine the internal market , such as Amendments Nos 28 and 12 , and amendments that aim to exclude certain sectors from their advantages , such as the first part of Amendment No 13 tabled by Mrs Niebler .
The Commission is also unable to accept Amendment No 39 on language requirements .
Finally , I should like to inform Mr Fiori that the Commission certainly agrees that the opportunity to obtain redress must be used as quickly as possible , but the Commission thinks that in most cases this is best done by the promoter itself .
The Commission will propose a certain number of rules ensuring that the promoter acts in this regard .
Mr President , those are my replies to the questions and comments presented this morning and this evening .
The only task remaining to me is the pleasant one of thanking Mr Beysen and his shadow rapporteur for the outstandingly positive contribution they have made as rapporteurs to our discussions on this important topic , which has aroused such lively interest .
The Commission knows that Mr Beysen has devoted a great deal of time and effort to this task , which presented many difficulties to him and his committee .
The Commission is very grateful that we have finally managed to reach a satisfactory compromise , and hopes and expects that it will be passed when it is put to the vote , which I believe will take place tomorrow .
Thank you Commissioner Bolkenstein .
I too , along with the rapporteur and the Members , regret the way this important debate has been managed .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0249 / 2002 ) tabled by Mr Berenguer Fuster , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the draft Commission regulation on the application of Articles 87 and 88 of the EC Treaty to state aid for employment [ C5-259 / 2002 - 2002 / 2126 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Council Regulation ( EC ) 994 / 98 contains the provision that the Commission should approve regulations on block exemption which exempt certain aid from the obligation to notify the Commission , employing a technique already used successfully in the field of anti-competitive behaviour .
So far , the Commission has approved the Regulations on SMEs , training and minimums , and now it is proposing a Regulation on employment aid .
I would like to start by making a series of observations .
Firstly , that the proposal we are currently analysing , although it is not being modified , improves the existing system .
There is currently no regulation on block exemption in this field and the guidelines on this type of aid are based on a series of diverse communications which are not regulatory .
The fact that certain aid with clear criteria is being exempted from the obligation to notify , although those criteria may be insufficient , represents considerable progress in terms of transparency and legal certainty , which we must not fail to recognise .
Secondly , I would like to insist that this does not mean that aid without the characteristics included in the Regulation will be considered illegal .
Not at all .
All it implies is that such aid will have to be subject to notification , in order to analyse whether or not it contradicts the objectives of the Treaty .
And we must not forget that these objectives do not just include maintaining a system in which competition is not distorted , but also the promotion of employment .
Thirdly , certain possible scenarios should be stipulated in order prevent the administrations who grant the aid - particularly the regional authorities in the case of Spain and also in other Member States - from being subject to long procedures involving notification when granting aid aimed at promoting employment , especially in sectors in which workers are most affected by unemployment .
To this end , and in line with the objectives of the Lisbon strategy , we must propose support for the transformation of employment contracts into permanent contracts and greater flexibility in defining the different groups of workers who will benefit , as well as adapting them to the particular characteristics of each region , and the inclusion amongst the exempted aid of aid aimed at promoting the employment of women and , finally , extending the age range , so that young workers - or those who are in the final stage of their working life - can benefit from aid without the need for modification .
All these criteria , included in Amendment No 1 from the Group of the Party of European Socialists , are aimed directly at promoting employment in the least-favoured sectors , and their inclusion in the Regulation in no way distorts competition .
The comparison of the anti-competitive effects of this aid with other types of aid , if we analyse it soberly , is something of an insult to the intelligence .
We are not going to get into a debate here on public aid and its effects on competition , but , if there is any public aid worthy of being seen as compatible with the objectives of the Treaty , then that is the aid aimed at promoting employment .
It would not be good to give the European citizens and workers the impression that the Commission shows signs of flexibility when allowing other types of aid , while being extraordinarily strict when it comes to employment aid .
Furthermore , it would be appropriate to include the social economy sector - in a general sense - as an exempt sector .
As all the honourable Members know , social economy companies provide a significant cushion in terms of maintaining employment when there is crisis in a sector , and that reality should be reflected in the Regulation .
Finally , in the report adopted certain paragraphs have been introduced in relation to the preference for employment flexibility measures over aid for the promotion of employment .
I am not going to get involved in refuting this idea , which - like all ideas expressed in such emphatic terms - reflects a rigid and distinctly conservative approach , which I cannot agree with .
But , quite simply , the honourable Members will have to recognise that whatever the ideological position they hold , this is a strange and extravagant idea at this time , which should not appear in the report , since it relates to other issues .
To insist on it would imply an excessive interest in sending messages in favour of a certain action , which cannot be shared by important sectors , both in Parliament and in European society .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Berenguer Fuster , and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on the quality of the report .
Given the employment situation in the Community , every aspect of employment represents , and must represent , an essential political priority .
I welcome Parliament 's comments on this proposal , which seeks to reduce the administrative burdens on national authorities which employ State aid measures to respond to the challenge represented by employment .
I am all the more pleased to note the generally very favourable tone of the report .
As you are aware and as the rapporteur has just pointed out , the proposal concerns a fourth exemption regulation in the field of State aid , which follows on from the exemption regulations already in force in the areas of training , aid to small and medium-sized enterprises and de minimis aid .
The main aim behind all these regulations is to reduce the administrative burdens upon national authorities , exempting them from the obligation to notify measures which are clearly compatible with the internal market .
The proposal concerns the relationship between two essential Community objectives : employment and competition .
The need to find the right balance between these two objectives is clear - and let it be understood that in saying this I am in no way trying to suggest that competition and employment are two objectives which are incompatible .
On the contrary , we are convinced that , worldwide , sustaining a dynamic market economy in which the forces of competition are free to express themselves will contribute greatly to increasing employment levels .
There are , of course , countless measures that the Member States can and , indeed , do take to promote employment .
Many of these do not constitute State aid , particularly when they are not selective but cover the entire economic activity of a Member State .
The draft regulation does not relate to these measures .
It must also be pointed out that , in many cases , State aid with different primary objectives also has the implicit objective of promoting employment .
This is the case of regional investment aid , for example , and aid to certain sectors .
The regulation before us only concerns aid which is formally and explicitly linked to the achievement of employment objectives .
The text does more than just streamline the administrative requirements : it clarifies the fundamental rules which apply to employment aid too .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate the rapporteur .
He has worked very hard on this report and it is a good one .
The report and the underlying regulation seek to establish clearer and more transparent rules for state aid for employment .
Streamlined procedures for Member States wishing to aid employment schemes are to be welcomed and sensitivity to local circumstances is also desirable .
The report welcomes and expresses support for the state aid register , which the British Conservatives have made a priority .
It is vitally important that we keep track of the various Member States and their record on state aid .
In terms of general principles , we believe that it is vitally important to restrict the areas where state aid can be given .
I am not sure whether we would go as far as Mr Monti - I believe he has referred to state aids in the past as evil - but we certainly believe that it is necessary to restrict state aid in order to maintain economic efficiency and economic prosperity and a level playing field between companies in different Member States .
Having said that , this report and the regulation acknowledge that certain state aids are acceptable and indeed desirable in relation to employment schemes .
We are , however , very wary about the degree of extension that can be accepted even in this case , because of our suspicion of state aids .
But we believe the Commission has drawn the line at a sensible point . That is also reflected in the report .
I would not go as far as Amendment No 1 , as put forward by Mr Berenguer Fuster .
In particular paragraph ( a ) of Amendment No 1 , which seems to specifically condemn temporary as opposed to permanent contracts , is not appropriate and should not be supported by the House .
I ask the House to remember that state aid , in this context , is rather like a Band-Aid or a sticking plaster being applied to a gaping wound .
State aid for employment , where it is permitted , as appropriate , by this regulation , can never actually solve Europe 's unemployment problems .
It is appropriate to permit government state aid for employment schemes in restricted circumstances , but the real way to tackle the 18 million unemployed in Europe , to give people genuine job opportunities , is by labour market reform , by producing structural and economic reform and labour market flexibility , making it easier to hire people .
That is the way to deal with the serious and unacceptably high level of unemployment in the European Union .
So we accept this as a pragmatic and sensible measure .
Both the regulation and the report make sensible proposals , but it is vitally important that we address the key issue , which is labour market flexibility and economic reform .
Mr President , I should like to endorse the rapporteur 's positive appraisal of the Commission 's proposal for a regulation .
It is precisely because the private economy is failing to live up to its responsibility and create secure jobs that we need more aid to promote employment in the European Union .
You only have to think about current mass unemployment and the different situations in the regions to realise that this regulation is crucial , because it creates greater transparency , cuts red tape , provides legal security and improves comparability and , with it , we shall soon be in a position to judge how effective aid is .
It is interesting to note that national employment policies in the European Union have changed , gearing towards the common objectives of the employment strategy , with action plans being used as levers .
But what struck us in this context is that the current employment guidelines make no reference to growth or to the desirable or undesirable effects of employment aid .
We need to call for finishing touches to be put to the employment guidelines in the interests of mainstreaming and the coherence of European employment policies .
We need to clarify that the contribution of both sides - employment policy and competition policy - to the European employment strategy can be guaranteed .
I think that , in the proposal before us , the Commission rightly recognises the need to allow state measures in the form of employment incentives for companies , especially for certain disadvantaged groups .
This is not just a logical consequence of the objectives set in Lisbon .
Full employment is and always will be one of the most important objectives of the Lisbon strategy , Barcelona confirmed that .
Which is why we must call for finishing touches in the form of a more flexible definition of which groups are to benefit .
I think that the age limit of 25 should be raised to 30 and that the age limit for older employees should be dropped from 55 to 50 , because society relies on both , young people entering employment and older people remaining in employment .
I should also like to call for special care to be taken to ensure that the differentiation which the Commission rightly makes in its proposal between small and medium-sized enterprises and large companies does in fact apply when this proposal is implemented .
Mr President , the point I should like to make is that we simply want to cooperate better with the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
We have not reached a view on this report as we would normally do , partly because we received it far too late .
The same may also be true of other committees .
Against the background of the matter we have just been discussing , namely the Commission Communication on policy coordination between economic policy , which involves competition policy , and employment policy and other areas of social policy , we need to consider to what extent we can achieve a number of things that are very important in the fight against unemployment .
One example of a very important issue is a fourth exemption regulation .
If you are in a region suffering from severe problems and pressure , where subsidies are needed and the procedure for obtaining them is very bureaucratic - I myself come from such a region , but I know countless others - then this is very irritating .
In these circumstances it is great to see the social aims in existing legislation being given a chance , and that is what I meant just now when I was talking about exchange .
I hope that this base will broaden in the future , and that starting from the Spring summit in Athens we will pursue exchanges in an attempt to achieve common social and sustainability goals , considering what economic policy can contribute to this process rather than bringing matters which the Treaty describes as subordinate in line with economic policy .
Briefly , against that background I think that this is an excellent proposal and believe it important for competition rules in general - I am thinking for example of services of general interest , which I could list - to be re-evaluated and tested against what we want to achieve through social policy .
Looking at the Lisbon process as a whole , I think that a number of the assumptions contradict what we are trying to achieve with our employment objective .
Some objectives , such as the new economy for example , were quite unjustly selected in the Lisbon process .
We can see that now and realise the far-reaching consequences .
State aid based on those Articles 87 and 88 . Those articles are very important in rechanneling back to the objectives of social policy , and that is why we must avoid any misunderstanding .
Perhaps we now need to go a step further .
I believe that we must not only ensure that existing regulations are properly translated into social objectives but must also look at what social objectives we need , as formulated in the Treaty among other documents , and consider whether we should revise the Treaty , for instance to put social policy and economic policy on an equal footing .
Against that background , and considering the proposals contained in Mr Berenguer Fuster 's report - and I should like to thank him and his committee for their work - I call on members to support Amendments Nos 1 to 4 .
Support by the whole of Parliament for these amendments could well sway us to vote for this proposal as a whole .
Outsiders find European regulations a great and impenetrable mystery .
Many different regulations , varying requirements and conditions , masses of provisions and long texts create a forest of rules .
Citizens and companies are lost without expert help .
Thus , European regulations are not shining examples of clarity and comprehensibility .
Legal action taken and legal queries raised by local authorities , businesses and affected citizens shows that this can cause problems when it comes to applying for aid .
Parliament should therefore support the proposal to simplify and clarify the rules on granting aid in the context of employment promotion .
Simplification and clarification does not mean adding numerous new objectives and ideas that are difficult to implement .
It is in this context that I should like to make a brief comment on the first amendment .
The additions proposed in Amendment No 1 really belong to employment policy , and have no place in a resolution on granting aid on the basis of the EC Treaty .
As I see it , the Commission 's regulation deals primarily with the financial side of granting aid .
After all , aid is granted only when necessary and when justified by the circumstances .
The additions mentioned in the first amendment are in my view also too broad for specific application in the context of granting aid .
I support this resolution , except for Amendment No 1 .
I also agree with Mr Bouwman that the procedural handling of this report has been somewhat bizarre .
Mr President , Commissioner , honourable Members , I think that the Commission 's draft regulation illustrates perfectly that the view held by many members that employment policy always plays second fiddle to economic policy is simply not true .
We need both , one presupposes the other .
There is no contradiction between competition policy , growth policy and the need to grant aid to certain sectors , as this regulation clearly illustrates .
We realise that aid has to act as an incentive and help bridge the way to self-help .
Aid is no substitute for economic policy and a well-ordered employment policy .
We still think the best way of creating jobs is to have a functioning internal market , to implement the stability and growth pact , to pursue the Lisbon objectives and to introduce the four freedoms , a deregulated and more flexible employment market and an education system which encourages lifelong learning , diversification of skills and continuing learning .
We welcome this regulation because it says yes to systemisation , simplification and bundling , yes to control and transparency , with the help of the aid register , yes to regulated employment aid for small and medium-sized enterprises , the pillars of European economic and employment policy , and because it says yes to greater coordination between the Commission 's policy and the policies of the Member States and between ministries in the Member States .
We have already moved in this direction in Austria , for example , by successfully merging the ministries of labour and the economy into a single ministry .
I should like to thank you , Commissioner , for sending out a clear signal in your statements on aid and the floods that your aid policy takes account of regional differences in economic , competition and employment policy .
Mr President , Commissioner , I have to disappoint you .
Unlike some of my colleagues , I am not very enthusiastic about the regulation before us .
I am quite sure that if no changes are made to the regulation during the consultation process many Member States will have the greatest difficulty in achieving the ambitious objectives of the European employment strategy to which they committed themselves in Lisbon .
If we are to see 70 % of the population of working age in employment by 2010 , this also requires helping older workers , giving people without good educational qualifications access to employment and getting disabled people into jobs , all of which means that supportive measures will be needed .
I am sure that greater flexibility and structural reforms will not suffice to solve these problems .
However , Commissioner , the regulation focuses so much on competition that it will be almost impossible to achieve these objectives .
Just one example : the ceilings for support for vulnerable workers are set so low that from one day to the next all Flemish social insertion firms that provide meaningful work for the unskilled long-term unemployed will have to close down , unless we reclassify the workers as disabled .
Another point : I am still concerned that the Commission fails to recognise the institutional reality of some Member States .
In my country and in others , it is the regions that set support for employment programmes .
As the regulation is currently drafted , this responsibility comes under the specific measures , not the general measures , and must therefore be notified by the regions .
Commissioner , I think that we have found a number of arguments for the Convention to limit competition policy , but I do hope that when the Commission applies this regulation it will be able to show that , even without amending the Treaty , it is able to reach a balance between employment objectives and competition objectives .
And I should like to ask you whether it would be possible to ask the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs in charge of monitoring the Lisbon objectives for its views on this regulation .
Commissioner , we support the draft regulation and also this continuing project of the Commission , which appears to be working on a sort of general initiative , of which this could be the fourth part .
You might wonder , since I support the regulation , why I am speaking at all , but I have taken the floor because we are confused about one fundamental matter .
This is my question : why is it that , in a regulation which seeks to reduce bureaucracy through a series of measures - and we have already mentioned the specific sectors - was it decided to exclude the transport sector ?
I am taking as an example - most exceptionally - the domestic situation in Italy , where decisions have been taken over the years which have had debatable consequences , although it is also true that Italy is a country whose environmental conditions are very different from the rest of Europe .
In a regulation which regulates employment measures in sectors which already have a great many problems and which need to diversify and to retrain their workforces , singling out the transport sector for absolute exclusion from the measure would appear to be something that the Commission might want to reconsider .
Mr President , I want to welcome Articles 5 and 6 of the draft regulation , which give a positive signal to Member State governments to support special arrangements for so-called reasonable accommodation to promote the employment of disabled workers .
However , I want to ask Commissioner Monti , in replying to the debate , to address the 400 000 disabled workers , such as those at Remploy in Southend in my constituency - and in other workplaces throughout Europe - where the company employs more than 50 % of disabled workers unable to work in the open labour market .
This is known as sheltered or supported employment .
I know the Commissioner has received representations from the General , Municipal and Boilermakers Trade Union and many others that the actual organisational , administrative and transport costs of such companies should also be exempted from the state aid rules .
I understand that the advisory committee on state aids has given an initial sympathetic response to this proposal .
Tonight I hope the Commissioner will reassure this Parliament and those many disabled people who are unable otherwise to attain a job in the open workplace that Europe will fully recognise their rights and their aspirations in its competition rules .
Mr President , it would seem from today 's speeches that there is wide support for the rationale underlying the regulation , which can be described as follows .
First of all , there is a basic coherence between competition policy and employment policy , as Mr Karas quite rightly pointed out .
There are two reasons for this coherence .
Firstly , in the long term , a competitive economic environment will certainly contribute to the creation of sustainable employment , and , secondly , competition policy is sufficiently flexible - as is shown by the regulation - to combine overall rigour with the possibility of state aid where there are sufficient grounds for this .
State aid - this is another aspect of the rationale which I feel today 's speeches have picked up on very well - is , by definition , selective .
Our goal is to ensure that it is selective in a way which benefits enterprises and groups of workers which are encountering particular difficulties .
Aid for the creation of new jobs should , therefore , be granted to small and medium-sized enterprises - as Mrs Randzio-Plath pointed out - and to businesses located in assisted regions .
Further aid should be allocated to fund the employment of disadvantaged groups of workers .
This explains , amongst other things , why large companies located in non-assisted regions are excluded from the possibility of receiving aid for job creation .
This is not to be interpreted as a lack of appreciation of such enterprises : we are simply acting consistently with the desire to support other enterprises which are in situations which justify aid .
The rules are now clearer and the amount of aid granted no longer depends on complex criteria such as whether or not jobs are linked to an investment project , and , moreover , they are now consistent with the rules on regional aid and aid to small and medium-sized enterprises .
A number of speakers - Mrs Villiers , in particular - have also mentioned the value of transparency in the state aid register too .
I have to say that converting such a philosophy , which appears to be widely supported , into detailed , directly applicable provisions , is by no means a simple task .
There may be some room for negotiation as regards the precise provisions , and I note the amendments tabled in this respect .
I can tell you , for example , that we are considering the possibility of extending the definition of disadvantaged worker - I am addressing Mr Howitt , in particular - beyond that contained in the proposal published in the Official Journal in April .
That text already included a provision on women in regions where unemployment among women is higher than the regional average , as mentioned in Amendment No 1 .


To move on to the subject of transport , raised by Mr Fiori , I have taken note of your suggestion , Mr Fiori , although , as you are aware , in terms of internal Commission responsibilities , this matter falls within the sphere of competence of Vice-President de Palacio , of course .
I will just say that there are specific concerns regarding the excess of capacity in certain parts of this sector , particularly in the area of road transport , and we are , in general , of the opinion that where there are problems of overcapacity , it would not make sense to grant state aid , which could , indeed , exacerbate these problems .
We will , however , give all due consideration to your comments .
I would also like to say - and here I am addressing Mrs Van Lancker , in particular - that we are considering providing the explicit possibility for Member States to notify measures benefiting workers who are not covered by the definition of disadvantaged workers .
Moreover , we intend to make provision for the special case of sheltered employment for workers with disabilities .
There may also be other cases in which we might be able to consider increasing flexibility too .
I would like to end by thanking the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and the rapporteur , Mr Berenguer Fuster , once again for their very valuable contribution .
Thank you Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0233 / 2002 ) tabled by Mrs Avilés Perea , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , on the mid-term review of the 2000-2003 Daphne Programme [ 2001 / 2265 ( INI ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , in this report we are analysing the DAPHNE programme , its implementation , its achievements and its failings .
It is a programme to combat violence against women and children , essentially in the domestic environment .
This violence is a serious violation of their fundamental rights .
Violence against women results from the unequal relationship between men and women and the sex discrimination which exists in society .
The fight against violence requires an integrated approach which combines prevention , dealing with aggressors and support for victims .
The European Commission has carried out an exhaustive and rigorous mid-term assessment report on the programme , which allows us to make proposals for the future with a view to achieving the objective of ' zero violence ' .
Violence against women and children takes place in all countries , regardless of class , race or level of education .
This violence is an obstacle to achieving equality and perpetuates inequalities .
We must point out the insufficient budgetary contribution to this programme , which has only allowed a third of the projects presented to be funded .
We must pay special attention to the prevention of violence , but also to the treatment and rehabilitation of aggressors in order to prevent re-offending .
It is essential to create teaching programmes aimed at preventing violence , to be used in schools and adult education centres .
We must involve all sectors of society in the fight against violence , and in particular the media , as opinion formers and instruments for the transmission of values , so that , by means of the media , a non-stereotypical image of women may be transmitted , also of children and of victims in general .
The way news about acts of violence is transmitted is also essential to the subsequent evaluation of them .
The NGOs have played an important role in the fight against violence , but the public institutions must also be involved - so far only 10 % of the programmes have been implemented by them - as well as universities and study and research centres .
We need more information on real violence , since we only have knowledge of a small proportion of it .
We must have common indicators and a common database .
The Member States should update their legislation so that they have more appropriate instruments for combating violence .
In certain countries there already exists the right to remove the aggressor from the shared home , with the corresponding accompanying measures .
The victims must be protected and we must ensure that it is not they who have to flee and hide .
Better police training in this field would be of great help .
The DAPHNE Programme should continue after this one ends , since the problem unfortunately persists and we know that it is difficult to eradicate , and therefore actions taken to increase awareness in society and try to change the sexist mentality which still persists must be welcomed .
Amongst these measures we propose a European Year for combating violence against women and children .
Finally , I would like to point to the need to change the legal basis of the Programme .
This is the right time to do so , since the European Convention which is reviewing and updating the Treaty has the opportunity to modify it , and I would therefore affectionately ask Commissioner Vitorino , whose sensitivity towards all these problems we are well aware of , to insist , to apply pressure , to do everything humanly possible to introduce into the Treaty a legal basis which facilitates the fight against violence towards women and children throughout the European Union .
I am aware of the difficulties involved in this , but I trust in your ability to achieve it .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too should like to congratulate the rapporteur on her broad-based approach to the problem of violence and its many expressions and for proposing that we continue and make better use of this programme .
Our mid-term report assesses how far we have come in raising awareness of the problem of violence and how to deal with it .
However , the painful truth is that violence persists in our society , forcing us to adopt more radical and efficient measures , such as introducing a legal basis in the Treaty or organising a European year on this topic , as the rapporteur suggests .
I , for one , am very keen to see a wide-ranging information campaign using every possible means and involving every agency in the overall campaign in the European Union and the candidate countries , which will reach small , particularly remote societies where , as we know , violence persists in the family , in schools and on the streets .
And , over and above this objective , we need to encourage the whole of local society to get involved , as the Commissioner has already said .
Taking stock so far , we can see that , although the programme is open to regional and local authorities , their level of involvement is only somewhere in the region of 10 % , while non-governmental organisations working at local and regional level are prevented from taking part by the need to create internal links by finding partners in other Member States and by the complicated management of the programme .
It is therefore vital , I think , that the final report contain an in-depth analysis of the quantitative and qualitative involvement of the various agencies and the mechanisms they use to cooperate and of the impact which the programmes have on local society .
This will help us study and propose new ways of ensuring small agencies join the programme and areas in which little action has been taken so far , such as reviewing educational programmes which generate violence and educating teachers and journalists .
Similarly , if we are to make better use of the programme , we need to look at it in relation to other , similar programmes , especially national programmes to reduce violence and help victims .
Mr President , the Group of the Party of European Socialists welcomes the Commission 's mid-term review of the Daphne programme .
This programme has proven to be highly effective in combating violence against children , young people and women , even though it has had very little funding .
Daphne was born of an initiative by Commissioner Anita Gradin and the European Parliament and it is a perfect example of how , with huge personal commitment on the part of everyone involved in the programme and in implementing the project and clear political will , results can be achieved and new policies developed .
Because violence is such a massive phenomenon , it has been hard to narrow the Daphne programme down .
This is a taboo subject in the twilight zone .
There is a lack of unequivocal data .
But we know from studies that every third woman has experience of some form of gender-related violence .
One in five women suffers violence at the hands of their spouse or partner .
According to IOM estimates , 500 000 people are caught up in trafficking in the European Union every year , mainly women and children , while other women are at risk of genital mutilation .
We were only able to support 73 projects under Daphne in 2000 and 2001 , just 12 % of the projects proposed , causing some frustration among NGOs .
Four million euros a year - hardly enough to move mountains - but enough to raise expectations and then dash them .
But what is important is that Daphne was a multi-disciplinary tool and the Commission should continue to demonstrate flexibility here .
For example , the violence monitoring centre in Dublin overseen by the European women 's lobby provides excellent data .
It also has managed to draft a good overview of the measures introduced and the legal instruments in the Member States .
It brings synergies between players and projects at national , European and international level together .
Unfortunately , the central and eastern European countries are still not involved enough .
Only 6 % of organisations even have any resources to put into projects .
We found out during our delegations ' trips to the candidate countries that there is a tremendous need here ; they are hugely willing but financially unable and these two factors need to be reconciled in the NGOs .
It is important not to stop at the external borders of the European Union .
Russia , the Ukraine , Belorussia , nowhere is safe from this phenomenon , which also affects us here in the European Union .
We need to open up more and include other Community programmes in the Daphne programme .
I and my group think it is important that we build on our experience from the first half of the programme to strengthen synergies in the second half of Daphne .
This is stated in item 12 of the resolution .
We must continue with the campaign against violence and with preventive measures .
There are excellent examples of this on the external borders in the form of warnings to young women .
We have achieved good results with our networks , with the NGOs , and these now need to be implemented in the Member States .
What we really need - and this has been pointed out and called for on several occasions - is a European Year against Violence .
Commissioner Reding , who is responsible for communications , has already given the go-ahead .
Now we must push in the Convention for a clear statement to the effect that , from the point of view of the legal basis , this is not just a public health issue ; internal security is also at risk if violence against women continues .
Mr President , violence against women and children , despite having been condemned in successive UN and European Union resolutions for constituting an unacceptable and intolerable breach of their fundamental rights , is still a reality in our society , including in Portugal .
Especially domestic violence , one of the most common forms of violence , although one of the least visible , and which involves huge human , social and economic costs for all of society , in addition to being a threat to the safety , the physical integrity , the freedom and the dignity of women .
Hence the importance of an integrated approach enhancing the measures , actions and financial means which the Daphne programme provides for , but which are insufficient , as has also already been emphasised .
Furthermore , as the report states - and I must congratulate the rapporteur - in the European Union around 500 000 people per year , the majority of whom are women and children , are victims of trafficking in human beings for the purpose of sexual exploitation , which also requires more effective measures in the fight against all forms of violence and in supporting victims , including increasing the financial means that are currently earmarked for this purpose .
I should also like to draw attention , however , to the field of prevention , by creating more high-quality employment , better social provision and support and by paying greater attention to education against violence , by providing more information and improving promotion of women and children 's rights .
I therefore urge the Commission , the Council and the Member States to take account of the proposals put forward by Parliament , capitalising on the experience gained since 1997 and presenting a new action programme with appropriate financial appropriations , and also counting on the full participation of the candidate countries and the creation of a common database to eliminate violence .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , you know that this report has been unanimously accepted without amendments .
There are no contradictions in this report and in this revision of the Daphne programme .
Everyone is in agreement .
This initiative , instigated by the European Parliament 's Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , has been a great success .
Not only in Europe but also in many distant regions of the world , as my fellow MEPs have already mentioned .
Sadly , it cannot be regarded as an unqualified success , as the Commissioner has already indicated .
This programme may be drawing to a close , but I have heard many positive indications that it could continue although there may not be sufficient funds in view of all the associated problems .
One of the questions I should now like to raise is whether , in the case where certain projects have been approved by the Commission but cannot be funded , the Commission and your Commissioner could not recommend that the Member States , who are after all responsible for the projects , should take over a project .
This would mean that a project would be funded by a Member State instead of the Commission , encouraging the Member States to undertake high-profile activities in their own country , perhaps also involving NGOs and public bodies such as local councils .
The Spanish Presidency has selected violence against women as one of its priorities .
This led to a major study into the measures taken by various Member States and an examination of best practice .
The Danish Presidency continued along this path , but I should like to take this opportunity to draw your attention to one particular aspect which I think deserves more funding : violence within the family .
Why ?
A survey conducted among the Antwerp police showed that 70 % of all police work related to events directly connected with violence within the family .
This includes incest , attacks by children on their parents and vice versa .
Violence against elderly relatives , psychological problems , physical and mental violence before and after divorce , when exercising visiting rights or in the case of a newly formed family unit .
I am not just talking about children who grow up in a violent family and so see this behaviour as normal , but also of a general blurring of moral standards .
Sometimes the reverse occurs : one of the parents grew up in a disruptive or violent family and wants to spare their children this experience at whatever cost .
This parent becomes over-protective and exerts too much discipline .
The other family members either accept this situation or feel oppressed and rebel .
In situations like this children may run away from home or attack their parents .
Or girls growing up in circumstances like this later on unconsciously choose a tyrannical partner and often become the victim of domestic violence .
Making all these problems a fit topic for discussion in our society opened up a Pandora 's box .
We cannot abandon the victims to their fate , failing to provide support or a way out .
I 'm thinking here not just of the traditional activities like helplines , reception centres and safe houses , but also of training projects .
Training and educational projects for people when they first come into contact with a possible victim and have the opportunity to help him or her out of their isolation : groups like doctors , teachers and police officers .
Because acting when violence first occurs also prevents escalation and is the most important step in prevention .
I should also like to stress just how important Daphne is .
It was a project undertaken by a number of NGOs in various countries together with an international organisation : the International Organisation for Migration .
They devised a project in the context of cooperation in helping the victims of human trafficking .
That project was very successful , which is why I see it as so important that the projects can be continued and further refined .
In fact , on 17 October the European Parliament will be holding a round table presenting a video , a brochure and a website where politicians like ourselves , police officers , journalists , researchers and students can obtain information .
I should just like to tell my colleagues how important this is .
Mrs Avilés Perea expressed it very well .
We need the International Year against Violence , and subsidies .
Perhaps we should put more pressure on our Member States to get involved .
Mr President , I would like to start by congratulating the rapporteur on her work , on the figures and statistics presented , which , although there is a lack of homogenous data , reveal that violence against women and children is an extremely disturbing phenomenon .
The most recent data on domestic violence and violence within the home , which reveal how one in five women is the victim of violent acts committed by her husband or partner , are incredible .
These acts of violence are often never exposed and sometimes even end in the murder of the victim .
In the face of such tragic figures , we are astounded at the allocation of such an inadequate sum , even taking into account the increase of the 2002 budget by EUR 1 million .
We are also astounded that public bodies have only accounted for 10 % of the participants .
The role of public bodies is , indeed , decisive , both in terms of training specialised staff and in terms of the provision of information on and prevention of acts of violence and abuse perpetrated against women and children .
In particular , we need to create or improve counselling and legal advice centres which will be able to guarantee and provide maximum protection for the victims , as well as free psychological and legal assistance .
It would be desirable to include teaching spaces dedicated to the prevention of child abuse and domestic violence in school curricula .
Lastly , my group fully supports the idea of a European year of action to combat violence against women and children .
However , I agree with my colleagues : if the legal basis is not changed , there is little of actual practical , effective use we can do to combat these terrible offences .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the Commission because this is the result of perseverance and of having believed in something which had never before been dealt with .
Therefore , in recent years , during this legislature and during previous ones , a European awareness is being created of the problems of violence against women , against children and in the home .
I believe we should insist on this working approach despite the fact that it is difficult to introduce the credibility and importance of these ideas into the policies of the countries .
Let us consider what is happening in many European countries . Organised prostitution , domestic violence , the alarming increase in violence against children and the abandonment of many of them by their families , demonstrate that we are talking about an issue which must be dealt with through a system of shared competences .
In this regard , I fully support the proposals of Mrs Avilés and I very much agree with what the Commissioner has said .
To put it another way , Europe must create a minimum referential legal framework both for violence in the home and the obligation of the States to protect the victims and for trying to prevent the irreversible damage being done to children who are witnesses to horrors , minors who live in an atmosphere of fear and who cannot escape violence .
Furthermore , it is very clear , and I would like to stress this , that the majority of abandoned children and those who suffer horrors in their own homes are in this situation because the family has broken down or has never existed .
Consequently , their protection and education cannot be dealt with within the family framework .
Other protection and defence strategies must be put in place since sometimes the family is a repressive environment .
Furthermore , I have the feeling that we are getting used to so many cases arising .
In this regard , I would ask for the implementation of a right for children which is binding for the Member States and that this obligation be taken into account when discussing the countries which are to join the European Union .
It is impossible to carry on working without a basic legal framework , particularly when we know we are not protecting the victims .
Mr President , at the moment I can do little more than thank the rapporteur and the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities for this excellent report .
I also thank the Commissioner for his response to the report and his commitment to renew this programme .
I am a patron of an organisation in Ireland called Women 's Aid .
It is a national organisation which has benefited greatly from the Daphne programme .
It provides shelter for women and children who are the victims of domestic violence .
It also provides advocacy and public education and research .
The problem we are dealing with here is deeply ingrained in our society , not just in far-off , distant societies which have particular religious views in relation to women .
In Europe also there is a deeply ingrained misogyny in our society .
It is not going to be rooted out overnight .
It will require education and addressing the culture that we live in ; it requires addressing the attitudes of our media .
Our hope lies with our children and in trying to ensure that we inculcate in them a respect for the dignity of every human being , male and female , adult and child alike .
Mr President , I should like , first of all , to thank all the speakers for their contributions to this debate and to emphasise the political visibility given to this issue by the Spanish Presidency , which created a momentum which , I feel sure , will be maintained by the current Danish Presidency , during which I hope that the framework decision on the trafficking of women and children for the purpose of sexual exploitation will finally be approved by the Council .
We are extremely close to achieving this approval and I hope that it will be formalised during this presidency .
The only substantial answer that I should like to give at the moment concerns funding .
I believe that it is sometimes tempting to think that , when an activity is eligible for Community funding , Community monies can be a replacement for national funding . In reality , however , the rules of our conception state that Community funding is additional to national funding in a task of this scale and of this political importance .
Hence the importance that the Commission attaches to the public authorities of the Member States also being able to apply for the Daphne programme , because this would create a situation that encourages the Member States themselves to participate in projects and to invest financial means in combating violence against women and children .
There is one problem , however , that I do not wish to ignore : the issue of the debate on funding is very closely related to that of the legal base .
A clear , explicit and solid legal base in the Treaty would provide another lever for the funding of a project of this nature .
As long as we have to work within the scope of Article 152 we shall continue to have problems .
I sincerely hope that , with this debate , we might reach agreement on the joint efforts to be developed in the Convention so that the future Constitutional Treaty of the European Union enshrines the fight against violence towards women and children as an objective of the Treaty on European Union itself .
Thank you Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0256 / 2002 ) by Mrs Smet , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Legal Affairs , on the scoreboard on implementing the social policy agenda [ 2001 / 2241 ( INI ) ] .
The purpose of the annual scoreboard for the implementation of the social policy agenda is to ascertain how much progress has been made towards the objectives laid down in Lisbon and Nice .
The essence of these objectives is the creation of a European social model to eliminate poverty and unemployment , create high-status jobs , encourage lifelong learning , modernise the social security system and do away with all forms of discrimination .
The 2000-2006 period is a crucial time in this respect as changes in the economy , demographics and migration have rarely been as great as they are now .
It is therefore to be expected that Parliament , as the mouthpiece par excellence of what is of concern to the European population , should keep a close watch on assessment of progress .
The document put before us by the Commission gives us a first-class overview of the activities which have been undertaken and of what we can expect in the near future .
But what is missing - and this is my main criticism - is a six-year summary of what has to be done .
Parliament takes the view that the extent of annual progress can only really be judged in the light of the targets set for the six-year period in question .
Parliament expects more from the Commission than an annual report .
It requires a six-year programme containing initiatives to be taken and the instruments to be used for each initiative , such as legislation , open coordination or negotiations between social partners , and deadlines for the completion of these initiatives .
As part of its interim evaluation in 2003 , the Commission must attempt to work out a different type of scoreboard and present it to Parliament .
Parliament already made this request last year and is repeating it this year .
This brings me on to my second criticism : the lack of Parliament 's involvement .
The Commission knows full well that the European Parliament is the greatest advocate of the social aspect of European development , much more so than the Council of Ministers .
We have plenty of examples of this , starting with European legislation which Parliament usually pushes further than the Council of Ministers would like .
I therefore fail to understand why the Commission took so little trouble to involve Parliament at an early stage in devising the social policy programme .
The Commission 's document is dated 19 February 2002 and was approved at the Spring Summit in March .
Parliament needs at least 2 months to produce a report through its committees and plenary sessions , and that does not give us much time .
I would therefore advise the Commission to ensure that it submits its next report by the end of December , so that a useful dialogue with Parliament can be organised .
It should be possible for this dialogue to progress positively and quickly if the Commission takes account of the comments made in Parliament 's two previous reports .
Finally , a few words on one of the instruments of social policy , open coordination .
The success of this method lies in the fact that it has given us a way to coordinate the policy of the 15 Member States , to bring the 15 Member States behind a coherent set of objectives and to provide the 15 Member States with best practices to achieve those objectives .
And all this in areas where binding European Union legislation is not desirable or not possible .
The difficulty for Parliament is that its involvement is not , or not adequately , regulated .
The method has a high input from many groups outside this Parliament .
This raises the question of whether the use of the open coordination method and the participation of the European Parliament can be better aligned in the context of the Convention and the Intergovernmental Conference .
We hope the Commission will support us in this .
Mr President , I should like to make a point of thanking Mrs Smet for her report on the scoreboard on implementing the social policy agenda .
As she quite rightly points out , the social policy agenda for the years 2000 to 2006 is the first common commitment adopted , including by the Council , and the first European charter of social commitments and actions .
The first year , 2001 , was a special case which we discussed last year .
It was the first year we ran it and it had serious shortcomings and problems .
This year , we have our first detailed scoreboard , containing a step by step analysis of the progress made in this particular policy area .
The comment last year was that the description only applied to the Commission .
I think it is clear that , this year , we have a detailed description of all the agencies involved in each action .
One example is the proposal for socially sensitive restructuring in the business sector , which describes the role of the Commission , the European Parliament , the social agencies , the social partners , governments and civil society .
Of course I agree with Mrs Smet and her comment in the report that we should always look forward as well as back , i.e. not just to how specific agencies have been involved but also to the objectives they have set for the following stages .
The following stages will be examined to a certain extent in the first mid-term review in 2003 .
The period from 2003 to 2005 is also important .
There will be an initial progress report and we shall be able to make any changes deemed necessary .
I should point out here that the European Parliament will be fully involved in this mid-term review because as Mrs Smet says , and I am sure no-one disagrees , Europe 's basic ally in all social policy proposals is the European Parliament .
It is more often than not Parliament which is the driving force behind the European Union in social policy .
I should like to comment on three points which I feel are instrumental to the debate .
First that , with cooperation between the Commission and the European Parliament , most of the social policy agenda initiatives planned for 2000 to 2002 have been brought to a successful conclusion or are under way .
Secondly , as has already been mentioned , we have found a modus operandi with the method of open cooperation between the Member States and , to a certain extent , a way of including the role of Parliament in this method .
Of course , this is a first step and what we need to do is identify the basic , fundamental role of the European Parliament and this is something the Convention will need to address .
The third point is that , as with the European Parliament , we need to find a legal basis for involving civil society in discussions in the Convention .
I should like to make a point of thanking the European Parliament for its constructive cooperation .
We look forward to receiving your individual comments .
Mr President , the scoreboard on implementing the social policy agenda is obviously extremely valuable because it allows us to draw conclusions as to the progress made .
I have had the honour of drafting the relevant opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights .
To be perfectly honest , I had little to add to the very detailed report drafted by Mrs Smet , who also happens to be an active member of the European Parliament 's Committee on Women 's Rights .
The importance and value to women of implementing this agenda is obvious , given that , over recent years , most increases in employment have affected women .
Around two-thirds of the new jobs which it is estimated will be created between 2002 and 2010 will be filled by women , which is why I was especially pleased , Commissioner , with your communication a short while ago about the new initiatives which you have taken on behalf of the Commission to coordinate economic policy and employment policy .
The procedure for assessing progress , despite the shortcomings pointed out by Mrs Smet in her report , is without doubt a very useful tool , especially at a time of economic recession , when the pressure is on to relax social policy and to abandon efforts to reduce economic inequalities and combat social exclusion .
We therefore welcome the initiative taken by the Danish Presidency to highlight the problem of social exclusion and the various repercussions that social exclusion has on the two sexes .
Mr. President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by congratulating Mrs Smet on her excellent work .
The scoreboard on the application of the Social Agenda must allow the progress made in terms of the application of that Agenda to be monitored , but it must also act as a rapid alarm call when there are delays in the implementation of the measures announced .
I believe that the rapporteur has been able to harmonise both aspects in her report .
Furthermore , in its application , the Social Agenda should not , in my humble opinion , be treated as an unaltered or unalterable programme .
Designed by people for people , I see it as an evolving programme which demands subsequent adjustments , as the mid-term assessment of the progress achieved , to be carried out in 2003 , will demonstrate .
Commissioner , much has been done in terms of the development of the European social model , but I would venture to say that there remains much to be done , and in different fields .
Sex equality policy , measures to combat social exclusion and poverty , policies on the integrating of disabled people socially and taking advantage of the capacities they do have , and opting for life-long learning and training and , with it , the need to adapt to the new forms of work and the reconciliation of work with family life .
In any event , there is a demand which I would like to highlight and draw the Commission 's attention to .
I am referring to the new forms of work , with the new risks inherent in them and therefore the concern about the forms of participation in productive processes by means of productive externalisation or decentralisation - subcontracting , the presence of freelancers , independent workers - in the field of the risks of the contracting company , etc .
Hence the need for the application of measures aimed at preventing risk - inherent in all forms of work , but sometimes imperceptible and blurred in the context of these new forms of production - being converted into work accidents .
I believe that these measures would be viable for all workers , employers and society .
Mr President , I want to congratulate the rapporteur on this report and indeed congratulate Commissioner Diamantopoulou for her very excellent work in this area of social policy .
A major step forward was made for the European Union at the Lisbon Summit , in its commitment not only to a competitive , dynamic economy but also to a society which is cohesive and based on full employment .
Too often we hear spokesmen from the various political groups talking purely about the idea of a competitive economy and ignoring the balance we need to ensure within the European Union in terms of modernising and deepening the social model that we have in Europe .
The Nice Summit also took a major step forward in adopting the new social agenda .
If we had had a referendum in Ireland on that , rather than on the Treaty of Nice , it would have received 100 % support .
Unfortunately we do not have to vote on these issues at this stage .
But it was an important advance .
I have to say , however , that progress seems to have considerably slowed down since then .
I have no doubt there are forces or elements in the European Union - both in the Commission and in the Council - which are deliberately seeking to slow down progress on this agenda .
It seems to me to be short-sighted .
If we are serious about creating a European Union which has the support of the citizens , we must give a balanced commitment to the development of a social Europe .
Even for the centre right it makes sense .
If they are serious about Europe and creating a Europe of states and peoples , then we must ensure that equality , cohesion and solidarity rule right across the Union .
I feel there are inadequacies in the scoreboard itself .
Not all the progress has yet been measured .
I welcome the idea of a mid-term review for early next year and I look forward to participating in it .
I hope that in the years ahead , particularly in the Convention and the subsequent IGC , we can succeed in ensuring that the commitment that began to be developed in Lisbon and subsequently in Nice can be incorporated and deepened in a constitution for the European Union which guarantees that we have not only a competitive Europe but a Europe that cares equally for all of its citizens .
Mr President , I too should like to begin by congratulating Mrs Smet on having , as usual , done a sterling job .
In my own country , Sweden , a national election campaign is under way right now .
Those in Sweden who belong to the same political group as Mrs Smet usually maintain that the social agenda is not something for Europe but that social policy is a matter only for the individual Member States .
I usually put forward Mrs Smet 's view .
Despite our belonging to different political groups , we are in complete agreement about the need for national social agendas .
A European social agenda is also needed , however , as something which is becoming more and more important .
Like Mr De Rossa , I approve of what happened in Lisbon .
Incredible progress was made , and we succeeded in broadening and deepening the social agenda .
At the same time , I am rather uneasy about the signals which have been produced in the course of last year and which I see in terms of attempts to throw the Lisbon process off balance .
The talk now is simply of companies and of competition between companies , and the social dimension is forgotten .
It is therefore good that there are MEPs who wish to go beyond party boundaries in promoting the social aspects , and I wish again to congratulate both the Commission and Mrs Smet on their work .
I also share Mrs Smet 's views on the scoreboard , namely to the effect that it must be more forward-looking and strategic and be based upon the conclusions from the spring European Councils .
I hope that the Commission too will take that view on board , as well as the open coordination method , which is something to which we have returned time and again .
We have debated this on many occasions , and I am myself a proponent of the open coordination method .
It has meant that we have been able to develop cooperation in new areas .
If the open coordination method is to be successful in the long term , it must not however be applied behind closed doors .
If the method is to be employed for a long time , it must be subject to democratic control and be debated both here in the European Parliament and in the national parliaments .
We must hope that the Convention will get to grips with this issue so that the open coordination method is taken account of in the Treaties .
The social agenda is important in another perspective too , namely people 's willingness to take the EU project to heart .
The social agenda concerns precisely those questions that people consider to be important - the fight against poverty , together with increased employment and a more just society - and that is why the social agenda is important .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Social Policy Agenda is a dynamic programme and , therefore , likely to be adjusted .
Hence the importance of the annual assessment panel , enabling the European Parliament to monitor and control the implementation of the Social Agenda , analysing the past and programming the future .
The rapporteur , Mrs Smet , has presented a magnificent price of work , which criticises the Commission communication and lays bare its weak points , as well as making clear and lucid contributions to the future implementation of the Agenda .
Employment is the European Union 's number one priority .
In 2000 , the employment rate reached 63.2 % . Despite the creation of around 3 million new jobs , it is still 7 % below the Lisbon Summit objective for 2010 and the number of unemployed still persists , at 14.5 million European citizens .
The low employment rates of older workers , the disparities between men and women , both in terms of the employment rate and of remuneration ( 18 % and 14 % respectively ) the high levels of unemployment - around of 8 % of the workforce - and regional differences in employment constitute structural weaknesses that require attention and active measures .
The committed involvement of the social partners is crucial .
Poverty and social exclusion are other issues that deserve increased attention .
More than 60 million people are living at risk of poverty .
This phenomenon varies , as is known , between Member States , but we are not mistaken in considering the fight against poverty and exclusion and their eradication to be the greatest challenge facing us .
Therefore , the Commission must speed up the works that are underway in the aim of understanding and assessing the phenomenon , paying particular attention to women .
With regard to promoting equal treatment between men and women , this Commission assessment panel still lacks an overall strategic approach . Consequently , the Commission must propose measures to improve the situation of women and , in parallel , to adopt initiatives to promote their full participation in decision-making in the workplace .
Thank you Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
. ( PT ) We welcome the fact that on an issue as sensitive and as topical as the definition and harmonisation of operational standards to make air navigation safer , a broad consensus has been reached between the actors involved , resulting in an agreement between the various operators on limiting flight times and crew rest requirements .
We therefore share the rapporteur 's conclusions , because they reveal the urgent need for the gradual adoption of technical standards guaranteeing increasingly high safety standards and in the aim , furthermore , of enabling passengers to have the utmost confidence in European air transport .
. ( PT ) As the rapporteur states , ' The oversight and enforcement of the implementation of EU environmental law is already very unsatisfactory ' .
In fact , in a field which is increasingly important to Europe 's citizens , who are already aware of the importance of managing , rationalising and protecting their environment , we are still seeing on a regular basis , brutal attacks on what is everyone 's cultural heritage .
This betrays an inadequate legislative framework and unsatisfactory coordination between actors and the Community authorities .
In order to end this state of affairs , better monitoring and practical and firm action are required on the basis of the reports sent by the Member States to the European Commission every three years .
Incidentally , we are seeing worrying levels of delay in implementing infringement procedures .
Everything must be done , therefore , to enable the Commission ' to come up with a coherent picture of what is happening over a whole sector of policy - as with waste management ' , thereby responding to the increasing and increasingly insistent concerns of Europe 's citizens .
Hence my vote in favour of this report .
Iraq
The first item is the Council and Commission statements on Iraq followed by a debate .
Mr President , I do not simply want to repeat or parrot what the Minister has just said in his comprehensive speech about what has led up to the present situation .
So I will discard some of my remarks that would otherwise have been rather repetitive , which should allow even more honourable Members to take part in this exceptionally important and , I think in terms of procedure , almost unique debate .
Over the past few weeks Iraq has figured more and more prominently , as the Minister just said , on the international agenda .
The situation appears to be evolving day by day .
What is plain , whatever else may be doubtful , is that the risk of a very grave new crisis is increasing .
Many important voices have been raised , not least in Washington , about how to deal with Iraq and with the problems linked to its possession and development of weapons of mass destruction .
Positions have been expressed by many key players , including European governments .
I note from this morning 's papers what was said only yesterday .
Against the background of this tumult of speeches and articles , I would like today simply to concentrate on the things we know with certainty and on which we should all be able to agree .
First , as pointed out by Baroness Nicholson 's excellent overview of the present situation in Iraq , which we discussed in this Chamber last May - and I agree , incidentally , with everything the Minister said about our concern for the people of Iraq - we can have no doubt about the evil nature of the regime led by Saddam Hussein .
That was made manifest in the excellent report that we discussed in May , albeit , I have to say , with slightly fewer people in attendance than is the case this morning .
Terrible events have occurred throughout the 23 years of his rule : wars , aggression and brutal internal repression , including the use of chemical weapons against his own people .
There is , in his country , a total absence of basic human and civil rights and I have no doubt that the Iraqi people would be better served by new and different leadership .
Indeed , I would be surprised if anybody thought that they are best served by this leadership , not just the Iraqi people , but the Middle East region and indeed the whole world .
His is not the only regime that the world would be better off without - there are a lot of others as well - but it is certainly as high on the list as any .
Secondly , following the departure of UN inspectors in 1998 , a UN Security Council Resolution , No 1284 , which the minister referred to , was adopted in December 1999 , establishing a new arms inspection entity , UNMOVIC , and setting out what Iraq has to do to have UN sanctions lifted .
Notably , it had to cooperate with the inspectors ' in all respects ' .
This means that Iraq should give full unrestricted access to UNMOVIC inspectors to any site , area , equipment and installation at any moment without any conditions .
Yet Iraq never complied with this Security Council Resolution - just as it failed to cooperate with the UN throughout the 1990s - there were nine Security Council Resolutions - either refusing entry to UN inspectors , or imposing unacceptable conditions on their operations .
This House has always been absolutely clear about the importance of the UN in securing better global governance of our troubled planet and I do not think that you can exempt Iraq from those considerations .
According to the UNSCOM report of January 1999 , there are legitimate suspicions that the Iraqi regime is developing weapons of mass destruction .
It is not the Commissioner for External Relations who is saying this , UNSCOM is saying it .
At this point in time , no clear evidence has emerged , although it should be noted that the Iraqi Government has not facilitated the task of the UNSCOM inspectors to gather evidence about this .
Whenever I think about this issue , one question crops up again and again . If the Iraqi regime has nothing to hide , why do they bar access to the UN-mandated inspectors ?
It is not an unreasonable question to ask .
I think two conclusions stand out clearly , from whatever point people come to this argument and this debate , which is going to cause a great deal of passionate discussion in the next few weeks and months .
First , we must continue to press for full Iraqi compliance with the UN resolutions .
Is there anybody in Parliament who disagrees with that ?
Good !
We have a consensus .
The situation may not quite exist in other countries yet , but at least we can begin in this Parliament with a consensus on that point .
The EU Presidency declaration of 20 May reaffirms European Union support for United Nations Security Resolution No 1284 and unhindered access for UNMOVIC inspectors .
Second , we must recognise that efforts to force Iraqi compliance are more likely to succeed if they are backed by a coalition of concerned parties as broad and effective as that which was put together with great diplomatic finesse in 1991 and which helped to secure the expulsion of Iraqi armed forces from Kuwait after the unprovoked invasion of that country .
We should also be looking for as broad an international coalition to secure UN compliance as possible .
Again , that seems to me to be a perfectly reasonable proposition .
We must all respect the authority of the United Nations and of international law .
The Security Council has charted the way forward in dealing with this intensely difficult problem and every nation should act within the framework of the decisions and resolutions issued by the United Nations .
Finally , the plight of Iraq 's population - and this was a subject that we certainly discussed at some length on the basis of the honourable Member 's report back in May - has highlighted the difficulty of dealing with a regime which is as ruthless as it is reckless .
Since the Gulf War in 1991 the EC has been the major donor of humanitarian aid to Iraq .
We have contributed over EUR 270 million .
Over the last three years we have provided assistance of some EUR 10 million annually .
In 2002 we shall provide around EUR 13 million .
Yet the impact of our help is reduced by the limitations placed upon it by Saddam Hussein 's regime .
That is why we strongly welcomed UNSC Resolution No 1409 , to which the Minister referred last May and which introduced so-called ' smart sanctions ' intended to limit Saddam Hussein 's ability to develop weapons of mass destruction while also limiting his ability to inflict hardship on his own population .
Meeting at Elsinore last weekend , Europe 's Foreign Ministers called for full implementation of the UN resolutions and a resumption of inspections without excuses , without prevarication , without ' ifs ' or ' buts ' .
That is obviously the best way to proceed .
I would like to make a couple of personal remarks .
I hope that , as the debate on how to achieve these shared objectives continues in the coming weeks , it will shed light as well as generate heat .
We need to consider how we can best limit the production and proliferation of weapons of mass destruction .
We have to look at how we can continue successfully the international campaign against terrorism on as broad a front as possible .
We have to promote the end of violence in the Middle East , the restoration of a peace process and the establishment of a Palestinian State living side by side in peace and security with Israel .
That is what Foreign Minister Møller in the office of presidency is trying to do this week in the Middle East , taking to the region a roadmap which suggests extremely convincingly what Europe thinks is the way to get back to peace talks and to get away from violence .
We have to prevent a gulf opening up between the democracies of Europe and North America and the Islamic World .
We have - and this may not be popular everywhere these remarks are heard - to encourage the development of participative democracy , civil society and the rule of law in all countries , including those which comprise the Arab World .
We have to think constructively about what can and should justify intervention by the international community in the internal affairs of a sovereign state .
We have to think equally constructively about whether the global rule book that has by and large governed our affairs for the last 50 years is still valid or whether it requires some changes , how it can be reinforced and strengthened .
It is important that on all these issues , which are going to shape the sort of world we live in for the next decades , Europe 's voice should be heard .
( Applause )
I would just like to offer one last thought : it is perhaps ironic that the debate on these far-reaching issues at the beginning of a new century is triggered by the question of how we should deal with a dictator whose rule exemplifies much of what was worst in the last century .
I just wish I were as certain about some of the answers to these questions as are many of those whose voices are currently raised so loud .
( Applause )
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner Patten , ladies and gentlemen , the reason for this debate here and the debate in the international community is Saddam Hussein 's dictatorial and criminal regime .
The focus of evil is in Iraq , not in the United States .
As both the President-in-Office and the Commissioner have already pointed out , Saddam Hussein already has a history of using weapons of mass destruction against his own people and against Iraq 's neighbours .
He invaded Kuwait .
If he is still stockpiling and producing weapons of mass destruction , that is a threat both to the Middle East and to the international community as a whole .
Anyone who wants to prevent a war must prevent Saddam Hussein from being able to use biological , chemical or nuclear weapons .
The way Saddam Hussein is flouting international law is quite unacceptable .
He is obliged to permit unconditional and unfettered checks by UN arms inspectors in Iraq .
That is what we in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and the European Democrats are calling for .
Saddam Hussein must comply with the demands of the United Nations .
That is why we must maintain pressure on this Iraqi dictator .
If we in Europe are not united , he will exploit that .
That is why it is unacceptable - and I am saying that very calmly - for the Federal Chancellor of Germany to talk about a German approach to this issue .
That will only encourage Saddam Hussein and weaken Europe 's unity and solidarity .
We in the European Union will only have any influence if we act jointly .
There can be only one European approach .
America 's President Bush has promised the allies close consultation .
We call on our American friends to share all the information they have with their European allies .
The use of force can only be justified if all other means fail .
The United Nations should have a monopoly when it comes to making decisions and taking action .
Military means should only be used if all other means fail , but even in that case the following questions need to be answered .
The first question is whether the coalition against terror that President Bush so impressively assembled after the events of 11 September will survive .
The second question is what the plan for the Middle East is after that .
I can only emphatically support what Commissioner Patten said when he told us that we need a peace plan between Israel and Palestine , we need a Palestinian state and an Israeli state that can peacefully coexist .
The third question is what the consequences are .
What consequences would military action have for our relations with the Arab and Islamic world , with whom we want to coexist in partnership and - if possible - in friendship ?
I know just how important an answer to this question is at the moment , because I have just visited Saudi Arabia , Dubai and Qatar .
These questions need to be answered , and on all of them we need to establish a joint position with the United States .
People are also wrestling with these questions in America - it is not as if there is only the position of Vice-President Cheney and the position of the Secretary of Defence , Mr Rumsfeld , there is also the position of the Secretary of State , Colin Powell , the position of the former Secretary of State , James Baker , and that of the former Security Advisor to the President 's father , Brent Scowcroft .
That is why there is absolutely no reason for anti-Americanism in this debate , because exactly the same debate is going on in America as here in Europe .
What is important is for the United States and the European Union ultimately to establish a joint position .
I want to request and call upon our American friends to resist the temptation of unilateralism and not to act alone .
This does not just relate to Iraq , it also relates to how we deal with the International Criminal Court .
I also call on all parties , on all the governments of the European Union , not to take unilateral action , but to follow the lead of the European Union as a whole .
I also call on our American friends to consistently act in unison with Europe on other issues , such as Kyoto , just as in the present case with Iraq .
I have the impression that our American friends see their relations with Europe more in terms of their bilateral relations with France , Germany , the United Kingdom , Italy and other states , than in terms of seeing the European Union as a single entity .
President Bush made an important speech to the Bundestag in Berlin .
We can agree with nearly everything he said , but he did not mention the concept of the European Union once in that speech !
That demonstrates how important it is to strengthen our dialogue with the US Government .
I would very much welcome it if in the foreseeable future we could also invite the US President to address this House , because if my memory serves me correctly , the last US President to address the European Parliament was President Reagan in 1986 .
All these things would help to strengthen our relations with America , with our American partners and friends .
We need to step up our dialogue with America .
We need to act together to avert the threats posed by Saddam Hussein , and above all we in Europe , the Member States of the European Union , and the European Union itself need to act together and in unison .
I say that because if we are not united , Europe cannot hope to have any influence .
That is why the top priority is for us to act jointly on the world stage through the European Union .
( Applause from the right )
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen .
Mr Haarder , I was going to congratulate you on your application of the Spartan rules of European Parliament terseness as a representative of the Council , but you have taken them to the extreme by omitting to tell us what happened in Elsinore .
Allow me , therefore , to ask you what Mr Patten asked the Members of this Parliament : is the Council unanimous ?
Do you agree with the account of the Elsinore meeting given by the Vice-President of the Commission ?
These questions are very important for this debate .
I say this because we have observed a verbal escalation on the part of the President of the United States over the summer , which , on this highly sensitive subject , comprises obvious risks .
I think we need to distinguish between two subjects : one is our judgment of Saddam Hussein 's regime in Iraq .
There is no defence for this cruel , tyrannical dictatorship , which does not hesitate to use genocide against its own people , through the suppression of both individuals and groups .
We must also , however , take account of something else .
You mentioned long-term sanctions .
These are counterproductive .
Similarly , we must take into account that we in Europe have managed to overcome the nationalism that did us so much harm in the past .
Here , too , President Mitterrand used to say that nationalism is war .
We Europeans have overcome it , but the Arab world is in a different cultural dimension , and nationalist sentiment , pride and confrontation , where necessary , make sense .
We must therefore pay close attention to what President Mubarak said , which is that unilateral intervention without the support of the United Nations would certainly have a devastating effect throughout the Middle East .
Our progress in resolving the conflict is therefore extremely important and there I believe the Danish Presidency has made an important proposal with regard to the creation of the Palestinian State .
It would be useful if the Presidency explained this to us .
We must take this into careful consideration if we are to avoid being accused of applying double standards in this situation .
With regard to the philosophy of the current American Government , I believe that Bush junior should pay greater attention to what his father did 10 years ago , for one reason : President Bush senior achieved a very broad coalition and acted in accordance with the United Nations mandate .
I am not going to talk about the debate underway in the United States , but it is odd , and it has already been said , that here civilians seem for the first time to be launching a military coup against the military forces , since those who have had military responsibilities , including in this field , are the most cautious when it comes to dealing with this issue .
Let us hope that all this remains a purely verbal escalation .
With regard to our relations with the United States , I think it would be useful for President Bush to come here , but we must also talk to the US Congress . About this , about the International Criminal Court and compliance with the application of WTO Panel decisions and resolutions on such important subjects as the Foreign Sales Act .
Although these are not the subjects of today 's debate , it is important for us to talk to the US Congress , as our interlocutor .
On the subject of Iraq - and I am anxious to hear your explanations - my group endorse the position voted by Parliament on 16 May 2002 , four days before the Council adopted it .
We think that peace and stability in the region , in a region as fraught as the Middle East , can only be ensured within the framework of the United Nations .
I hope your explanation on the position reached at Elsinore will be along these lines .
We think it is very important to maintain humanitarian aid and we hope that the United Nations , under the leadership of Kofi Annan , will be able to make Iraq comply with its international agreements and allow inspectors back into the country .
We believe this is the best way forward .
Mr President , Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein poses a real threat .
He has used weapons of mass destruction in the past to oppress his own people and in seeking to draw Israel into a wider Middle East war .
The international community has a responsibility to stop Iraq developing weapons of mass destruction .
Yet the consequences of war are potentially so serious that , for my group , it should be only a last resort .
Avoiding war does not mean letting Saddam Hussein off the hook .
Those who urge America not to launch a pre-emptive strike against Iraq are not appeasers , as Donald Rumsfeld implies when he compares George W. Bush to Winston Churchill .
To my mind that comparison is more absurd than Dan Quayle comparing himself to John F. Kennedy .
If I may paraphrase Senator Lloyd Benson I would say ' Donald , George W. Bush ain 't no Winston Churchill ' !
The real lesson of history is this : Churchill correctly identified the Nazi threat at an early stage but when he acted it was not unilaterally and pre-emptively .
He drew a line in the sand .
He acted with moral authority and international backing when that line was crossed .
Churchill did not bomb Berlin and try to overthrow the Nazi regime based on his suspicions of Hitler ; he acted in concert with his allies when it was clear that he had right on his side .
For the ELDR Group the issue today is about getting United Nations weapons inspectors back into Iraq , not about George W. Bush settling an old family score with Saddam Hussein .
The Iraqi Government must comply with UN resolutions and must let weapons inspectors back in unconditionally .
Once in , those inspectors must be allowed to go wherever they want , whenever they want .
Only if Iraq refuses to readmit inspectors , if it unreasonably obstructs their work or if those inspectors find evidence of Iraq developing weapons of mass destruction would the international community be justified in taking further action .
European governments must make clear their support for UN-backed military action in those circumstances .
If it comes to war it must be the international community that acts together , not the United States unilaterally .
A UN resolution needs to be approved setting a deadline for Iraqi compliance .
A broad international coalition must be built and must include Arab countries if we are to convince world opinion that we are not seeking a clash of civilisations .
Frankly , as the Commissioner said , our task would be a lot easier if the US showed the same focus on resolving the crisis in the Middle East , as it does on removing Saddam Hussein .
We also need to think seriously about how to rebuild stability in the region after any strike .
The international coalition , including America , must commit resources to nation-building .
Unless we rebuild its economy and society and help to develop viable political institutions , an Iraq devastated by war would risk imploding and posing an even greater danger to the stability of the region .
We cannot postpone the debate much longer by claiming that no decisions are imminent .
I would say this to the President-in-Office of the Council : Mr Haarder , it is no good saying the European Union 's position is clear while referring to a statement of 20 May .
The Union 's position is as clear as mud .
If it were clear , Ambassador Burghardt in Washington would not lament how Member States are jealously guarding their own access to the American Administration rather than acting as a common front .
Just as at the UN Summit in Johannesburg , the European Union will have influence only if it acts as a United States of Europe .
That is your job .
Consensus needs to be built about how to tackle the threat , evidence of weapons of mass destruction needs to be published and - most importantly of all - any strike needs to be backed by international law and the moral authority of the international community .
The world cannot afford the instability which would come from a unilateral and pre-emptive military adventure in Iraq .
Mr President , I am sure we all agree that the regime governing Iraq is without a doubt dictatorial , that it tramples all over human rights , and that in the past it has waged criminal wars using chemical weapons against Iran and Kuwait , and even against its own people .
Mr Haarder , I find it rather striking and not just an academic question that just now you only mentioned the war against Kuwait .
Why did you not mention that war against Iran , which involved a far greater number of deaths ?
I think the answer is obvious : the war against Iran was a war which at the time suited the West very well .
It was the West that armed Hussein and even paved the way for him to have chemical weapons .
The war against Kuwait was fought for this dictator 's own reasons .
If I say that this is not an academic issue , I say that that because we are seeking difficult answers in a very , very complicated situation .
If we want to get to the roots of war and aggression we need to ask ourselves how such situations arise in the first place .
There is also another point of view .
Hussein is an unsavoury dictator whose military position has now been clearly undermined .
There is very little to choose between him and some of our allies in the war on terror .
In Iran we have a regime that uses torture and has nuclear arms , and a nuclear arms strategy little different from that of the United States .
Quite remarkable !
Last week President Bush was virtually paying court to Prince Bandar bin Sultan , the representative of one of the most reactionary regimes on this planet .
Surely it weakens the credibility of our human rights policy and of our security policy if such people are our allies ?
I anticipate that my group will conclude that anyone who really wants to guarantee democracy , human rights and security cannot call for a war to secure them , and can certainly not indulge in hypocritical power politics that demonstrate the absurdity of our stated objectives .
That is the key issue for my group .
We are unreservedly against this war , come what may .
However , I welcome the fact that - whatever the underlying motives may be - there has been very wide-ranging criticism indeed in this House of these preparations for war .
That is far more important .
With regard to the most recent Council of Foreign Ministers , I would like to say that I have come to respect you very much here in this Parliament , but what I have heard from you today demonstrates to me that you are totally trapped in your current position .
That is unsatisfactory as far as I am concerned .
I believe that a common European policy in this area would be valuable in its own right in view of the dangers of the present situation .
I agree with Mr Poettering on that - a policy of this kind is urgently needed .
But where is it ?
I believe that we are facing a serious crisis as regards the Common Foreign and Security Policy in what is a vitally important international relations situation .
However , this community of interest cannot just be arbitrary .
I think that it involves alternatives to the US approach , to a unilateralism that I find ever more threatening , and which I think is in any case counterproductive for the United States .
So , as far as I am concerned , putting forward an alternative is anything but anti-American .
We believe not only that this war should be unreservedly rejected but also that the inhumane and politically counterproductive embargo should be lifted , with the exception of arms exports , so that Iraq 's exclusion from democratic development can be lessened .
Thirdly , the UN inspectors should go back , but on the basis of the existing mandate .
My fourth point is that we need multilateral cooperative relations and not unilateralism .
And my fifth point is that we finally need to return to disarmament .
You cannot say that you are willing to go to war to force others to disarm and at the same time rearm yourself without expecting weapons of mass destruction to proliferate .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , nobody has come here this morning to support the regime of Saddam Hussein , and I do not believe there is any point dwelling on the noxious aspects of this regime .
Personally , I would like to take up two or three points from this morning 's debate and I would like to make a point of my own .
Firstly , I will make my point : common foreign and security policy does not exist at European Union level and , for the moment , we have little or no influence .
For the time being , only the governments of the European Union are in a position to intervene in order to try to make the United States see sense .
I notice , however , and I am not alone , that there is currently no unanimity .
I note in particular that the United Kingdom is systematically aligning itself with the United States , which consequently considerably undermines any initiatives we might be called upon to take .
Secondly , I will take up the points from this morning .
I would first like to mention what Commissioner Patten said , which is that if we wish to avoid potential disaster , it is absolutely crucial to promote a very broad alliance so that action by the United States could only be taken within the framework of the decisions of the United Nations and the Security Council .
Secondly , it is vital to try to acknowledge and take account of the position of Arab countries .
The United States does not know a great deal about Muslim countries and Muslim reactions , and our fellow Member Mr Barón Crespo reminded us , just a moment ago , of what Mr Mubarak said .
There is no doubt that unilateral action determined by the United States , outside the framework of the decisions of the United Nations Security Council , with complete disregard for the domestic situation of Arab countries , would lead to disaster .
President Mubarak said himself , and I believe he is right , that in this situation , no Arab state leaders would be able to contain the outburst of feeling in their own countries .
It is obvious that we in Europe are directly affected by what could happen .
I would like to add another point : if you still doubt the will of the United States to take action , just watch CNN and you will be transfixed , because the people of the United States are being systematically conditioned everyday .
I believe that the decision to take action has been made .
It is therefore high time the governments of the European Union did something to make the United States see sense , otherwise we will face unimaginable and potentially tragic consequences .
( Applause from the right )
Mr President , one of our objectives is certainly to prevent war , to do everything possible to ensure that war is avoided , but the problem is not just defining our position for or against a possible armed intervention : the problem is seeing what Europe , the European Union , can do not just to try and avoid armed conflict but to try and stop the massacre of the Iraqi people by the dictator , Saddam Hussein , too , to do everything in its power to stop what is , in all probability , Saddam Hussein 's build-up towards the development of weapons of mass destruction , with the genuine possibility , the real danger that these weapons will be used .
This is a danger against which the United States , under the Bush administration , has decided to take a stand , adopting a position which , although erroneous , is quite clear , quite cut and dried .
If there are alternatives - and we must do everything in our power to ensure that there are - they must be developed vigorously and resolutely .
In other words , Europe , the European Union , must be the vehicle , the place , the centre where alternatives to conflict are developed : the alternatives of international law , the alternatives of the UN , the alternatives provided by what is known as multilateralism .
These alternatives must be developed with determination and must not be a smokescreen to hide ambiguities or conceal a policy which is directly or indirectly benefiting Saddam Hussein .
As the European Union , as the Union which has fought so hard to set up the International Criminal Court and other instruments imposing and promoting the rule of law and democracy , we must , of course , think back to Churchill 's Europe and consider what has been said in this Chamber today , but we must also make every endeavour to prevent Europe regressing to the situation under Chamberlain .
Mr President , there is no doubt that Saddam Hussein is a villain who has committed atrocities against his own and the Kurdish people . There is no doubt that we can well do without leaders such as Saddam Hussein .
It is worth remembering , however , who it was who helped promote him to high office . It was the same country which now wants to take the lead in bringing him down , namely the United States .
Yesterday 's friends are tomorrow 's enemies .
How long is this to continue ?
In the fight against terrorism , we have now become friends with the mullahs of Iran who still to this very day permit the stoning of women .
We are friends with the House of Saud , where democracy is a completely unknown concept .
These are today 's friends . Are they also tomorrow 's enemies , however ?
What would be the consequences of a possible attack on Iraq ?
I know that the American Congress has discussed this in detail , but where is the discussion in Parliament not only of our views and opinions concerning the United States and Saddam Hussein but also of the consequences for the whole region of a possible attack upon Iraq ?
It is already a very unstable area we are talking about .
I think the European Parliament should be involved in getting such an inquiry under way .
Moreover , I should like to ask whether there is agreement in the Council on the policy in relation to Iraq . I should like to know , for example , whether the Danish Presidency is sticking to its own traditional policy , to the effect that we do not say anything until we are asked , irrespective of the fact that the Danish Defence Minister is of the view that we should ideally attack Iraq right now .
Is the Danish Presidency in favour of a common policy on this issue ?
Is there agreement about the policy , and does this include demands for a UN mandate and for clear evidence of Saddam Hussein 's possible involvement in the attack on the World Trade Centre or collaboration with al-Qa 'ida ?
Mr President , first of all I welcome this debate this morning .
It has come at an opportune time .
To a large extent the problem we face in Iraq is the unfinished business of the Gulf War .
We have to recognise that before we begin .
Mr Watson referred to the previous President Bush and the fact that to some extent the most recent President Bush maybe hopes to resolve some of his father 's failures .
The truth is , and we have got to face it , Saddam Hussein has effectively made fools out of the international community ever since that time .
Time and time again he has led them forward by the nose and time and time again they have allowed him to get away with it .
Yes , the United Nations has done sterling work but with no success for weapons inspection to date .
I welcome Mr Blair 's statement this morning , whatever it means .
No doubt he will not be able to tell us everything but perhaps he could throw some light on the situation .
The weapons of mass destruction must be destroyed to protect the free world .
Yes , Saddam Hussein has ruled Iraq with an iron fist , he is an evil dictator .
We must ensure that Iraq is approached in a multilateral way .
There must be no unilateral approach .
I believe there must be a wide-ranging international coalition supported by the United Nations resolution .
This is not a resolution for doing nothing , as many Americans would say , but assures widespread support for that action and much of it has been outlined here this morning .
We must engage Congress as Mr Barón Crespo said , but I have to tell this House in my experience Congress is thinking of the November 5 elections and is not all that much engaged or wanting to engage in discussions with the European Parliament .
However , we in the European Union must be central to this .
Mr President , we seem to be very much in agreement on this score .
Saddam Hussein 's regime , which we all regard as dictatorial , is being denounced by the Group of the European People 's Party and European Democrats , the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and the Group of the Party of European Socialists alike .
For the past 23 years , he has systematically killed his own people and the leaders of his Stalinist regime .
Moreover , we denounce the US 's unilateral action as well .
In addition , we have noticed that Europe is still not speaking with one voice to a sufficient degree .
We would , in fact , urge the Council to take an active part in this debate in the United States now , because it is clear that there are different currents in the US .
What we could do with right now is a display of commitment to the United States that is not anti-America but pro-America by taking part in that debate now .
But that requires that we speak with one voice and take a clear stand .
I would like to say to the Security Council that this is not , therefore , a licence to launch into unilateral action .
We need the UN Security Council if we want to exert pressure on Iraq to reinstate the weapons inspections .
This also means that if we ultimately want to act and threaten with violence , we must have proof .
This proof must be clear and public .
This also means that we must at the same time be prepared to act smartly .
Mr Lagendijk of the Group of the Greens used the term ' smart sanctions ' which are , of course , a reality .
By using them , we can hit Iraq and its leadership harder and help the population at the same time .
What Commissioner Patten said here this morning is crucial .
It could be very detrimental if we unilaterally adopted the same stance in the Middle East , but we can also use this stance to enlist support for a new peace initiative along with the US .
It is essential that the Council take action in order to decide on the two-state solution .
Peace in the Middle East now , by addressing the issue of Palestine and Israel , is the key .
There is a real downside , of which President Mubarak has warned us , in fact , namely that we may head in the wrong direction .
Europe is playing a pivotal role .
Instead of neglecting this role , we must take action now .
I would ask for your support in this .
Mr President , yesterday , our group held an extensive debate on the situation in Iraq in the presence of the Spanish Minister for Foreign Affairs , Mrs Ana De Palacio .
It was striking how unanimous our group was , and Mr Hans-Gert Poettering 's outline fits in perfectly with this debate .
I should like to underline three points .
We have established that Saddam Hussein is without a doubt one of the most dangerous people of our time , with his chemical and biological weapons , which apparently he is also willing to use .
After all , he did exactly that against his own people .
We have also established that if an intervention proves necessary - but a number of conditions will need to be met first - this can never be done without UN support .
This is truly what our group unanimously believes .
Thirdly - and this is an appeal to the Commissioner and the Minister - Europe must speak with one voice and must join forces .
If this ever proved necessary , then surely now is the time .
I also have a few questions that relate to what Mr Van den Berg said a moment ago .
It appears that Europe does not have all the information that the Americans have .
In my view , if Europe is to receive support and resources , it is extremely important for all this information to be available , particularly also to the political forums and parliaments .
My second point is one of concern .
In all the comments that we make in this matter , we should also consider the situation of Israel .
If we treat the entire Arab World in the same way , this could rebound on Israel in a big way .
We must therefore , as a matter of key importance , also get the Arab world behind us in this matter .
Finally , a strategy must be developed in order to boost support in Europe , for not all citizens , by a long chalk , are convinced of the need for intervention .
For this strategy , we need a European plan , and I think that Mr Patten and the Minister will need to play an important role in this .
Mr President , we run the risk today of fiddling while Rome burns .
At any moment the current low-intensity aerial defence of southern and northern Iraq - which has been carried out at considerable personal risk by pilots from the USA , originally from France , and also from the UK , to whom I pay tribute as they have saved countless lives - may be stepped up to considerably heavier military action , which I believe will have support from a wide number of countries which are at present silent about their opinions .
The EU voice must be heard .
We must no longer stand on the sidelines , wringing our hands and repeating like a hopeless prayer ' Iraq must comply with UN conventions and the weapons inspectors must go in ' because this leopard will not change his spots .
We have ample evidence of the use of weapons of mass destruction .
I have first-hand personal evidence of the use of such weapons : chemical warfare against the southern Iraqi people in the late 1990s .
I have talked to the victims who stumbled choking from clouds of yellow smoke that must have been mustard gas .
We have evidence first hand of the destruction of the environment , the water , the degradation of life in the marshes of the deep south , for example .
We talk in Johannesburg about the need to bring water to millions more people , yet we have allowed Saddam Hussein to take away the water from over half a million Iraqi people .
We have stood silent .
We have first-hand evidence of that .
We have been overflying the south since 1994 .
On human rights and genocide : as Max van der Stoel said when he was human rights reporter on Iraq for the United Nations : ' Genocide has been carried out against the Marsh Arabs and the Iraqi people ' .
We have evidence of that ; I personally have had evidence at first hand .
On weapons of mass destruction : surely our quarrel is not precisely about having weapons of mass destruction - quite a number of countries sadly have such weapons - it is what you do with them that counts .
We have the continuing threats of Saddam Hussein to invade Kuwait and Iran .
I have seen the mined borders and the tanks just over the borders from Iran .
We have that evidence available .
What can we do ?
We can set up the Office of Inquiry for Human Rights Violations that was recommended in our report , which the Commissioner so kindly referred to just now .
We had a full house - an 85 % majority for the vote on that report .
I call upon the Commissioner and the Council of Ministers to set up that office today .
( Applause from the centre and the right )
Mr President , because time is short I will start by saying what we need to do .
In the first instance we need to engage with the United States at every level . We need to engage with the Americans on a country-to-country , a union-to-union , a party-to-party , a committee-to-committee basis , at whatever level we can , not only in relation to Iraq , but in relation to the extremely dangerous unilateralist philosophy they are currently developing in regard to so many areas of world concern .
We should not ignore the fact that the current attempt to undermine the International Criminal Court has implications far wider than simply excluding American forces engaged in international conflicts .
It is a direct challenge to the European Union and is part of the attempt by the United States to establish superiority in every region throughout the world .
The only response that the European Union and its Member States can make to this and to the current attempts by the United States to generate a war psychology in relation to Iraq is to stand together .
I know it is difficult and there are differences between the Member States on this , but there is a much wider concern for the future which has to be borne in mind .
I was quite impressed by the Commissioner 's speech in which he identified the need for reform of our international law in relation to how , when and who should intervene in other states .
It is a matter which is coming to the fore more and more , particularly now that the Cold War is over and the dust is settling .
However , as far as our experience with the International Criminal Court is concerned , it is not yet opportune to start dismantling the current protections that exist under the United Nations Charter .

Mr President , Mr De Rossa can talk about United States unilateralism ; perhaps we should better refer to the United States shouldering responsibilities which are ignored by others .
What a pity it is that other countries have not joined in enforcing the no-fly zone over Iraq over the last ten years , something which has been referred to already .
Responsibility has been borne by the United States , by the United Kingdom and in the early days by France .
This is the sort of allied coming together that we should be seeing .
It seems to me that there is too much speculation about the nature of some sort of attack on Iraq while our concern should really be the threat posed by Saddam Hussein 's regime being in possession of weapons of mass destruction .
It would be a dereliction of duty by any of our governments if they were aware of a threat to our security and chose to do nothing about it .
We must take effective action against Iraq and it is most important that we show allied solidarity .
Perceptions are absolutely vital here and it would be fatal if Saddam Hussein misread the intentions of the West , of the European Union and of other allies and if he thought that he was able to create divisions among those allies .
We must send a very strong signal to Saddam Hussein that we stand together on this .
This is a signal of solidarity .
If there are any differences among allies it is time for those differences to be sorted out behind closed doors and not in public discussion .
We need to send the right message .
We started to misread the intentions of Saddam Hussein in early 1990 .
We almost made a mistake then .
We regarded him as a rational man , we rather thought that he would not invade Kuwait at that time .
In fact he is an irrational leader in control of very dangerous weapons .
We must show the solidarity to take the necessary action to remove those weapons from his hands .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the subject we are discussing can basically be reduced to two different concepts .
Can we respond to international threats by using international law and the mechanisms it provides ?
Even if these mechanisms are in need of reform , as Commissioner Patten has said , they still exist and they could be implemented in their present form .
We believe that when it comes to dealing with international threats from states like Iraq - and there is no need for me to repeat what kind of threats we could be talking about - the only way to implement international law is through the United Nations .
The alternative is to respond to these threats on a unilateral basis , which is the approach currently being adopted by the US .
Mr Poettering is quite right in saying that there is an urgent need for this process to be completed , because there is also an internal debate , although a consensus is evidently starting to emerge around President Bush .
The question that needs to be answered next is where Europe stands on this .
The answer is that we do not support unilateralism , as we have already heard , as Commissioner Patten asked how we could stabilise the international coalition against terror .
We will certainly not stabilise it if the United States undermines it by adopting a unilateral approach .
That is where there is a really great danger , because what we are actually fighting - and I would like to remind Mr Van Orden that Mr Brie has already referred to this - is the Iraqi Government , which has been so heavily criticised here , yet where did they get the technology that has enabled them to constitute such an enormous threat today ?
From the United States - in the days when Iraq was still an ally in the battle against Islamic fundamentalism in Iran , which also demonstrates that the governing Baath Party in Iraq is not an Islamic fundamentalist party .
We all know that the Muslim Brotherhoods that are persecuted in Iraq have been granted political asylum in Europe .
I only wanted to remind you about that to make it clear how complicated and dangerous unilateralism is in practice .
That is why , Mr Van Orden , we in Europe are united in saying ' no ' to unilateralism and ' yes ' to the implementation of international law .
Mr President , Commissioner Patten , as you said , we have a consensus and a desire in this House to prevent the crisis that is looming , a crisis that has been triggered by the actions of Saddam Hussein .
I would like to say to Mr Barón Crespo that no one knows better than the armed forces , both here and in the United States , that the use of force to prevent this crisis can never be clean .
There is no such thing as a clean war .
Despite progress in technology , man does not yet have the means to kill all evil people at the touch of a button , if only because it is impossible to separate the good people from the bad .
In these circumstances , war or the use of armed force may be a lesser evil .
In that case , all political and diplomatic avenues must have been thoroughly explored with a view to achieving the political objective otherwise to be pursued through the use of such force .
That is why we fully endorse the Union 's current approach which is to maintain pressure on Saddam Hussein to allow weapons inspectors to return to do their work .
Secondly , if this decision is taken , it must have a chance of achieving its aim , yet it has been made very clear to us that the objective now is to overturn the regime of Saddam Hussein .
There are two questions being raised here . The first concerns the assessment of the threat .
Mr Poettering and Mrs Maij-Weggen emphasised that we are eagerly awaiting the details promised by the British Prime Minister , which should arrive in the next few minutes .
Commissioner Patten said in his speech that he doubted whether any evidence at all would be available .
It is very important that we have this evidence .
Secondly , we must have a chance of winning .
In Afghanistan , we were sure that the Afghan people themselves were ready to bring down the Taliban regime .
Is there any chance , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , that the Iraqi people will help , in the event of military action , to topple the regime ?
That is a genuine question .
Mr President , much has been said of the evil and immoral behaviour of Saddam Hussein and rightly so , but I want to focus on the European Union and indeed on one Member State in particular , my own , the United Kingdom .
Mr Blair made it clear yesterday that he will support the US in a war on Iraq , without waiting until other options have been explored and without seeking a fresh UN Security Council resolution .
In a press conference yesterday , he implicitly backed the principle of pre-emptive action on Iraq , saying that the simple restoration of weapons inspectors into Iraq may not be sufficient to avert war .
We cannot enforce international law by breaking international law .
A war on Iraq in these circumstances would be immoral , illegal , dangerous and wrong .
Much has been said about the importance of the EU having a common front and a common voice and I agree with that .
In that case I urge the Commission , the Council and all other EU Heads of State to do all they can to help us restrain their fellow EU Member State .
Mr President , UN Resolution 678 and the 1991 US Congressional resolution predicated the whole Gulf War ceasefire agreement on the undertaking that Iraq would dispose of all weapons of mass destruction , but instead UNSCOM inspectors were expelled accused of being American spies .
Saddam Hussein still possesses huge quantities of biological and chemical weapons and three years ago he attempted to buy weapons-grade uranium from Serbia .
He has been negotiating with North Korea to acquire ballistic missile technology .
Therefore he clearly poses a global threat to oil supplies , and , were he to become a nuclear power , could hold the whole world to ransom .
Let us also be morally consistent .
Nobody in this House asked for UN resolutions to attack Milosevic 's Serbia , and human rights violations alone were deemed sufficient .
Surely Saddam Hussein 's violations of the rights of the Kurds whom he has gassed , the Marsh Arabs and the Shias whom he has tortured and killed , and the Israelis , where he has paid the families of suicide bombers to kill innocent victims , are much worse than any of Milosevic 's crimes , - not to mention the British and the Americans whom he has sworn revenge against for our participation in the Gulf War .
I remain sceptical about neighbouring countries ' concerns about military intervention , as some fear democracy in Iraq and others giving the Kurds autonomy in the north .
I welcome foreign minister de Palacio 's support yesterday for the British and American position .
I also hope that China and Russia will not veto any requests in the UN Security Council for further resolutions on this matter , should America so request .
In the West , we should support our American allies ' quest to complete the unfinished business of ridding the world of this extremely evil man .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , I would like to take the liberty of making a personal comment , because I have worked with you for a very long time and because I have always very much appreciated the open and honest way in which you have expressed your views .
It seems to me that in the course of the ten-metre journey from here to where you are sitting now you have been struck dumb .
You have not told us what happened in Elsinore , but instead you repeated what the Spanish Presidency achieved in this area in May .
I suppose that is better than nothing .
I would like to comment on Commissioner Patten 's two questions .
I can assure you , Mr Patten , that we are all in favour of observing UN resolutions .
However , the United Nations is not an organisation where you can pick and choose - we have to comply with the United Nations Charter and we also have to comply with international law .
The United Nations Charter stipulates the cases in which military means are possible and permissible , and the procedure is also laid down .
The UN Charter does not make any provision for a pre-emptive war or for a war to remove an undesirable government , and we cannot ignore that .
Anyone who wages such a war in spite of this is himself an aggressor and is himself in breach of international law .
The second question was about the broad coalition .
On that point , I can assure you that that should in fact be the European Union 's sole objective .
But we are not the ones who have split the broad coalition ; no , it has been undermined by American unilateralism .
My question to you is : how can we re-establish this unity , this broad coalition ?
Mr President , Saddam Hussein is evil .
His regime is evil .
His deeds are evil .
We have seen what he can do to his people , and we fear what he might do to the wider world .
He is totally defying the international community .
As Commissioner Patten said , the world would be a much better place without Saddam Hussein and with a different regime in Iraq .
Achieving this , however , is easier said than done .
Furthermore , it is fraught with enormous complications and very , very great risks .
Even the Pentagon has reservations about a possible attack .
We must , of course , use all diplomatic and political means in order to get Saddam Hussein to comply with UN resolutions and allow the inspectors in and in order to solve this issue .
There must of course be evidence , to which we all have access , of the existence of weapons of mass destruction and possible collaboration with al-Qa 'ida .
The EU must , naturally , stick together and insist that any attack must be subject to a UN Security Council decision .
What happens , however , if we fail to find a political and diplomatic solution , if Saddam Hussein continues to defy the international community , if we do obtain proof , and if we manage to get a common decision in the Security Council ?
What discussions have been taking place in the Council ?
What forward planning has there been ?
I do not mean military planning . Rather , I am wondering what preparations have been made to support the forces of democracy , the Iraqi opposition and the Kurds in northern Iraq and to look after our relations with the wider world .
I am absolutely convinced that these issues were discussed in Elsinore , and I would therefore be grateful if the President-in-Office of the Council could say something about them .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , if the British and the Americans want to wage war on regimes which do not respect human rights , they certainly have their work cut out for them .
If they wish to wage war on undemocratic regimes in the Middle East , they must wage war on Saudi Arabia .
If they wish to wage war on regimes which do not respect the United Nations ' resolutions , they must wage war on Israel .
If they wish to wage war on countries which have acquired weapons of mass destruction , they must wage war on India , Pakistan , China and North Korea , which have - of this we are certain - atomic weapons .
If they wish to wage war on countries which serve as a breeding ground for terrorists , they must destroy London and Hamburg .
This is the reality of the situation .
I am obviously being ironic , because the reason for this military action is clearly not Saddam Hussein 's regime , which is an authoritarian regime , of course , but also a secular regime which respects the right of Christians and of women .
This military action is about weapons of mass destruction .
So far , we have not yet been given any evidence whatsoever that they exist in a country that is dying on its feet , where light bulbs can no longer be found , where there is no lead for schoolchildren 's pencils because these are made of graphite and where even a number of UN observers condemned the role that they were being made to play .
I shall end with an anecdote : three years ago , my brother , a Catholic priest , visited Iraq .
Whilst there , he was almost killed by a bomb and , in truth , he does not know if this was an American or British bomb .
One might well ask which international law allows Iraq - which , it is true , was defeated and which , as a result of its defeat , agreed to visits by UN inspectors for many years - to be bombed on a daily basis and to continue to suffer from sanctions .
Mr President , there are two extremely sensitive issues of concern to the public of the Arab countries , including what are known as the moderate Arab countries , and they are the Palestinian issue and the impact of the embargo on Iraq .
It is the international community , not the dictator , which will be blamed for the impact of the embargo on Iraq , we must be quite clear about that .
I do not feel there is any division here , as has already been said , as regards condemnation of Saddam Hussein and his regime .
However , the repeated announcements of unilateral action by the United States - which were not the invention of the international press but have been repeated on several occasions by the President himself - are having two , extremely negative consequences : on the one hand , the interests and fate of the dictator are becoming linked to those of his people once again - you saw , even yesterday , Saddam Hussein 's declarations , ' we will resist , we will win ' - and , on the other , there is a build up of opposition to this action .
I therefore believe that the European Union must pursue the path of international law , the path of the United Nations , resolutely , and that a much , much clearer link must be established between the readmission of the UNSCOM and the end of the embargo on the Iraqi people , for this will enable us to start to dialogue with the people of Iraq .
Otherwise it will be extremely difficult to make any impact on Saddam Hussein .
Moreover , the West 's task is hardly to replace Saddam with an ayatollah , for example .
We must introduce democracy into this and other Arab countries , and I believe that , if Europe genuinely believes in this position and is united , then it will be able to make a contribution .
Mr President , a speaker on the left side of the Chamber said that we must oblige the United States to act in accordance with Europe .
I believe it is naïve to believe that we can put the United States under an obligation .
The United States does not act in order to achieve world domination . It acts only because we are exposed to the threat of a development worse than war .
If Europe cannot decide , the United States will hopefully act alone .
It is as if we have forgotten that it was the United States that rescued Europe in the First and Second World Wars and that saved us from Communist takeover .
It is naïve to believe that the United States would act without evidence .
The United States would not make large sacrifices if there were less risky alternatives .
Prime Minister Tony Blair stated clearly yesterday that they had evidence .
It is Tony Blair 's and the United Kingdom 's position we should emulate , and I would call upon the Presidency to work towards a situation in which the EU is united in rallying to the cause of combating dictatorship .
We should not of course be infringing international law by toppling a vicious dictatorship which is threatening its own people and world security , and the approach based on the UN model has of course been fully tried and tested .
The weapons inspectors were turfed out , so what is the point of bringing them back ?
Saddam Hussein has been given every warning , but he is quite clearly unreceptive to our demands , and we are merely signalling our own weakness .
Our duty towards the people of Europe is to stand shoulder to shoulder with the United States in this fight against a dictatorship that is threatening world security .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , the debate about the situation in Iraq and possible military intervention is of course also a debate about the nature of solidarity .
When some Members of this House , Mr Van Orden and Mr Tannock , talk about solidarity , they chiefly mean solidarity with the United States .
For me it chiefly means solidarity within Europe .
That is why I am concerned that the United Kingdom , but also Spain and Italy , are going down a path that suggests that this solidarity could be undermined .
What particularly concerns me is the yawning gap between the United States ' and Europe 's conceptions of international world order .
The US seems to be increasingly drawn to a theory that international agreements and organisations have , as it were , a merely substitutional role .
For the major powers at least , it seems that national sovereignty and a national view of the world have top priority .
I have great difficulty with the US view that they can decide when to support an international organisation , be it ' just ' the United Nations or the International Criminal Court , and when they themselves should act and when they can carry out pre-emptive strikes , and whereby they can define the danger and make decisions on deployment without consulting the international authorities .
Lastly , I also have a big problem with the idea that the President of the United States can read a book over the summer that says that you should not trust the military , because the military will hesitate and always see the risk of failure , and that the sign of a true politician is that he distrusts the military .
Given that the same author , Elliot Cohen , believes that we did not drop enough bombs on Yugoslavia , any country that listens to advisers like that really worries me .
Mr President , I was not intending to speak but whilst listening to this debate , one cannot help but be struck by , if I may say so , the predominance of ignorance and powerlessness .
As regards the predominance of ignorance , we know nothing or virtually nothing of the decisions which have been taken by the United States , of the specific information that they have and of their aims .
What do they want to do with Iraq , what can they do with Iraq ?
How can we resolve the problem with Iran on the one hand and with the Kurds on the other ?
We know nothing .
As for the predominance of powerlessness , which arises from the absolute division and the complete heterogeneity of opinions were expressed here .
I also feel that we should reflect on the fact that we are not in the middle of a moral or sentimental debate , but a political debate .
A political debate is based on two pillars : force and law , on the understanding that force must be subject to law and that there is a place where law must be exercised , and that is the United Nations .
It is indeed premature , I feel , in view of the discussion which has just taken place , to think the European Union might have a seat at the United Nations , because one wonders what opinion it would express there .
That said , there are members of the European Union that have a seat at the United Nations , and the European Union could perhaps reflect on finding a solution to the current debate .
Clearly , the United Nations must be involved , clearly , the permanent members of the Security Council which belong to the European Union must adopt a position .
Which position must they adopt ?
Which mandate can be given to them , providing that a mandate is possible in this situation ?
In any case , what position will the countries of the European Union - those that are also members of the UN Security Council - adopt if the latter is invoked ?
This is the real question which , at the same time , sets out the limit of this debate .
Mr President , preparations are under way for a war that could have devastating consequences for the population of the whole world .
For my part , I firmly believe that a country must be built on the rule of law , and this applies nationally and internationally .
All countries must comply with international law , including Iraq and - lest we forget - the US .
All countries must comply with this legislation , and they have no right to take liberties that are not provided for in legislation that has been enacted jointly .
In answer to Commissioner Patten 's question regarding the way forward , I believe the key issue is to bolster our relations with the Arab world and to get it to put pressure on Saddam Hussein .
There must be a better alternative to making enemies for ourselves in the Arab world .
Naturally we must demand that the weapons inspectors be allowed back unhindered .
We want peace in the Middle East .
We want a Palestinian State .
That goes without saying .
The sanctions currently in place against Iraq , and which have been in place for 12 years , have brought enormous suffering to the Iraqi people .
According to the UN 's own figures , one and a half million people , including 600 000 children , have died as a direct consequence .
Moreover , the country has been subject to low intensity bombing for several years .
This has strengthened Saddam Hussein 's brutal dictatorship instead of weakening it .
A war such as that currently being prepared will , of course , undermine world peace and security .
The EU must therefore speak with one voice , and a strong one at that .
It is the prerogative of the Iraqi people to establish their own democratic regime ; this cannot be achieved with bombs .
International law and the UN Charter must be respected , and the EU must state unequivocally that the international community has a duty to solve conflicts peacefully .
' Yes ' to weapons inspectors , but ' No ' to war against Iraq !
That concludes the ' catch the eye ' section of this debate .
I thank all colleagues who have contributed and apologise to all those who have not been called , but it is in the nature of the ' catch the eye ' procedure that we cannot take everyone in the time available .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the conclusions of the informal Elsinore Council were reasonable ; it agreed to explore all avenues for a non-military solution to this problem , including sending in inspectors .
However , for this to succeed , for example getting inspectors into Iraq , means Saddam Hussein honouring his obligations .
That needs to be made crystal clear .
We cannot allow him to act as judge and jury here .
There needs to be broad agreement that Saddam Hussein must go .
But this can only succeed if various viewpoints are taken on board .
Unlike Mr Sakellariou , I believe that pre-emptive wars are acceptable .
However , they are only acceptable if there is evidence of immediate danger and proof that there is a greater risk than without a pre-emptive war .
Such evidence is not forthcoming at present and we can therefore see no justification for war .
Nor has proper consideration been given to whether starting such a war and terminating Saddam Hussein 's regime would not lead to changes in other parts of the Islamic world involving far greater risks than allowing Saddam Hussein to remain in power .
Destroying the coalition against terror and establishing fundamentalist regimes in the ' moderate ' Arab countries could have very negative consequences , particularly for us in Europe .
This needs to be weighed in the balance if we wish to succeed .
For example , we also need to consider what the direct consequences of such a military conflict would be for Iraq 's minorities , given what Saddam Hussein has done to the Kurds or other population groups in the south of his country in given situations .
This all needs to be taken into account in weighing up the situation .
We Europeans , however , can only drive forward this process of weighing up the situation if we have a common view .
That is a prerequisite .
Neither Mr Blair 's position on one side nor Mr Schröder 's position on the other is very helpful in trying to reach such a common stance .
I believe that the only way to stop the Americans going ahead unilaterally is by means of such a united approach .
There is a debate raging about this even in America itself .
If the US is aware that we in Europe are presenting a united front on this issue , it will be possible to get certain points accepted .
Since 11 September , approaches have been adopted that may be understandable but are nevertheless dangerous .
Since the events of 11 September , Article 5 of the NATO Treaty has been discussed but not implemented , because implementing it would have meant that we in Europe were involved in joint strategic planning and decision-making .
So we Europeans have to ask ourselves this fundamental question : Can we position ourselves as partners and take part in the decision-making process , or we will just be ordered into action when the decision has been made and a war is imminent ?
This also has fundamental implications for future transatlantic relations .
Parliament should endeavour to support the Council and the Commission in pursuing this common policy approach , because that is the best way of both getting rid of Saddam Hussein and avoiding a war .
Mr President , on the eve of the anniversary of 11 September , Europe must , more than ever , speak with a single voice and defend peace .
Europe must firmly tell the world once again that the fight against terrorism , which it supports unreservedly , cannot involve war and that a so-called preventative war against Iraq would , on the contrary , sacrifice a nation , would cause unrest in the Middle East , and would have no guaranteed outcome .
Europe is faced with an historic opportunity to speak with a single voice and to distance itself from the policy of the axis of evil that the United States is trying to impose whether we like it or not .
In its report of 16 May on Iraq , the European Parliament called , in particular , for the UN to play a crucial role in seeking a regional , political and peaceful settlement , and for Europe to adopt a common position on the issue at last .
These words have been almost completely disregarded .
Once again , Europe is divided on which strategy it should follow .
Baghdad is wavering over whether to open its doors to UNMOVIC inspectors and the Iraqi people are continuing to mourn the victims of an inhuman embargo which has failed to destabilise the regime of Saddam Hussein , whilst President Bush is mounting his crusade of good , blatantly breaching international law in doing so .
What game are we playing ?
That is why I shall avoid beating around the bush and ask the Commission and the Council the questions that are on everyone 's lips today .
What guarantees can Europe offer Iraq that the UNMOVIC inspections will be carried out fairly , that they will have a time limit and that they will ultimately lead to the lifting of economic sanctions ?
In other words , that these inspections will not , as before the 1998 crisis , be infiltrated by US intelligence officers taking notes on locations to bomb in the future .
Secondly , what guarantees can Europe give Baghdad that , once it has been proven that its arsenal has been dismantled or it has been verified that there are no weapons of mass destruction , America will not immediately attack , once they can see that the regime is not armed ?
Although Europe is seeking to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction , we all know that the United States want the regime overturned .
Is this indeed Europe 's mission to seek to overturn regimes ?
There are certainly other regimes that we would like to see overturned !
Thirdly , what would Europe 's reaction be if an attack against Iraq were carried out without the backing of the UN ?
A war against Iraq would not be fair , appropriate , or effective .
It would not be fair because , without the green light from the UN , it would be an affront to international law .
It would not be clean because , as Mr Morillon has said , there is no such thing as a clean war , not to mention the fact that it would be an experimental war in new weapons , which would harm the Iraqi population .
It would not be effective because , in terms of the fight against terrorism , and Afghanistan is proof of this , bombs are of no use .
Osama bin Laden is still at large and Saddam Hussein will , in all probability , remain at large .



That is why , when I hear Mr Van Orden speak I am afraid , as I was when I heard Mr Blair speak yesterday , I have just one message , based on the words of the Count of Auteroche at the battle of Fontenoy : if the English wish to support our American friends , they can fire first , but they cannot count on us to support them !
Mr President , I know that the President-in-Office , a highly respected former colleague in this House , will take back our views to the General Affairs Council .
There may be no consensus among the Member States , but there is broad consensus in this House .
Since the end of the Gulf War , our strategy has been one of containment and deterrence .
To change that strategy , we need compelling evidence that our objectives in the regions would be better served by military strikes .
Even with such evidence , military action should not be undertaken without clear and realistic political objectives and a commitment to finance and administer the necessary reconstruction .
To win a war against terrorism in one country , you need broad consensus of support in that country .
To win a war against terror across borders , we need to build a consensus across borders .
The Council must unite , either to agree such objectives , to make such a commitment , to build such a consensus , or to rein in the declared ambitions of the United States .
Mr President-in-Office , an opinion poll by the German Marshall Fund and the Council on Foreign Relations shows that two European citizens in three support the Union acting in this way .
We in this debate are urging you to seize the initiative .

Mr President , the truncated speech by Mr Haarder and the much longer statement by Mr Patten give us cause for concern , dismay and alarm , particularly after the British Prime Minister 's warmongering in Sedgefield yesterday .
It is evident that the unstated assumption by the European authorities - with the remarkable exception of the German Republic - is that war is , by now , a certainty .
Never mind that there is no scrap of evidence that Iraq possesses weapons of mass destruction , even nuclear weapons , never mind that Mr Blair has again postponed the publication of his own private dossier on the matter .
There is no doubt that , as with Enron 's creative accounting , the CIA are working on creative evidence .
Confronted with such an imminent disaster for humankind , the Council and the Commission are taking the wrong - although expected - stand .
As the French newspaper le Figaro puts it , ' confronted with American intransigence Europe excels again in its inclination to compromise ' .
Compromise in this case is offered by the figleaf of the United Nations , a figleaf that in this specific case covers much more than has been covered by UNSCOM and UNMOVIC .
Unfettered , unconditional , intrusive access by United Nations inspectors , let us say Anglo-American inspectors , to every site in Iraq - something which Mr Rumsfeld himself expects to be rejected out of hand by the infamous Baghdad dictator .
After that only one alternative : war .
Unfortunately , what we have heard today from Mr Haarder and Commissioner Patten confirms our belief that there is a growing gap between the people of Europe and these governing bodies , a gap which this war will enlarge with deleterious consequences for the future of the Union .
Mr President , I wish to begin by saying that I served in the American Army in the 1950s , so I have a little knowledge of the horrors of war .
I also want to say that George Orwell would find it difficult to create characters like Rumsfeld , Cheney and Ashcroft .
It is very important to ask ourselves what precisely do we mean by weapons of mass destruction .
Are we talking about Hiroshima , Nagasaki , Cambodia , or even Korea , where I served in the American Army ?
What precisely is our definition , and what are they and where are they ?
A unilateral attack on Iraq would be moral madness .
The 22 million Iraqi people have already suffered enormous pain and loss .
They are now threatened with a full-scale invasion by a so-called Christian power , resulting in countless dead .
It will be seen for what it surely will be : a crusade by the West against Islam .
We are told that Israel will use nuclear weapons in certain circumstances .
Yet we have no evidence , as has been constantly repeated in this House this morning , that Iraq has weapons of the kind referred to by the hawks in the American Government .
US Secretary of Defense , Donald Rumsfeld , is proclaiming that Iraq is giving refuge to al-Qa 'ida terrorists .
Nobody but a fantasist would suggest such a thing .
Another bombing of Iraq would be mass murder .
The American Government talks about saving civilisation - a 200-year-old civilisation or a 5000-year-old civilisation ?
One has to really ask the question : who is the American Government really out to save ?
The American Government could be boosting the armaments or the oil industries at home or it could be geared towards the re-election prospects of President George Bush , à la Margaret Thatcher .
We will certainly see a rise in Islamic fundamentalism and individual attacks on Western targets will continue unabated , even on a freelance basis , should this war take place .
I urge the Iraqi regime to change course and allow UN inspectors to be readmitted to Iraq now .
Finally , I ask the media to examine their conscience and ask : why now , why not then ?
Mr President , one might wonder whether we are in Parliament or whether we are listening to continuous CNN propaganda .
What has been said about Saddam Hussein could be said about countless other heads of State the world over .
We are well aware , since we are the representatives of the nation States , that the Member States are , by nature , cold-hearted monsters , so cold-hearted that they only very rarely back down in the face of war , especially when seeing where they stand in the power stakes leads them to assume an imperial mindset , which is the case today of the United States which is fuelling potential conflict situations , throughout the world , in the simple , albeit acknowledged aim of achieving world domination .
This is absolute madness , because let there be no doubt , it is not the United Nations that is waging war , it is the Empire .
Imperialism equates to war .
In order to prevent Member States engaging on this slippery slope , a few rules were drawn up through the ages , which , in the twentieth century , took on the name of collective security .
Unfortunately , in the same way as the efforts of The Hague were scuppered in 1905 by the First World War , the efforts of the League of Nations were scuppered by the ' Imperial ' and not the ' National ' ; the Imperial Hitler Socialism and , more specifically , its preventative wars , particularly in the Sudeten region .
In 1948 , we had to start again from scratch .
That was the task of the UN founders and of the UN Charter , which now forms the backbone of any international order .
In our book , war is banned .
War is only permitted in specific cases , framed by stringent rules which assume , on the one hand , the support of the Security Council and , on the other hand , the monitoring of military operations by a major multinational State , itself placed under the authority of the Security Council .
We are brushing all that aside today .
We are completely brushing aside international law .
This is an enormous breach of the law .
We are now in the middle of a discussion to determine whether we shall condemn a State which is , led by its own President , contravening international law , whereas Europe should quite simply condemn it , not simply out of pity - and I did indeed say pity , speaking as a Christian - for a nation , which has , for ten years , been suffering genuine martyrdom and upon which we are turning our backs because it reminds us of our own powerlessness , but we must , above all , think of the very concept of law , with which Europe has become synonymous for centuries .
It is this concept that the United States is now disregarding , thus opening the door to new acts of barbarism .


Ladies and gentlemen , Mr Watson is right : the Council 's position does not surprise us because , as illustrated so well by Mr Pasqua earlier , there is no more of a common foreign and security policy than a common policy in Europe .
Our positions will never be similar , but Europe should , at the very least , remember that it has become synonymous , as has France , with the concept of law and this is much to its credit .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the American and British governments are preparing a general military offensive against Iraq , a small country of 19 million people , a member of the United Nations Organisation , in order to overturn Saddam Hussein 's government which they - the self-appointed global police - suspect of posing , sic , ' a threat to world security ' .
In doing so , they are violating the United Nations ' Charter , international law and , more generally speaking , people 's rights .
Since the end of the Gulf War , America and Britain have , in fact , never called a halt to their air attacks on Iraq and have caused , by imposing sanctions - a genuine crime against humanity - the poverty and death of civilian populations and , according to the UN , the death of more than one million children .
It is surprising that , although a number of countries , including the allies of the United States are dictatorships , Iraq , a Muslim country that is secular and tolerant towards religions and minorities - the Deputy Prime Minister is Christian and three government ministers are Kurds - is their number one target .
It is also surprising that these western superpowers , paragons of democratic virtues , are preparing so cynically to breach the peace .
You are against the death penalty for murderers , but the British and the Americans are going to murder thousands of Iraqis and their children .
This preventative war is unacceptable and you are well aware that real reasons are immoral ; in fact , this war is essentially for electoral purposes and to protect oil supplies .
( Applause from the Non-attached Members )
Mr President , I should like to express my thanks for a good debate with many sound viewpoints and many good pieces of advice .
It is a difficult matter we are debating , but it is also a very simple matter .
I have very deliberately confined myself to the crux of the matter , namely that the EU wishes to put maximum pressure on the dictator , Saddam Hussein to get him to comply with the UN resolution and the conditions to which he himself has agreed .
That is not a weak but , on the contrary , a strong position .
Everything we say and do must put maximum pressure upon Saddam Hussein .
Strong and combined international pressure of this kind is the only thing that can induce him to respond .
I would therefore thank you for all the reflections that have contributed to this agreement to put such pressure upon Saddam , and I would ask you to appreciate that , because of the need to do this , I am neither able nor willing to adopt positions on all contingencies .
I can assure both Mr Barón Crespo and others that what Mr Patten said was , in every detail , in accordance with what is the common EU position , confirmed once again in Elsinore at the weekend .
It was an informal meeting with no new decisions taken , but I can readily divulge that there was support for maintaining the existing policy and for the importance of broad consultation on the part of the United States , including consultation with Arab states .
There was agreement about the inspectors now having to be given the opportunity of entering Iraq and there was concern about the weapons of mass destruction that not only the United States but also UNSCOM have reasons for suspecting are being produced and that may be a deadly danger to peace in the Middle East and in the rest of the world .
The EU supports the UN 's efforts .
A regime such as Saddam Hussein 's can only be expected to be prepared to comply with its obligations if there is strong and combined pressure from the international community .
I should like to say to Baroness Nicholson and Mrs Napoletano that the Council fully supports Parliament 's desire that everyone who has committed war crimes , genocide and crimes against humanity should be held to account for their actions .
That also applies of course to those responsible for the Iraqi regime 's many crimes , and it is something for which preparations must be made in time .
In connection with this , I should like to say that I am able to confirm what Mrs Maes said , to the effect that the Danish Presidency has set a deadline of a month for a dialogue with the United States on the International Criminal Court .
I am able to confirm that this is what was at issue .
Mr Barón Crespo would have liked me to report on the EU 's latest efforts to help solve the Middle East conflict .
I cannot give a detailed answer to his request but , like Mr Patten , I am able to inform you that my colleague , Mr Møller , is in the Middle East right now to present a proposal from the EU for a practical timetable or ' road map ' for establishing a legitimate Palestinian state by June 2005 .
We are confident that there is broad support for this initiative , which can contribute significantly to further progress in the positive process which the Quartet has succeeded in setting in motion and in which we must place all our hopes .
Mr President , I think that it is probably true that I have had the honour , and always the pleasure , of replying to more debates in this Parliament than any other Commissioner in the last three years , such is Parliament 's welcome interest in external affairs .
For me this has been one of the most interesting and important debates .
It is no business of mine how Parliament conducts its affairs , but if one of the reasons for the interest and informed passion of this debate has been the formula which you have applied on this occasion , that which I think you call ' catching-the-eye ' , then I , for one , very much welcome it .
I think that there are more people in the Chamber than normal .
If Parliament does not mind me making the point , in my experience we have had the rather more unusual spectacle of people waiting to hear other people 's speeches .
I am even delighted to discover that one or two people have come back into the Chamber to hear the winding-up speeches which is a particular and rare pleasure .
So speaking for my humble self , in the expectation that I will have rather a lot more debates to reply to in the next couple of years - unless Parliament focuses its interest entirely on domestic affairs - I found this an extremely welcome breakthrough .
I was asked one specific question , and another rhetorical question to which I will return .
General Morillon asked the specific question of what we know about the attitude of the people of Iraq to their own regime , what we know about their ambitions and aspirations .
The sad truth is that we know damn all because they have not had the opportunity to express their views for all too long .
Indeed , the expression of free opinions in Iraq has led to people being shot , tortured and stuck in jail .
I look forward to the day when we will know rather more about the aspirations of the people of Iraq but I have my doubts as to whether , in a free election , Saddam Hussein would sweep back with a plurality of the votes .
I should confess to a personal prejudice at this point .
I have never regarded enthusiasm as a huge attribute in the discussion of foreign policy .
I think enthusiasm does not always go well with the discussion of difficult foreign policy issues and I have always preferred foreign ministers who are prepared to sit under the tree for a bit and think what needs to be done first , rather than those who tear around trying to change the world .
I find myself signed up enthusiastically to the famous dictum of Talleyrand ' surtout pas trop de zèle ' .
Reading so many articles over the last summer on Iraq and so many speeches , I have sometimes wished that I believed in the veracity and wisdom of anything I say as fervently as some people seem to believe in the veracity and wisdom of everything they say .
I also think that we have seen a parade of certainties sometimes based on obfuscation .
I know very few people , for example , who seriously contend that Saddam Hussein is not in possession of any weapons of mass destruction .
As I said earlier , if he is without any weapons of mass destruction , then what is the problem about letting inspectors in ?
When we are asked to define weapons of mass destruction , I suspect it is a question which could be put with some benefit to the Kurds in Iraq or to the people who live in the marshes in the south of Iraq , who could explain what chemical weapons do to your lungs .
Those would be very good replies .
Some of the certainties are also based on evasions and , from time to time , on a lack of willingness to enunciate clear , consistent and defensible principles .
I just want to refer to a number of questions that we need to face up to .
They go right to the heart of the issue of compliance with the United Nations and the whole issue of the justification for military action - an issue which was widely debated during the campaign in Kosovo and a question which goes to the heart of the matter we have debated on many occasions in this Chamber - the so-called clash of civilisations .
My first question is what happens if Iraq continues to defy existing UN resolutions ?
Do we simply shrug our shoulders ?
Secondly , what happens if we go back to the United Nations Security Council , get a new resolution and Saddam Hussein defies that ?
What do we do then ?
Do we simply wring our hands ?
Thirdly , what happens if we give Saddam Hussein an ultimatum and he defies it ?
What do we do ?
Write a letter to Le Monde , sign a petition ?
There have been several references - not all of them as laudatory as Mr Alastair Campbell might have liked - to the press conference which the Prime Minister of Great Britain and Northern Ireland gave in his constituency yesterday .
The honourable Member Mr Lagendijk , for example , referred to what he said .
Let me quote one thing which Mr Blair said yesterday : the UN had to be a way of dealing with it - i.e. the problem caused by Iraq - not a way of avoiding dealing with it .
While I am not a paid-up member of New Labour , that is a pretty good point and one which we simply cannot duck .
My fourth question concerns a point which Dr Kissinger has often reminded us of .
Since the Treaty of Westphalia and the end of the Thirty Years War , international law , itself sometimes a rather nebulous concept , has been based on , among other principles , the principle that one state should not intervene in the affairs of another and certainly should not intervene militarily .
Is that an entirely adequate principle of international law today ?
We saw the debate begun a couple of years ago by the Secretary-General of the United Nations , Kofi Annan , about whether humanitarian intervention was sometimes justified , for example when a sovereign government could be accused of assaulting the interests and the liberties and the rights of its own people .
Is intervention in the affairs of another sovereign state justified by its possession of weapons of mass destruction ?
Can you turn that into an acceptable principle ?
Does it depend entirely on context ?
Does it depend on the nature of the regime ?
Does it depend on the stated intentions of the regime ?
Does it depend on the scale of threat represented by that regime ?
Whatever else you say , clearly if you are arguing along those lines you will need to present a good deal of evidence .
Finally , on the question of justifying intervention , there is the point which Dr Kissinger argued very explicitly in a recent article in The New York Times .
He argues that terrorism raises an entirely new issue for nation states .
Today , he argues , one nation state can be faced with a threat from another nation state operating through non-state actors .
In other words , the argument is that intervention could be justified where a nation state appears to be using terrorist organisations to threaten another nation state .
At the very least I imagine all of us would argue that military intervention in a sovereign state demands a clear and well-argued justification .
Those are all issues which will be very near the heart of foreign and security policy debates in the next decade or longer .
They are issues on which we in the European Union , not least because of our tradition of the rule of law , not least because of the other principles in which we believe , should have clear and unequivocal opinions .
The final question is : if the present government in Iraq is replaced as a result of military intervention , will that make the politics of the region more moderate or will it make the politics of the region more extreme ?
All those are questions which we cannot duck .
They are all questions to which we will have to find our own answers over the coming weeks and months .
I would like to finish with this thought . There has been a lot of reference to our relationship with the United States .
I very much hope that we can work together with the United States - Europe and the United States - over the coming months to deal with an undoubted threat to world peace and to international stability .
We on our side may from time to time sound to Americans as though we are speaking with a rather self-serving condescension in arguing that United States leadership should be based on as broad a moral consensus as possible , referring to the Truman doctrine and the Marshall Plan , which helped to secure our futures , our prosperity , our freedom in Europe .
But we in Europe , if we are to pull on our end of the rope , have to face up to one or two rather difficult issues ourselves .
We must avoid wishful thinking and we must avoid ducking the difficult questions which I have addressed during these remarks today .
I am sure this will not be the last time we debate this issue .
I hope we can clarify our responses to some of those questions in the weeks and months ahead .
Mr President , on a point of order .
I want to apologise to Commissioner Patten because in my speech I gave him the title of Vice-President of the Commission .
It was a lapsus due to the Convention .
I hope that Commissioner Patten will not be offended .
Mr President , I shall respond to that very courteous point .
I am always delighted to be identified with Mr Kinnock , and even more delighted from time to time to be identified with the honourable gentleman 's Spanish colleagues Mr Solana and Mrs de Palacio !
The debate is closed .
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the situation in Afghanistan .
Mr President , I should like firstly to congratulate Parliament on the ' catch the eye ' form of debate we have just tested in practice .
For a former parliamentarian , all these debates with planned speaking times have been a misery . Relief was at hand , however , and the delightful experience of real debates with spontaneous contributions in which people respond to each other instead of reading from pre-prepared scripts .
Where Afghanistan is concerned , I should like firstly to draw attention to the fact that , a year ago , Afghanistan was a country in ruins , which initially suffered under an occupying power and a succession of warlords and then under an extreme Islamic revolution which forced through the de-modernisation of society and introduced mediaeval methods .
Finally , the country became the domicile of fundamentalist terrorists .
That is what makes it that much more significant and that much more of a pleasure to be able now - nine months after the Bonn process was set in motion - to report on a country in which the situation is gradually being normalised .
There is nonetheless a long way to go before there can again be talk of a stable Afghanistan .
There continues to be inadequate security in the country .
In July , Vice-President Haji Qadir was killed openly in the street .
Conflicts between local warlords continue , and serious infringements of human rights continue to take place .
The conclusion of the Bonn Agreement of December 2001 between Afghan groups under UN leadership marked the start of the positive development we are now seeing in Afghanistan .
The Bonn Agreement lays down a process for the re-introduction of democracy .
As a first step , an interim government was established which governed the country for six months until a hastily convened council of elders , Loya Jirga , met in June and appointed a transitional government headed by Mr Karzai who is to lead the country for two years until elections are held .
The convening of this Loya Jirga and the formation of the transitional government were essential steps forward .
The Loya Jirga process and the regional and district elections showed that Afghans throughout the country have the desire and the courage to participate in the process of democratisation .
Afghan women played a striking role .
There have been attempts to mediate in the conflicts in Afghanistan .
If the Bonn process seems to be a success , this is particularly due to the fact that it is founded on traditional structures in the country , based upon the need to secure a broad representation of the various ethnic and religious groups .
It is precisely the securing of representativeness and the protection of minorities that are the keys to long-term stability in the country .
Afghan ownership is another code word .
Even though the UN has operated as an essential catalyst in the process that is now developing , it has played its role with full respect and support for Afghan ownership of the process .
The re-establishment of an Afghan state that can secure unity , peace and stability in the country and guarantee the observance of human rights is absolutely crucial .
Progress is slow and the transitional government still has difficulty controlling large parts of the country where , as a result , local warlords and bands of robbers have an easy time of it .
Central to the efforts to promote security is the establishment of an Afghan army and police force in which the population has confidence and which operates with respect for human rights .
In that connection , the EU has expressed great satisfaction with the setting up of Afghanistan 's National Defence Council .
Just as important a factor is the state 's ability to deliver development , including access to health services .
A large number of Afghan refugees have returned , and those who have done so need international aid to secure their permanent reintegration .
On the issue of the return of refugees , I am delighted to note that , according to the UNHCR , the situation in Afghanistan has now improved in such a way that the great majority of Afghans are able to return voluntarily without risking persecution .
I agree with the UNHCR that their return should be supported by relevant relief measures put in place by the international community and that individual Afghans should be offered ' realistic repatriation packages ' .
Seville gave high priority to adopting measures to promote an accelerated return to Afghanistan .
In cooperation with the Commission and the Member States , the Danish Presidency will make efforts to comply with the Seville Declaration .
I myself also had a meeting with Ruud Lubbers a short time beforehand .
There are still forces that are seeking to knock developments in Afghanistan off course .
There are still various ethnic groups that , with the support of groups in neighbouring countries , do not believe that their own particular viewpoints are adequately represented .
There are various warlords who , for long periods , have become accustomed to a high degree of self-determination in those areas they control and who have resisted the establishment of a central government .
There are also different points of view as to how quickly and how far Afghanistan can move in the direction of a modern Islamic state with close contacts with the West .
The hope is that , by setting up a democratic process , opportunities will be created for solving these conflicts through political negotiations rather than through a return to the pointless fighting of the past .
The relatively encouraging development is also due to the fact that the international community has committed itself to Afghanistan .
The United States played a decisive role in the rapid removal of the Taliban government through Operation Enduring Freedom .
The American-led forces are still present in the country , combating the last remaining pockets of al-Qa 'ida fighters .
In and around Kabul , the International Security Assistance Force , ISAF , is helping to ensure stability so that the interim government is able to operate .
The EU also attaches importance to helping promote stability in Afghanistan and in the region .
The country must not again become a seedbed of terrorism and of drugs production .
We wish to support the Afghan people in their efforts to secure peaceful development .
Together , the EU Member States contribute the larger part of the ISAF force and are the largest international providers of aid .
The Commission 's and the Member States ' combined promise of aid amounts in 2002 to more than EUR 550 million .
Recently - or , more specifically , on 22 July - the General Affairs and External Relations Council adopted conclusions concerning the situation in Afghanistan .
It was stated that , in dialogue with the transitional government , the EU would proceed on the basis of the key principles agreed by the Afghan parties and the international community .
The principles are stated in the Bonn Agreement , the final declaration from the Tokyo Summit in January and UN Security Council resolution 1419 .
The principles include the formation of a broadly constituted , multi-ethnic and representative government , in which women too participate .
Through its special representative , Mr Vendrell , the EU is maintaining a close political dialogue with the government in Kabul and other Afghan parties .
The purpose is to help developments proceed in the right direction .
Dialogues are also being conducted with the countries neighbouring Afghanistan in order to ensure their cooperation .
International commitment to Afghanistan will in the last analysis depend upon whether the Afghan parties really make efforts to achieve the stated objectives .
The EU will therefore attempt to promote a process in which , in partnership with the international community , Afghanistan 's transitional government develops verifiable criteria and monitoring systems in connection with the considerable aid that is being given .
The EU will promote the allocation of aid in a way that strengthens the central government and weakens those who are not involved in , or who are directly opposed to , the Bonn process . At the same time , it will be ensured that the population as a whole shares in the aid as a visible peace dividend .
The financial situation in Afghanistan is characterised by a serious budget deficit , and the government will soon be in no position to pay out wages .
Direct budgetary aid will therefore also be necessary to ensure political stability in Afghanistan .
The international community and the EU can therefore strengthen the peace process .
Whether those steps in the right direction we are now witnessing in Afghanistan can be translated into genuine and sustained improvements of the situation will , when all is said and done , depend upon the Afghan people 's own desire to support the process that has been set in motion .
Mr President , I am extremely surprised because the Conference of Presidents has - unanimously - asked the Council and the Commission to specifically include in this morning 's statement the issue of war crimes allegations in Afghanistan , which have recently been acknowledged by the UN .
I am extremely surprised that nothing has been said on this issue , and I would like to ask you , Mr President , to ask Mr Haarder to expand on his statement so that it includes the subject that the Conference of Presidents specifically requested .
As I was not present at the Conference of Presidents I do not know about your discussion , but Mr Haarder will have a chance to reply at the end of the debate .
If he then wishes to take up that matter he is free to do so .
The Minister may well want , on behalf of the presidency , to say a word about those allegations of human rights atrocities .
I was certainly intending to say something myself , which I do not imagine will be very different from the presidency 's remarks .
Indeed it would be a cause of considerable diplomatic anxiety were we to be saying anything very different on this subject .
I am sure we will not .
I would like to thank Parliament for this timely opportunity to review the situation in Afghanistan .
It is almost a year ago that the events of 11 September catapulted a country which the European Commission 's humanitarian office had labelled a ' forgotten crisis ' at the beginning of that year , into the limelight of world attention .
Since then we have witnessed remarkable changes for the better : the Taliban regime imploded more rapidly than some expected , leading to the installation of an interim authority which soon established its credentials around the world and - even more importantly - managed to develop a balanced relationship with its neighbours .
In June this year , an Emergency Loya Jirga brought to power a Transitional Authority which has more democratic legitimacy than any of the previous regimes over the last two decades .
By and large therefore , the Bonn process is on track .
However , there is still a pretty bumpy road ahead .
As Afghanistan moves into the post-Loya Jirga phase , a number of key challenges need to be addressed .
The most imminent is internal security - or rather , to be more accurate , the lack of it .
So far , President Karzai has found it extremely difficult to extend the authority of the central government to the regions , despite his own formidable efforts .
This challenge is linked to the difficulty of turning warlords into politicians .
Some of them continue to thrive on drugs and other illicit trade ; some profit from their involvement in the Operation Enduring Freedom ; others are attempting to openly challenge the leadership of President Karzai .
In this fluid environment , concerted long-term international support for the central government is more crucial than ever .
This brings me to my second point .
Unless President Karzai manages to show that the trust he generates among the international community in its turn generates tangible economic benefits and improved security , he will not find it easy to convince his rivals that he is the best man to lead the country through this difficult transitional period .
As the going gets tougher , he needs even more of our support .
The Commission is therefore pursuing - along with other donors - a two-pronged strategy : delivering a tangible peace dividend to the population as swiftly as possible , while ensuring that most of this assistance flows through the central government .
In turn - and this is my third point - we insist absolutely on the conditionality of our assistance .
In a nutshell , this means strict adherence to the letter and spirit of the Bonn process as well as to sound macroeconomic and financial management .
Let me turn briefly to the Bonn Agreement .
The appointment of the Constitutional Commission is due very shortly . This Commission 's work paves the way for the general elections due by mid-2004 .
It will have to make difficult decisions on the future centre-provincial structure , the question of secular versus Islamic society , gender issues and the role of minorities , to name but a few thorny questions .
This Commission , together with the Judicial Commission , will also have an impact on the dealings with war criminals , both past and present .
It will take time to find lasting solutions to many of these issues .
The important thing , however , is that we see this country progressing , with our assistance , towards peace and long-term stability .
The issue which was raised earlier about human rights atrocities is of very considerable concern to the international community .
Among other fora , it was discussed by the Security Council in a meeting on 28 August .
The UN , I am pleased to say , is prepared to assist the government in a future investigation .
At the moment it is important to keep the grave site protected and to protect potential witnesses before an active investigation can be carried out .
In my judgement , the UN Assistance Mission in Afghanistan - UNAMA - is best placed to handle this delicate issue , supporting the key role of the Afghan Human Rights Commission in taking future steps .
We totally accept that it will be necessary to take future steps and to be as transparent about the process as possible .
The need for steady , long-term progress must not distract us from the huge and immediate humanitarian challenge .
Since March this year , 1.5 million Afghans have returned from Pakistan to Afghanistan under the UN repatriation programme .
A further 116 000 have returned from Iran .
This is an impressive number but it is creating a large problem for the aid agencies .
The same is true of the large number of internally displaced people .
The international community is now faced with additional demands , both on the humanitarian and on the security front .
These bills come on top of the EUR 1.8 billion pledged for 2002 in Tokyo in January .
In such an environment , it is important to get priorities right , since it is unrealistic to assume that all the additional funding requests are going to be met at once .
One such issue is the funding for the increased rate of return of refugees where some international agencies have claimed Europe has not been generous enough .
I can speak for the European Commission .
We have more than doubled the humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan this year - from EUR 25 million initially earmarked at the beginning of the year to EUR 60 million at present .
However , I believe it is a mistake to look at this issue solely in quantitative terms .
The foremost challenge is - and this has been our line from the start - to ensure that this summer 's returnees do not become again this winter 's refugees .
Our interventions are therefore carefully linked to the overall sustainability of the return programme .
For our rural recovery programme , the migratory flows are one important criterion for the selection of areas of intervention .
Another important selection criterion is dependence on poppy production .
Together with a few other donors , the Commission is leading the debate on how best to develop alternative livelihoods .
All these issues throw up one unavoidable conclusion : Afghanistan needs partners who are prepared to be there for the long haul .
This , however , is not to say that we cannot point to early achievements in our aid effort .
Let me give you a few examples .
Under the Aid to Uprooted People 's programme , the Commission is funding the operation of 450 primary schools around the country in Afghanistan .
We are now supporting over 200 clinics , three district- and three provincial-level hospitals .
Our rural recovery and urban rehabilitation programmes are providing over 3 million person-days of work this year alone .
Under a contract with Habitat , we are cleaning up five cities around Afghanistan , preventing diseases like cholera .
We are co-financing a massive mine-clearance operation .
We are contributing more than any other donor to the operating costs of the government ( EUR 50 million from the Asia and Latin America budget and EUR 2.5 million from the Rapid Reaction Mechanism ) .
While less visible , these sums finance the salaries of essential government servants , including nurses , doctors , policemen , teachers and civil servants .
Regarding performance , I am pleased to say that Afghanistan proves that the reform of the management of external assistance produces results even under the most difficult of circumstances .
Of the EUR 120 million available so far for recovery and reconstruction , EUR 100 million has already been contracted .
This figure does not include the EUR 45 million in humanitarian aid under the ECHO programme , which has already been committed , or the further EUR 15 million due to be committed under the same programme before the end of the year .
I understand that Parliament will vote on a draft supplementary amending budget for the remaining EUR 70 million pledged for 2002 in October .
It is intended for further support to the public administration , for much needed infrastructure projects and for a primary health care package .
Preparations for implementation of this programme are well advanced .
I can assure Parliament that these funds will be put to immediate use once approved .
So we will have committed in Afghanistan this year - committed and largely spent - almost EUR 250 million - a good step forward in discharging our pledge to spend EUR 1 billion over 5 years .
That , the House will recall , has been achieved almost from a standing start .
It was , of course , only possible because of the understanding of the budgetary authority - Parliament and the Member States .
But it has also been achieved because of the outstanding work done on the ground by our delegation and our ECHO staff .
I cannot speak too highly of their cheerful dedication and professionalism in very tough circumstances .
I much enjoyed meeting them during my visit in May and look forward to making a return trip .
We in the Commission have good reason to be proud of those , like our team in Kabul , who do such a first-class job .
They will , I know , work as well with our new , experienced EU representative Ambassador Vendrell as they did with his committed predecessor Ambassador Klaiber .
I am determined to ensure that the European Commission remains fully engaged in Afghanistan even if world attention shifts to other places of conflict and post-conflict rehabilitation .
Let me again thank the European Parliament for its very constructive attitude in dealing with additional budgetary needs to underwrite this commitment .
I hope that as the months and years pass , Members of this Parliament will be able to go to Afghanistan - as they have been going to the Balkans in the last few years - and see European assistance being provided generously , efficiently and wisely , as it should be everywhere .
We will not be able to complete this debate before lunchtime , but we will carry on until about 12.20 p.m. so that we can take the speakers from the political groups .

Mr President , Mr Haarder , Commissioner Patten , thank you for giving us the opportunity to review the situation of this ruined country - as Mr Haarder described it last year - of this forgotten country , as the Commissioner so accurately described it .

No one here , however , has forgotten the opinions of those who considered themselves , not so long ago , to be experts on Afghanistan and who recommended reaching an agreement with the Taliban regime , on the pretext of implementing a realpolitik which would mean that only the Taliban would be able to guarantee some semblance of peace in this ill-fated country which has been torn apart for so long - you mentioned this , Mr Haarder - by tribal feuds .
The risk was that the country would once again fall prey to various warlords once the Taliban regime had been eliminated .
That is why we can only welcome the fact that , despite these forecasts , Afghanistan is not being torn apart today and that the progress we have already made in restoring order in the country is , on the contrary , encouraging .


The progress made is , of course , encouraging , as you have said , Mr Haarder , but it is far from satisfactory .
The fight against terrorism waged by al-Qa 'ida and Mullah Omar is far from over , security in Afghanistan is not , therefore , guaranteed , the reorganisation needed in Afghanistan - which involves creating institutions to ensure the representation of all ethnic groups and respect for international law and human rights - has only just got underway , and , lastly , because the large-scale return of refugees has only served to exacerbate the already disastrous humanitarian situation caused by the war and the drought which have been raging for years .
I shall return to all these points in order , if I may .
The fight against terrorism waged by al-Qa 'ida and Mullah Omar is far from over because we have no idea what has happened to them , for it is unlikely that they could have found refuge in areas bordering on Afghanistan , in the uncontrolled territory of the Pashtun tribes in Pakistan , but there is nothing to prove either , as far as I know , that they are not still hiding somewhere in the very heart of Afghanistan .
The security of the country is , therefore , not guaranteed .
Commissioner Patten and Mr Haarder talked about the murders .
They quite rightly emphasised the difficulties caused by these attacks for our representatives on the ground , and I join you , Commissioner , in praising the dedication and bravery of these representatives .
This may be the reason for the demand made by the transitional government , by President Karzai , to all donor countries , and to the European Union in particular , to extend the mandate granted to the peacekeeping force to outside Kabul and even to the whole territory .
Like the French Minister for Foreign Affairs , I do not think that this is desirable .
I do not think that it is desirable for the Afghans to entrust the responsibility of maintaining order on the ground to others .
It is far more desirable , to my mind , to speed up the training of the national army and police force , which has already begun , so that the Afghans themselves can take responsibility for security in their country , as they have begun to do within the institutions .
I mentioned the reorganisation that is needed and which has been carried out by setting up institutions which ensure the representation of all ethnic groups .
You are well aware that there are on-going difficulties with the Pashtuns .
I would also point out that we are expecting a great deal , and rightly so , from the work undertaken within the framework of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs seeking to make it possible to enforce international law and respect for human rights in Afghanistan .
I welcome the news that I received yesterday that a class has begun at the French High School in Kabul which is open to women and where female students do not have to wear veils .
Lastly , I mentioned the humanitarian situation .
In this respect , and I shall conclude on this point , we can only welcome the fact that , when examining the 2002 supplementary budget , the European Union has agreed to increase aid to Afghanistan , bringing it up to EUR 250 million .
What we shall ask for is greater transparency in the way this money is used .
That is why , when examining the budget , we asked for a line indicating all the transactions made with respect to Afghanistan .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , when we endeavoured to come up with a joint motion for a resolution yesterday , we took all the issues you have touched upon today into account .
There was a really broad consensus on the points we discussed , and I do not just mean humanitarian issues and reconstruction in Afghanistan , but also other political issues .
I would like to discuss that here , but I would like to specifically mention that my colleague Mrs Gröner will be dealing with the position of women in Afghanistan , which is a very special issue .
Our motion for a joint resolution starts with a clear condemnation of terrorism , stating that Afghanistan 's historical problems also contributed to the need for intervention of this kind .
I do not want to say any more about that intervention .
It was very broadly-based and it at least attracted support and could be justified .
We believe that the role of the United Nations - and I am now returning to the same discussion that we had earlier - is not being given sufficient weight at present .
The United Nations needs to decide not only about peacekeeping measures , but also about the future of this intervention .
The United Nations also needs to define the objectives of this intervention , the time required for it , and it should also decide when this intervention should come to an end .
We believe that the moral justification we had for this intervention should also apply to the treatment of prisoners from this war , either in Afghanistan itself or outside Afghanistan , in Guantanamo .
These prisoners deserve to be treated in accordance with international law and the international conventions .
We believe that the international community bears an important responsibility for investigating and establishing the position as regards the human rights violations in northern Afghanistan that have been mentioned , and in particular those in the Dasht-e-Leile region which have been reported by the UN .
In reply to Mr Wurtz , who mentioned this point just now , I would say that we in this House should make a very clear request for the United Nations to carry out an investigation and to bring those guilty to justice once they have been tracked down .
Mr Wurtz , I regret that your group feels unable to sign this motion for a resolution , but you can at least vote for it .
Mr President , I congratulate the Commission and the team led in the Commissioner 's office by Mr Fotiadis and those on the ground for the amazing work they are carrying out .
I attended the Tokyo Pledging Conference and was proud to see the way in which European Union leadership in nation rebuilding was exemplified by both the Commission and the presidency .
I congratulate the Commissioner himself and the presidency at the time - the Spanish presidency - for the way in which they conducted the business of the European Union there .
But the Commission 's subsequent work has proved my view to be correct : amongst the international community blocs claiming to be able to rebuild nations , the European Union is standing alone .
And we are working in a tough and dangerous situation .
Afghanistan is a very difficult country to help .
For example the main message coming from the Afghan Government at the moment is that international pledges made in Tokyo are not being fulfilled and the government therefore cannot conduct its business .
Last Saturday I had the opportunity to speak in Tehran with the new Afghan Ambassador to the Islamic Republic of Iran .
He made this very point .
I pointed out to him that the one partner on which he could firmly rely was the European Union .
I commend the priorities the Union has set itself , as the Commissioner has outlined today , because , as I said , it is not a simple matter .
Water .
One Member - Mr Morillon - has already mentioned the acute drought .
The acute drought is so widespread in the south-west of Afghanistan - it feeds across from the plain in Iran .
There are 26 major water projects under way in the Islamic Republic of Iran to try and provide the local population with water .
Over the border in Afghanistan , I have seen no water projects at all on the ground .
Yet this is the largest drought for at least 300 years .
It has hit many hundreds of thousands of people .
Of course in a drought the farmers cannot grow alternative crops .
The south-west of Afghanistan is not particularly heavily mined .
They can grow opium poppies in this drought .
Unfortunately , poppies grow extremely well in drought .
Until we put water projects in the south-west region , we cannot complain as much as we do that opium production is not being contained .
Of course it is not being contained .
The figures provided by the Afghan Government have been unintentionally misleading to the international community .
Water ought to be one of the topmost priorities .
On health care , the population is virtually at the lowest ebb .
Life expectancy is 46 years - the lowest in the world apart from Somalia .
All the health indicators show that health has been abominable for the last 23 years and there is a lack of education .
May we insist that other international donors focus on small-scale health projects to implement the World Health Organisation master plan on health .
Not large hospitals , for which there will not be enough staff or resources , but more mass immunisation , more primary health clinics , more mobile health clinics .
Could we please press other donors to focus on those areas ?
Then , of course , women 's rights .
I must tell you that women 's rights have gone downhill , not up .
Only last week , for example , the government passed a law stating that women would not be allowed to perform music on the radio .
So it is not easy .
I congratulate the Commission and I urge it to persuade other donors to adopt the same approach as our team in Brussels and on the ground .
We are doing wonderfully well ; others , I fear , are not being nearly as successful .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , when my group invited the director Jamie Doran to show his film at the European Parliament on 12 June , we had three objectives in mind .
The first aim was to gain as much recognition as possible for the overwhelming validity of the war crimes allegations made by the people interviewed by the British journalist in Afghanistan .
Next , we wanted to give as much backing as possible to the idea of sending , under the auspices of the United Nations , a committee of enquiry to the region in question , with a view to establishing the truth of events . This would enable us to stop , hunt down and bring to justice the possible perpetrators of these atrocities , whoever they may be .
Finally , we wanted to use this opportunity to reaffirm the need to respect the law and international conventions , in any situation , and this also applies to the fight against terrorism .
The joint resolution which will be submitted to us tomorrow explicitly fulfils these three desires and this is an exceptionally encouraging outcome , even though , to achieve it , it will have taken a leading US magazine to confirm our statements and , in addition , the State department , the UN and , if not the Council , then a number of European leaders to speak more openly .
We must now bring this episode to a conclusion and , furthermore , my group believes that we must learn some strategic lessons from it for the future .
Personally speaking , I have no doubt whatsoever regarding the need for a consistent fight against terrorism , and I have never had one ounce of sympathy for the Taliban regime .
It must be pointed out , however , that the military operations carried out by the United States or the West in Afghanistan , like the random detention of alleged Islamic extremists in Guantanamo or the compilation of ever-expanding lists of suspect organisations , have not enabled us to stamp out the al-Qa 'ida criminal network .
To some extent , this observation is based on the report that the anti-terrorist monitoring group formed by the UN sent to the Security Council today .
On the other hand , the actions mentioned above have brought about inhuman and often traumatic consequences for the population , have without a doubt reinforced the most radical and extremist elements and , lastly , have increased insecurity throughout the world .
That is why my group deeply disagrees with the passages of the resolution which seek to justify war as part of the fight against terrorism .
If these paragraphs were to be adopted , many of use would unfortunately be unable to support this text .
We must bear in mind that the subject of war has once again become a major concern in most of our countries .
Unlike the sorcerers ' apprentices who , not so long ago , supported Islamic extremist networks in their attempts to destabilise whoever their enemy happened to be at any particular time , we are calling for responsible , on-going management of security issues ; I am thinking , in particular , of the need to improve civilian conflict prevention and , if necessary , civil crisis management .
The fact that al-Qa 'ida cells still exist in at least 40 countries , according to the UN report that I mentioned earlier , also reminds us that terrorist networks are drawing their resources from the troubled waters of the international financial market .
When will we finally adopt drastic measures to clean up and lend greater transparency to the international financial circuits where speculative - let us call it traditional - capital now mixes , if not crosses paths , with dirty money from organised crime ?
This is one of the costs of a genuinely effective fight against terrorism .
For the time being , Mr President , it is clearly vital , as many of my fellow Members have said , that the international aid promised to Afghanistan at the Tokyo Conference be provided immediately so that the deeply scarred population - these people and , especially , these women - can , at last , begin to live once again like human beings .
Mr President , let the current situation in Afghanistan be a hard lesson to the United States and Europe about what happens to a country during and after military intervention .
In my first point , I should like to comment on Mr Wurtz 's contribution and the indications he has given , in combination with , in my view , strong clues in the article in Newsweek , as well as in the footage which he and his fellow MEPs showed last time , that hundreds , possibly even more , Taliban have been killed under suspicious circumstances .
I am not quoting this to indict the Americans in any way for something which may be completely unrelated to them .
I am quoting this because , in my view , it is extremely important finally to put an end to lawlessness after 20 years of civil war .
This means that a serious inquiry must be mounted into this and , unfortunately , similar cases .
We are all agreed without much hesitation that this inquiry falls within the remit of the United Nations .
The only problem is that the UN 's special representative , Mr Brahimi , has already made it clear that the United Nations is unable to carry out this enquiry because it cannot guarantee the safety of , for example , witnesses and researchers .
My very explicit question to the Commission and the Council is whether they would make every effort to enable the United Nations to look into this and similar cases , and to sufficiently protect witnesses and researchers .
My second point concerns the comment I made earlier in the debate on Iraq .
The much vaunted regime change can only be effective if there is support for it in the country itself .
Militarily speaking , such support was in place in Afghanistan , in the form of the Northern Alliance .
If a regime change were to depend on the construction of civil society or the existence of NGOs , then this would be extremely difficult .
These have all but gone in Afghanistan , and the European Union is at the moment trying its best - for which all credit to it - to develop these .
Nevertheless , I am very anxious about the way this is going and the resistance that is met along the way .
There are large groups in Afghan society that reject what they call Western , but in my eyes , crucially democratic , values .
As Baroness Nicholson already mentioned , there is what I see as a setback where the role of women is concerned .
Although I welcome the fact that the Loya Jirga included many women , there are now all kinds of signs that the role of women is being repressed .
I think that this is a sign that nation building does not happen overnight .
I am also addressing this statement to the Americans : nation building does not happen overnight .
Building a democratic society is a long-term commitment .
My final point is , in my view , politically speaking , the most important point at the moment and I would particularly ask the Council to address this matter .
It is about extending the mandate of ISAF , the peacekeeping troops currently based in Kabul .
We as the Parliament and also most Member States have been insisting for months that the mandate should be extended beyond Kabul because that is where chaos is escalating .
Although the United States seems able to permit this , it will not supply a single soldier .
It will be up to the European Union , the European Member States , to extend the mandate of ISAF by sending more troops to Afghanistan .
My question to Mr Haarder is the following : is the Council prepared to send more troops to Afghanistan in order to control the chaos outside Kabul and to keep the peace ?
Finally , Mr President , the lesson I have drawn from this situation is that we ought to think twice , if not more , before we decide on military intervention .
Once we are there , however , we should acquit ourselves of our tasks effectively for as long as this proves necessary .
Mr President , the fierce Taliban regime was defeated in the war but social and political calm and economic stability have yet to be established in Afghanistan , and the many problems linked to respect for human rights persist .
The new government is faced with severe difficulties and we must provide more than just economic aid .
Over 1.5 million refugees have returned from the places they had fled to during the many wars and upheavals which have afflicted their country in recent decades , but they have neither houses nor work and are prey to the ongoing dangers caused by the lack of security in the country .
With a view to bringing greater security , the US Special Forces advisors are working together with the Karzai government to set up a national army in Afghanistan , but if , on the one hand , the soldiers of the new army lack weapons , on the other , there appear to be 750 000 armed Mujahideen belonging to the various ethnic groups .
All this means that there will be further difficulties and that there is a need for especial political and diplomatic mediation between the national government and what are known as the ' warlords ' .
No progress has been made as regards the situation of women : the only woman elected a minister in the new government had to resign after receiving death threats for declaring her opposition to the Sharia .
The recent attacks , the recent discovery of a chemicals laboratory for producing explosives and lethal materials and the existence of an area under tribal influence between Afghanistan and Pakistan are further indications of a dangerous situation .
The Afghan government is proceeding , one small step at a time , to bring a return to law and order and respect for human rights , combating the extremist fringe groups which have combined terrorism and Islam to make a single religion .
However , the international community must also continue to discharge its responsibilities through technical , humanitarian cooperation which will give Afghanistan the economic and structural support it needs to eliminate drug cultivation , and through more unambiguous measures to combat the Sharia and discrimination against women .
The European Union has a particular responsibility : for too long , our democracies were deaf to the cries for help coming from the Afghan people oppressed by the Taliban regime and by the cultural and physical violence imposed by their dictatorship .
This new , specific undertaking by the Union will also be an - albeit posthumous - tribute to the appeal made by Commander Massoud , who , on 5 April 2001 here in Strasbourg , called upon Europe for help , although Europe , I am sad to say , was insensitive at that time to the afflictions of a country oppressed by Taliban fundamentalism and which al-Qa 'ida had made the cradle of international terrorism .
In a few days ' time , it will be the anniversary of the assassination of Commander Massoud , who was murdered a few hours before the tragedy of 11 September .
It is our hope that the men and women in Afghanistan too who believe in freedom and democracy will respond to Commander Massoud 's call and work together to defeat fundamentalist violence and secure peace for their people .
Mr President , it is difficult to speak in this House which barely resembles a genuine Parliament .
What we can say about the situation in Afghanistan is a mere extension of what we were saying earlier about Iraq .
In both cases , we are witnessing the unleashing of an empire , which is using every possible excuse to inflict on a nation - and , there is no doubt , via this nation , on the whole world - a display of its military capability .
In Afghanistan , the excuse is not plausible .
One does not destroy a whole country because a terrorist is hiding there .
As Mr Gollnisch said earlier , we will have to bomb London until the British Government extradite to France Rachid Ramda who masterminded several terrorist attacks that were carried out on the Paris underground in 1995 .
Although he spoke in an ironic manner , Mr Gollnisch has simply made a logical point .
Due to the fact , ladies and gentlemen , that the empire and its propaganda are so deeply engrained in our minds , we are losing sight of the most basic logic and even the most basic common sense .
Who , if not the empire , is flouting the law , and as I said earlier in relation to Iraq , the UN Charter , to which we are all bound , in the war that it unilaterally decided to enter into , first in Kosovo , then in Afghanistan and now in Iraq ?

Who if not Washington is guilty of war crimes , which I , like Mr Wurtz , would like Mr Haarder to speak to us about this afternoon .
And who , if not Washington , is using weapons of mass destruction in Kosovo , in Afghanistan and in Iraq , as proven by the numbers of deformed children being born in these countries as well as the condition of many American soldiers themselves ?
The American people are themselves victims of the unleashing of the empire .
Open your eyes , ladies and gentlemen .
The great warlord is no longer Saddam Hussein - it is George W. Bush .
The Hitler of today cannot be said to be the remote , sectarian ' hashassins ' - it is Bush and the pathetic , militaristic gang with their aspirations to dominate the world .
They should know that although they will not find wretched Europe standing in their way - Europe which is so divided now and becoming increasingly divided - they will at least hear the voice of the freedom of the Nations , and above all , the voice of France .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , it is certainly true that considerable progress has been made in the situation in Afghanistan and anyone who has visited the country recently can see that , despite the huge problems , there is hope and life .

You are quite right , however , Commissioner , that the problem in Afghanistan is the lack of security and that the current government , led by President Karzai , has little power outside of Kabul .
This is why , unlike Mr Morillon and the decision of the Security Council , I think that we are wrong not to respond in the positive to Mr Brahimi and Mr Karzai 's request to step up the presence of the international peacekeeping force , to extend it temporarily and to widen its territorial jurisdiction .
Personally speaking , I think that we perhaps have won the war , but there is a risk we might lose peace .
Currently , 4 800 soldiers from the international peacekeeping force are stuck in Kabul .
You are right , General Morillon , it would be better for the Afghans themselves to be responsible for the security of their country .
However , to put together an army and a police force takes time and , in the meanwhile , the tribal leaders are becoming more organised , as is evident from the attacks carried out in recent weeks .
That is why I am saying that reconstruction is a good thing .
The Commission and our staff are , in my view , making miracles happen in Afghanistan , but I sincerely hope , Commissioner , Mr President , that the next time Mr Brahimi and Mr Karzai ask us to step up the peacekeeping force , we might have the courage to say yes .
There are 7 800 American soldiers in Afghanistan to combat terrorism and 4 800 soldiers to maintain peace .
I think that we have done the wrong thing .
It would have been much wiser and perhaps more useful if we had had the courage to invest as much in peace and security as we have in the fight against terrorism .
We will now interrupt the debate for the vote .
The debate will be resumed this afternoon at 3 p.m.
Mr President , I would like to tell Parliament that this morning the Prince of Asturias Foundation awarded the prestigious Concord Prize jointly to Daniel Barenboim and Edward Saïd .
I believe this is an appropriate encore to the concert we enjoyed on Monday .
Mr President , I was the Member responsible for the successful amendment to the Corbett Report , as a result of which the book where you sign written declarations under Rule 51 was moved to just outside this Chamber instead of being stuck in an office which nobody could find .
I spoke to the official there today , who complained that not a single Member has shown any interest in reading the declarations or signing the book , even though the procedure is now much easier and more convenient .
Can Members please cooperate with this project , in order to justify the change and the human resources dedicated to making it work ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , I would like to move a point of order pursuant to Rule 144 of the Rules of Procedure .
The motion is to refer this text back to committee .
We believe that the Beysen report cannot legitimately be adopted until the questions that were raised by the Executive Committee in the Green Paper on Consumer Protection have been resolved .
These questions are : should we harmonise European consumer law using a framework directive or using specific provisions of the type used in the proposal for a regulation on sales promotions ?
In accordance with the Rules of Procedure , can I have a speaker for the motion and one against ?
Mr President , I think that the argument put forward by Mrs Patrie is based on common sense .
We should not be expected to vote before we have held a debate on the Green Paper on Consumer Protection .
My group is therefore also in favour of Mrs Patrie 's request .
The rapporteur has asked for the floor .
Mr President , Mrs Patrie 's suggestion comes as a huge surprise to me , because not a single new issue was raised during the extensive debate we held here yesterday , both in the morning and in the afternoon , and because Commissioner Bolkestein has also emphatically confirmed that the Green Paper and the draft regulation are completely compatible .
Moreover , I should like to draw Parliament 's attention to the fact that this report has been approved in the Committee on Legal Affairs by an overwhelming majority , with two votes against and two abstentions , and that normally speaking , this report would not have been discussed in the plenary had we applied the new procedure .
What is more , it cannot be the intention , surely , to obstruct the legislative procedure because a group , however important it may be , fails to reach unanimity on this report .
It is up to us to assume our responsibility freely ; this is quite simply our mandate .
I now put the motion that the text should be referred back to committee to the vote .
( Parliament rejected the request for referral to committee )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Mr President , I would like to table an oral amendment .
Mrs Villiers is suggesting the following amendment : ' believes it will be necessary to revise the regulation in order to apply it also to the transport area , as a strategic instrument for the development of the EU ' .
If we adopt this amendment , we will prevent the Commission 's regulation on State aid for employment from coming into force , which is something , I am sure , no one wants .
I therefore propose that we add the short phrase ' in the near future ' , to urge the Commission to present to us , in the near future , the proposals that Mrs Villiers desires , which will enable the Commission to apply this regulation that is , indeed , important .
I believe Mrs Villiers is in agreement .
Mr President , this report was voted under Rule 110a of the Rules of Procedure , which allows for no debate in Parliament and no amendments to the report .
The British delegation of the PPE-DE Group has previously sought to amend reports which it did not support .
The new rule , however , leaves no option but to vote against certain reports .
The British Conservatives deplore violence of any kind and welcome measures to combat this , including some of the initiatives under the Daphne programme .
Violence , especially against women or children , is completely unjustifiable and cannot be accepted .
However , the measures called for in Article 18 of the Avilés Perea report represent an infringement of the Member States ' right to determine their own criminal justice systems and represent measures to introduce harmonisation of criminal law .
The calls for a specific European legal base infringe the principle of subsidiarity .
We strongly believe that national parliaments and not the European Parliament should lay down laws relating , for example , to eviction of violent partners .
Whilst accepting that good work is being carried out by the Daphne programme , the British Conservatives are opposed to the principles of the report , for the reasons outlined .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have fully and enthusiastically supported this magnificent report by Mrs Avilés Perea .
In fact , the Daphne programme , designed to protect women and children against violence , and which is now also open to the countries that are candidates for accession and to the countries of the EFTA-European Economic Area , has had an exceptional level of response and , as has already been said , is a victim of its own success .
Therefore , the efforts made to draw attention to the programme 's clearly inadequate funding are not excessive . This inadequate funding is a matter of the greatest concern , particularly when we consider the forthcoming enlargement of the Union .
To date , the participation of the candidate countries only represents 6 % of the programme 's total resources and this is predicted to rise .
We also support the rapporteur 's proposals on the rehabilitation and treatment of aggressors , on undertaking comparative studies into legislation and punishment , on approaches to the problem of prostitution , to undertaking educational programmes which show that violence against women and children is unacceptable and on the creation of a common database on eliminating violence against women .
Nevertheless , in line with our Conservative colleague who has just spoken , we consider some excessive steps to be dispensable , in particular those which could be interpreted to favour a common European code , which we believe would breach the principle of subsidiarity .
Physical , sexual or psychological violence exists in every country in the EU .
The statistics gathered in the various countries are quite high , varying from 14.5 % in Germany to 56.3 % in Portugal , with 52.8 % of women suffering physical violence at the hands of their partner or spouse .
Since 1991 , Portugal has had a law to protect women who suffer domestic violence .
Nevertheless , this law was adopted under international pressure , and not as a result of any greater awareness , which means that there are almost no measures in place to implement the law .
Violence perpetrated against children , adolescents and women must be condemned , because it violates their fundamental rights , entails serious consequences for society as a whole and constitutes an obstacle to gender equality .
The Daphne programme to combat violence involves policies combining prevention , punitive action and victim support .
To comply with the objectives that have been laid down , sufficient funding is necessary and it is , therefore , crucial that we increase the budget for forthcoming years .
We voted in favour of this report despite the fact that , even in view of its limited objective - aid to associations which combat sexual violence and fight for women 's and children 's rights - the proposed budget is quite obviously insufficient .
The report itself recognises this and lists the projects rejected due to lack of budgetary resources .
We must , however , stress that , amongst the types of violence inflicted on women , who suffer not only sexual and domestic violence - they also suffer social violence which can in fact affect men as well , such as having to endure unacceptable working conditions .
One example is working at night for women , which is permitted in industry by the European Parliament , or worse still , losing one 's job and one 's income .
The inability to combat social violence and therefore prevent its consequences is also severely hampering efforts to combat domestic violence .
Increasing numbers of women and children are victims of - as you would expect - physical , but also psychological violence .
It is women and children who suffer the most from violence , but we must not forget that men are also sexually exploited and also suffer .
We must therefore put in place effective measures to combat all forms of violence , by combining prevention , punitive action and support for victims .
The Daphne programme is an effective instrument and it must be further developed .
The fight against trafficking in human beings must include penalties that act as a deterrent and that are common across all Member States .
All NGOs must be actively supported and violence must be understood in the broad sense .
All forms of violence must be opposed because violence is unacceptable .
. ( PT ) There is an enormous gap between the declarations of good intent proclaimed in the Social Agenda and the way in which these are put into practice , as proved in the report itself , despite some weaknesses and some specific negative points with which we disagree and hence our abstention in the final vote .
We welcome the report 's criticism of the Commission , however , both with regard to issues of form and for the lack of information given to the European Parliament and the social partners , and for the delays in meeting commitments it has given , in particular concerning the following aspects :
amending Directive 92 / 85 / EEC on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements in the safety and health at work of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding , on the basis of the proposals tabled in the motion for a resolution adopted by the European Parliament on 6 July 2000 ;
the establishment of criteria for the recognition of disabilities and the submission of an effective action plan to prevent musculoskeletal damage occurring in the workplace ;
and paying greater attention to the quality of work , to developing the social economy , to illiteracy , to combating illegal labour and discrimination against people with disabilities in terms of access to employment , to education and to vocational training .
The aim of this Commission proposal for a regulation is to remove any restrictions imposed by the Member States on unfair sales promotions ( price reductions outside sale periods , free gifts , below cost selling ) , such as the restrictions adopted in Greece in law 2941 / 01 banning below cost selling .
This ruling will do even more to help large multinationals concentrate money and corner the market , because only they will be able to increase their overall profits , even if they sell certain products below cost .
At the same time , it will be a disaster for small and medium-sized enterprises , which have already been hard hit by the implementation of the single internal market , and for consumers , who will be even more exposed to deception and will suffer the consequences when markets are cornered .
The fact that it has opted for a regulation , which ensures immediate application , and the fact that the proposal was not discussed with the interested parties , especially SMEs , shows just how concerned the EU is to directly promote the interests of large companies .
The whole affair illustrates exactly what it means by competition on the single internal market .
The MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece call for this regulation to be withdrawn and will be voting against the report .
Since Mrs Patrie 's legitimate request to refer the report back to committee was rejected and the amendments from the Left have not been adopted , I voted against the report along with my three colleagues from the Republican , Radical and Citizens ' Left .
The report dealing with the proposal for a regulation on sales promotions in the internal market , voted on by majority in the European Parliament , improves the European Commission proposal , although it contains some contradictions and incorrect points , which we voted against .
We voted in favour , however , of the proposals that are intended to provide greater protection for consumers and micro-undertakings and small and medium-sized enterprises , by combating the habitual and repeated dumping practiced by certain economic groups , which use a predatory price strategy , in the de facto aim of ruining weaker competitors and of forcing them out of the market .
We also support the proposals that are intended to uphold the most progressive national legislation , to protect subsidiarity and the sovereignty of every Member State , specifically in laws designed to protect consumers and minors and to support micro-undertakings and small and medium-sized enterprises , as has happened in Portugal , specifically with a ban on below cost selling outside sales seasons .
. ( DE ) Below cost selling has been a much-discussed issue over the past months .
The Commission would prefer to use this regulation to lift the ban on this practice in various countries .
Such a commitment would have catastrophic consequences for smaller producers , such as those in the agricultural and viticultural sectors .
Unlike the major supermarket chains , they often sell only one product and cannot pass onto other products the losses involved in below cost selling .
They would therefore lose all their capacity to compete , and , in order to counteract that , many producers would feel themselves constrained to use ingredients that were cheaper and thus of poorer quality .
Lower prices would not alter the fact that it would still be the consumer who lost out in all this .
It was with some satisfaction that I noted that the committee with competence in these matters has adopted the text of my amendment on the subject and managed to reach a compromise that satisfies almost everybody .
In the Legal Affairs Committee , other amendments sought to prohibit any sales promotion whatever of alcoholic drinks such as wine , beer or spirits .
There is no doubt that excessive consumption of alcohol needs to be stopped by means of appropriate education at an early stage .
Moreover , all the Member States stipulate a minimum age for the public consumption of alcohol .
Prohibiting any sales promotion whatever is , however , disproportionate , harming as it does all consumers rather than only the small minority who are addicted to alcohol and therefore need treatment .
A majority on the Legal Affairs Committee realised the absurdity of this step and rejected the amendments to which I have referred .
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
.
( NL ) These days , people are mainly seen as consumers .
They have to try to accumulate as much money as possible by working long and hard , or through speculation .
Anyone who fails to become rich fast , often at the expense of their fellow citizens , is considered a failure .
The winners , on the other hand , are continually invited to hand over all their savings as quickly as possible to estate agents , those offering expensive holidays , and casinos . And also to schemes which will make them independent of the normal education , health care and public transport services , for these have been whittled down to a level that is now only acceptable to the losers .
No wonder that the successful consumer is inundated with advertising , including from abroad .
In this proposal , it is assumed that sales promotions , such as discounts , gifts and games , are conducive to welfare .
In 2000 , they accounted for a million jobs in nine Member States and investments to the tune of over EUR 40 billion .
Although even the liberal-minded rapporteur , Mr Beysen , has to admit that such sales promotion adversely affects the ability to publish books , the fair distribution of medicines and encourages young people 's addiction to alcohol and gaming machines , he does not focus his proposal on consumer protection but on the suspension of rules and fewer obligations for those who run companies .
That is why I will be voting against it .
I have supported the rapporteur 's proposals , which significantly improve the text produced by the Commission and which seek to provide a satisfactory response to the points that could be most controversial .
I abstained , however , from voting on the legislative resolution , because I believe it is still necessary closely to observe the follow-up given to this report in the legislative process .
I agree with the ideas of ensuring price transparency and of strengthening legal certainty , responding to the pressing need to establish uniform rules with the introduction of the euro and corresponding to the new Community approach intended to provide more appropriate and coherent regulation at Community level .
This proposal could contribute to clarifying contractual positions in a field of some sensitivity to consumers , such as sales promotions of the type covered by the regulation : discounts , free offers , prizes or opportunities to participate in promotional competitions or games , in the context of the selling of a product .
I welcome in particular the constant focus on the need to provide full information in sales promotions , a feature that stands out in the new agreement on commercial communications policy and which I hope will run through future rules in this field , as the rapporteur recommends .
The Member States - and France in particular - which have passed legislation , using their sovereign right , to regulate below cost selling and sales , have done so with the clearly stated aim of preserving the balance between manufacturers , distributors and consumers .
It is the interests of each of these that the national parliaments have sought to protect .
The Commission 's desire , therefore , to remove restrictions on sales promotions , on the grounds of strengthening economic harmonisation , poses a direct threat to the interests and the balance of economic players .
It is also - on the grounds of a misinterpreted benefit to the consumer - the image of our leading brands of products that could suffer under the policy , ahead of certain manufacturers ' unscrupulous distributors - and their own economic restrictions - on which they thrive .
The amendments adopted by the parliamentary committees , including those that I tabled , have fortunately allowed respect for our national laws to be restored .
Only on the condition that Parliament adopts these amendments shall I support this text .
I fully support this report , which will potentially ensure that EU consumers operate in a level playing field and sales promotions are standardised across EU Member States .
Indeed , one of the most compelling arguments in favour of the euro is that European citizens are able to compare prices across borders .
This advantage is at present distorted by the fact that different types of sales promotion exist in member states and therefore cross-border price transparency is effectively distorted .
Once this directive eventually comes into force , it will represent one more step towards the completion of a fully functioning single market .
So this proposal is the best way to achieve price transparency and to ensure a level playing field .
However , as the committee recommends , it should remain the prerogative of individual Member States to decide whether to ban discounts on fixed price products and I fully support the committee 's insistence that the principle of subsidiarity must be upheld in this domain .
. ( IT ) I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his work .
State aid must be defined and provided by a nation at times of economic crisis .
If aid were to become a normal , regular occurrence , far from benefiting the country or providing an essential means of overcoming difficult times , it would without a doubt exacerbate the problems of the recipients .
The Berenguer Fuster report on the draft Commission regulation on the application of Articles 87 and 88 of the EC Treaty to state aid for employment should be read in this light , considering that these articles would also normally apply to the transport sector .
The impending enlargement must be seen as an extraordinarily important , exceptional event .
It will lead to a change in the distribution of work and to marked differences in salary levels and standards of living between the current Member States and the newly acceded countries .
The potential structural distortions generated by the - certainly lower - cost of labour in these countries , by different environmental , social and technical standards and by strong competition between the labour forces on the market can be addressed by making the labour market more flexible and , to some extent , through the provision of state aid to employment .
The accession of the candidate countries will lead , especially in the traditional economic sectors such as heavy industry , agriculture and transport , to excesses of labour , and these people will not be able to find work immediately in the new , emerging economic sectors .
( Text abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of procedure )
The very title of this report is misleading in itself .
The title talks of ' State aid for employment ' whereas the report is , in fact , about funding to increase employers ' profits .
However much the report ' welcomes ? greater transparency and legal certainty ' in the areas of aid , tax relief and benefits which are granted to employers on the pretext of encouraging them to create jobs , it does not question employers ' right to do what they want in their businesses .
Nothing can prevent them , therefore , from pocketing the funding without creating a single job , which is what employers have routinely done for a long time .
Since we do not wish to give our approval to this farce , we voted against the report .
I would firstly like to congratulate Mr Berenguer Fuster on his work and on his report and then say what great benefit could be derived from a European Parliament resolution which seeks to encourage employment and which recognises the need for State aid .
The report says that unemployment is too high .
I would add that it is a tragedy and a real disease into which we must channel all our energies !
It is perfectly legitimate to use State aid to support a number of measures to combat unemployment and encourage employment .
It was , incidentally , totally unacceptable to associate aid with increased labour market activity .
However , since the right-wing Members voted in favour of the report , my colleagues from the Delegation of the Republican , Radical and Citizens ' Left and I had to vote against the motion .
We are concerned at the approach that the report insists on promoting when it states that ' the key to improving employment in the European Union is encouraging labour market flexibility through structural reform ' .
This ignores all the problems of unemployment caused by restrictive monetary policies and by constant privatisations , including in basic sectors of the economy and in social fields .
It is also unacceptable that the report considers state aid for employment to be a last resort , thereby condemning disadvantaged regions and sectors in difficulty to failure and to poverty .
Of particular concern is the damaging impact that its implementation could have in countries such as Portugal , with micro-undertakings and small and medium-sized enterprises which are experiencing serious difficulties , and in sectors such as ship building , which are affected by unfair international competition policies .
Hence our vote against this report .
. ( DE ) I voted in favour of the Berenguer Fuster report , as I , like the rapporteur , support the Commission 's approach to reforming the system of employment aid .
I particularly welcome the way in which the planned limitation of the prior notification requirement now gives regional authorities more scope to develop local employment programmes , thus enabling them to respond quickly and flexibly , with targeted measures , to changed conditions in the labour market in the regions .
It is in particular small and medium-sized enterprises that will benefit from the more lenient conditions , being able , where the need arises , to expect the speedy and straightforward payment of aid , which I emphatically support .
The consolidation in a single text of current legislation on employment aid means that the Commission is also doing justice to its objective of greater transparency in the EU 's lawmaking processes .
There is one point , though , in the rapporteur 's argument where he and I part company .
The key to improving employment cannot be found in the greater labour-market flexibility for which he calls .
It is far more a matter of responding to the changed situation in the labour market by rethinking employment policy , for example by using new working arrangements to guarantee full employment while simultaneously safeguarding quality jobs .
.
( IT ) We voted for Mr Berenguer Fuster 's report .
Indeed , it would be difficult not to , considering who the beneficiaries of this aid are and the goals of simplification and transparency that the Commission has set itself .
The issue we need to reflect on , however , is the fact that , as the Commission is quite aware , in some regions of the Member States of the Union , the difference between being in an area receiving aid under Article 87 ( 3 ) and not being in such an area is a tax reduction in excess of 12 % .

The question is then the content of Article 4 ( 3 ) of the draft regulation , with reference precisely to the above-mentioned regions , for we believe that the method of determining the areas does not produce a wholly accurate definition of which areas are genuinely disadvantaged and that the Commission is aware of this .
Consider the method used by local employment systems to define these areas and how it has been disregarded in some cases .
We therefore believe that the current maps should be revised to ensure that they are consistent , irrespective of whether the regions themselves have used them .
Otherwise , even with the planned 10 % increase on the upper limit , the draft regulation would , in those cases , essentially serve the purpose of - covertly and only partially - remedying the errors made .
We find it entirely understandable that the European Commission should consider the time to have come , on the basis of an active policy of employment aid , to establish more binding criteria and to lay them down in a single legal framework .
In fact , this rationalisation is intended to pursue a dual objective : on the one hand , to simplify and clarify the system of regulating aid to employment , in the aim of ensuring greater transparency in the Commission 's action and of facilitating understanding and monitoring of this action ; and furthermore contributing to stimulating employment in the European Union , in line with the European employment strategy , especially for workers in the least-favoured categories .
I have , therefore , approved the rapporteur 's position , which supports , to a large extent , this Commission proposal , considering this to be the approach that will achieve the Lisbon Strategy , and I welcome in particular the references made to the need to support the economic development of the least-favoured regions of the European Union , with particular focus on the outermost regions .
That concludes voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 12.53 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , 11 September is almost upon us , the first anniversary of that day when two aircraft , piloted by terrorists belonging to al ? Qa 'ida , crashed into the World Trade Centre , caused both towers to collapse , killed thousands of people and , at a stroke , changed the world - or , at least so we thought at the time .
There have indeed been changes .
Under UN mandate , an alliance against terrorism was forged .
For the first time , a crisis was declared to be a matter for NATO , Article 5 of whose Treaty was invoked .
The American President Bush called for the head of Osama Bin Laden , the Saudi billionaire who headed up the al ? Qa 'ida network , and the war against terrorism met with its first significant success in Afghanistan itself , where the fundamentalist Taliban regime , which was generally inhumane and in particular hostile to women , was driven from power and an interim government under President Karzai , which is putting down democratic roots , was established .
One year on , we are of course all aware that the struggle against terrorism , as President Bush himself once said , will be a long one at various levels , and that quick victories are illusory .
In Afghanistan itself , the Karzai government enjoys de facto power only in Kabul .
The authority of the various provincial rulers belonging to different tribes is undiminished , and has , in some instances , even been reinforced , a fact demonstrated just as much by the murder of Commander Massoud as by the murder of Afghanistan 's Vice-President Abdul Qadir , who had incurred the enmity of rival drug baron , supporters of Osama Bin Laden and of the Taliban , but possibly also of members of the Northern Alliance who had felt themselves bypassed .
It is also far from clear whether or not Osama Bin Laden is still alive .
What is beyond doubt is that the al ? Qa 'ida network has regenerated itself and reorganised both its guerrilla organisation , which is active not only in the neighbouring Pakistan , and also its sources of finance , which continue to flow in abundance .
Anyone reading today 's Herald Tribune will find a sobering report on the transfers of gold to Sudan through channels running from Pakistan and Iran .
This means that the al ? Qa 'ida network and the Taliban militias still have large reserves of finance at their disposal , derived from the cultivation and sale of opium .
Set against the sums involved here , the aid given by the European Union towards stabilising the situation in Afghanistan looks rather modest , even though the EU has become the largest donor of funds for this purpose .
There is no doubt that we have to do this in order to bring peace to this country once under Soviet Communist occupation and ravaged by decades of civil war and thus make a contribution to consolidating the crisis region between Pakistan , Iran , India and the unstable Asiatic part of the former Soviet Union .
We also have to do it for reasons of self-protection .
Europe is a destination not only for Afghan drugs , but also for illegal immigrants , in the number of whom there has been a significant increase on the borders between the Czech Republic , Slovakia and Austria over the past year .
There is , then , a need for humanitarian aid just as much as for targeted measures in the fight against terrorism and organised crime , a fight we will certainly have to carry on for a long time yet , and one in which we can expect no quick victories .
Yet do it we must , if we are to demonstrate to the USA that we are to be taken seriously as a partner in an alliance against terrorism .
Relations with the USA in the aftermath of 11 September have , to put it mildly , been beset by irritations .
We are both saddened - Europeans when America goes it alone , and the USA by the European Union 's lack of political unity and its military weakness , both exemplified by the EU 's line on Iraq , which has to date been less than coherent .
Also symptomatic of this are the USA 's threatening gestures directed at Baghdad , which are not always credible .
What is needed on both sides of the Atlantic is coherent crisis management combating not only the symptoms of international terrorism , but also and especially its causes , as rightly demanded by the former White House security adviser Zbigniew Brzezinski .
Developing such a strategy to pull the plug on the crises in the Middle East , settle the conflict between Israel and the Palestinians , and neutralise Islamic political fundamentalism wherever it rears its head - and it has its boltholes in Europe itself - to all these things , the European Union can and must make a substantial contribution .
EU aid in Afghanistan is an essential building block in this .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , the European Union played a very active part in the democratisation of Afghanistan , for which particular thanks are due to the Commission and most especially its staff on the ground .
It was as early as the International Women 's Day in 1998 that European women started the ' Flower for the Women of Kabul ' campaign , and deplored the human rights violations that excluded women in particular from education , medical treatment , work and political involvement .
Another six years of the Taliban 's despotic rule had gone by before things began to look up for democracy .
The international anti-terror alliance then laid the spectre of the Taliban to rest .
Democracy movements were launched at once , and the EU again played an active part in this on the Petersberg in Bonn .
At the same time , albeit attracting almost no attention , the first Afghan Women 's Summit was meeting in Brussels at the invitation of European women .
It was there , for the first time and after two decades without political involvement , that it was possible for Afghan women , whether living in exile or in Afghanistan itself , to have their own forum and find themselves .
International pressure made it possible for women to be first admitted to the Loya Jirga and subsequently to participate in the new transitional government .
In the meantime , we saw to it that the Budget included funds to help the women make up a great deal of lost ground , and that it was again possible for self-help organisations such as the Revolutionary Association of the Women of Afghanistan ( RAWA ) to receive support from Budget funds .
It is with consternation that we now hear it reported that the first schools for girls are being closed down again , that fundamentalists again want to force women out of public life , and that the political influence of women ministers is being curbed .
All the political influence at our disposal must now be brought to bear in order to prevent the situation of women worsening still further and above all to ensure that aid reaches rural areas and is passed on to women .
Jointly with the women on the European Council , we had taken the initiative of setting up a multinational group of women observers to ensure that women get the aid they need .
Believing as I do that this fire must be kept alight , I now urgently call upon the Commission to continue to focus on the situation of women , and urge that we combat the principal evil , which is poverty and illiteracy among women .
Even if world public opinion concentrates on other issues , I do think that we should continue to focus on Afghanistan and that we have to maintain a local presence there .
My group , the Group of Social Democrats , will be sending a delegation to Afghanistan , and I look to the Commission to provide support for it in the shape of logistical aid .
The threat of war in Iraq would destroy much that has been achieved , and so all our efforts are needed to help make peace in the region .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , following on from this morning 's debate , it is encouraging to be able to read in the telegrams from Johannesburg that the President-in-Office of the Council , Anders Fogh Rasmussen , and the American Secretary of State , Colin Powell , held a meeting this morning in Johannesburg at which it was established that the United States would consult its allies about Iraq and that the US agreed with the EU about firstly trying to get Iraq to give international weapons inspectors free and unfettered access to the country .
The Afghanistan debate covers two matters : the current issue of the alleged war crimes in Afghanistan and the longer term question of the situation itself in that troubled country .
With regard to the alleged war crimes , we must now await the outcome of the UN investigation .
If the investigation shows that war crimes have been committed , the people responsible must be found and prosecuted in accordance with the current regulations .
There is really nothing more to be said about that matter at present .
It has been very encouraging to hear the President-in-Office of the Council and the Commissioner report now on developments in Afghanistan less than a year after the country lay in ruins .
We can be pleased with the Bonn process and proud of the aid provided by the EU to that poverty-stricken country .
We have in fact heard today about an EU success story in rebuilding a country , and we should thank the Commission in particular for its persistent efforts .
We also know that we are only in the first phase , that there is a long way to go and that the new administration , or transitional government , is subject to both external and internal threats .
Although much reduced in size , al-Qa 'ida is still an external threat from hiding places in the regions bordering Afghanistan . Internally , the fact that warlords clearly continue to operate , are still behind the cultivation of opium poppies and are in a position to threaten the stability of Afghanistan is necessarily a source of concern .
It is a threat to the country 's integrity and to Mr Karzai 's government , which is the best guarantee of a peaceful process of development involving the implementation of those values we cherish .
We must therefore continue to maintain a close dialogue with the transitional government , as well as engage in close dialogue with any government resulting from the 2004 elections .
Prompt and effective efforts on the part of the EU must be followed up by long-term efforts .
The fact that the EU has just launched the ' Water for Life ' initiative is commendably in line with what we have previously heard in this Chamber . Unlike almost all crops , opium poppies do not require much water .
So let the EU supply water to Afghanistan , show responsibility and contribute to a more peaceful world .
Mr President , I like to think and act to promote mediation and combating poverty and injustice as the means of resolving conflicts , not war and bombing , but I am not a saint : I am completely immersed in the complexity and contradiction of conflicts .
I agree with Commissioner Patten : it is not enthusiasm that is needed - although a little would not go amiss - but solutions , and these solutions must not be the Danse macabre being performed by Mr Bush and Mr Sharon or Osama Bin Laden and Hamas , who are destroying people , nature and human and social rights .
The conflict between forces of good and evil is reminiscent of the Middle Ages , and it undermines the rule of law .
The Taliban have been defeated but their ideology lives on : many of their practices , with which those in power today are not unfamiliar , remain .



The refugees are returning home but they are given no support , schools are reopening but schoolgirls have been the victims of a bomb attack , cinemas are reopening but they are banned from showing Indian films because they contain women without veils , women are banned from singing on the radio or television , rape and violence are common occurrences , the lethal , lucrative opium trade continues , and , although reconstruction is taking place - and it is a slow process - Afghanistan is in danger of forfeiting its sovereignty to money and corruption .
For this and many other reasons , our economic and social aid must be provided swiftly and effectively to allow the establishment of the structures and infrastructure of a rule of law and to empower that part of civil society - particularly women - which is completely devoted to securing freedom , justice , development and peace for all men and women .
The situation in Afghanistan is tragic and we must continue to help the country in the knowledge that there is a universal need for sovereignty and that there must be an end to war in the region .
Mr President , in all our efforts to help construct a better Afghanistan we should not lose sight of why we are now involved there with such commitment .
It is , of course , to root out terrorism , to help build a peaceable , well-disposed , durable and better society and to ensure that the extremists do not set down fresh roots either within the country or elsewhere .
All our actions should be measured against these yardsticks and we should be under no illusions about the fragility of the situation , which poses major challenges both for ISAF and the other coalition forces operating within the country .
There is now wider agreement about the desirability of ISAF broadening its mandate beyond Kabul .
This is not just a matter of the availability of suitable international forces but , as Commission Patten has said , it also tests the willingness of reluctant local warlords , often backed by foreign interests in the region , to comply with the authority of Kabul .
The Turkish armed forces are to be congratulated on the satisfactory completion of the first half of their span of command of ISAF .
The building of a professional and reliable Afghan army and police force , which is happening in parallel largely under American , British and French auspices , will take time and there seems little doubt that ISAF will have to continue its operations next year and an early indication of the follow-on command arrangements is needed .
The last thing we need , when action against Iraq is in the air , is uncertainty about military arrangements in Afghanistan .
I should like to highlight three particular aspects of the situation : refugees , EU funding and the landmine issue .
Firstly , refugees , which Mr Haarder touched on earlier .
There is now a degree of security in Afghanistan .
Yet , while many refugees have returned to the country , millions remain in Iran and Pakistan .
Some talk about two or three million respectively , though estimates differ significantly .
Furthermore , a large proportion of refugees and asylum-seekers coming to Britain and other European countries originate from Afghanistan .
We should bear in mind that many have extremist backgrounds and that we are therefore vulnerable to the implantation and cultivation of Islamic extremists within our own societies , not just from Afghanistan .
This is madness .
More focused and determined action is needed to deal with these problems and encourage return to Afghanistan .
On the funding question , the USD 4.5 billion pledged at Tokyo in January , including over USD 1 billion from the European Union , has , for the most part , been slow to arrive - although I note the Commissioner 's remarks about the way the Commission has responded .
There is an absorption problem : the Afghan Interim Government lacks the institutions to disburse the money efficiently and needs greater assistance in this area .
At the same time there has to be proper control and management of international funds .
I say this at a time when , yet again , the European Commission 's procedures in this respect have been the subject of serious criticism and , as in the Palestine Authority area until recently , the issue of proper control of funds appears to have been largely avoided by the international community .
The Bonn Agreement merely states : ' The members of the Interim Administration shall abide by a Code of Conduct elaborated in accordance with international standards . '
This Code is not published and , in any case , seems less than adequate .
We must insist that measures be put in place by the Afghan authorities and the international community , including the European Union , to ensure the proper management , accounting and use of these funds .
Finally , the question of landmines , which has already been touched on by other speakers .
Afghanistan is one of the most heavily mined countries in the world .
This was the case before last September and the situation has been exacerbated since then .
The presence of landmines and UXOs - unexploded ordnance - are a major obstacle to economic and social regeneration .
It is estimated that between five and ten people are injured in mine blasts every day in Afghanistan and that an estimated 10 million mines litter the country .
We welcome the undertaking by the Afghan Interim Government to accede to the Geneva Convention banning the use of antipersonnel landmines , but the mines are still there in the ground and the victims hobble through the streets .
There is an urgent requirement for a properly coordinated and funded programme of action to enable the resumption of mine action operations at least at the level they had reached before last September .
A concerted time-limited effort is needed , otherwise we are still going to be talking about this in ten years ' time .
There is much to be done in Afghanistan .
Let us get it right , working in harmony with the United States and other allies - and all the time remember why we are there .
Mr President , a great deal still needs to be done for Afghanistan , and this resolution is a good political contribution .
I would , however , just like to focus on three points .
Firstly , we must restore the role , responsibility and visibility of the United Nations .
In terms of assessing the outcome of the intervention , in terms of analyses which would justify any further action , we note that the United Nations is absent , often considered to be an intruder , and is , in effect , excluded .
This unilateralist approach does not further the cause of Afghanistan , not least in that we are legitimately and frankly concerned at the way we are blindly placing all our trust in President Bush , whose approach to foreign policy is quite inconsistent and has , moreover , even been questioned by his Executive .
Secondly , we reject double standards in matters of human rights .
We call for guarantees of fair trials for all accused persons , whatever the offence they are being charged with .
We call for respect for international conventions .
It may be that some of them need to be reworked and revised , and they must genuinely be revised , not set aside .
We call for these guarantees to be applied to all accused persons because it is a fundamental rule , a fundamental principle that there is no room for compromise in human rights , particularly if it is designed to make things easier for ourselves .
I would stress : whoever the accused person is .
Lastly , Mr President , through this resolution , we call upon the Afghan authorities to make the greatest possible endeavours to obtain justice for the journalists killed in Afghanistan and to expose the truth behind their murders - I reiterate , to obtain justice and to reveal the truth : as well as justice , we demand to be informed of the reasons why many journalists have been killed .
If we have had the opportunity to find out about what has happened in Afghanistan , it is partly thanks to the journalists who decided to go and report on this war on the spot .
To call for justice for those who fell doing their duty , Mr President , and for the truth behind their deaths to be revealed , is the least that Parliament can do now .
Mr President , a year has now passed since the tragic 9 / 11 events which triggered the war against Afghanistan , now mercifully in a mopping-up phase to search out and destroy remnants of the odious Taliban regime and their al-Qa 'ida terrorist allies .
Nevertheless , Afghanistan has come a long way since the rout of Mullah Omar and the disappearance , hopefully for good , of Osama Bin Laden .
Girls are back at school , music and film are allowed again and football is replacing public hangings .
We have had a successful Bonn Conference and a Tokyo Donors Conference .
The Loya Jirga was opened by the former king , whom I had the pleasure of meeting last September in Rome .
He has now been granted the title of ' Father of the Nation ' , as he has worked tirelessly and assiduously behind the scenes to reunite his nation and stop squabbling , particularly amongst the Pashtun communities .
However ISAF , the International Security Assistance Force , still has its work cut out .
We have witnessed the assassination of two ministers and this week a bomb attack , presumably aimed against western forces .
We still see the evils of warlordism , ethnic division and a flourishing drug trade .
I was shocked to read that the opium crop this year was up to three thousand tonnes , overtaking even that of the Golden Triangle 's 900 tonnes in Myanmar and Thailand .
We still have the problem of considerable sympathy for Islamic terrorism in neighbouring Iran , where some al-Qa 'ida fighters have allegedly taken refuge , but almost certainly many are sheltering in Pakistan , where president Musharraf walks a tightrope between cooperating with the West and yet not fully cracking down on his home-grown Jihadi Islamic terrorist groups despite pledging to do so .
These groups infiltrate Indian Kashmir , causing mayhem and making a war between the two nuclear neighbours a very real possibility .
Clearly , President Musharraf does not want a peaceful Kashmir election to be held .
Pakistan is also not fully cooperating with ISAF , allowing it to enter the tribal areas of the north-west frontier region where al-Qa 'ida is currently regrouping to threaten Afghanistan 's government and civil society .
The West must now be prepared to extend the mandate of Turkish-led ISAF forces beyond this December at the UN and extend their remit to Afghan provinces as well , to end the warlordism and extend the government 's authority in the provinces as part of the nation-building exercise and construct a national army and police force and distribute much needed aid to a desperately poor country .
Sadly , the USD 1.8 billion promised in Tokyo for reconstruction has yet to materialise .
Only humanitarian aid has been seen so far .
The recent Operation Mountain Sweep has only brought a few weapon caches to light and we still have a long way to go to make this beautiful country a peaceful and prosperous one and a respectable member of the international community again as it was once in the 1960s and 1970s .
I feel particularly strongly that the government of Afghanistan should grant a moratorium on the use of Sharia law in areas such as the stoning to death of women and the amputation of limbs , in order to show how a modern Islamic country respects international covenants and treaty obligations and promotes justice without cruelty or abuse of human rights .
War criminals must also be brought to book and tried .
Refugees coming to the West who are terrorist sympathisers or have been active with the Taliban or al-Qa 'ida must be sent back to face the music .
I sincerely wish President Karzai and ex-king Mohammad Zahir Shah well with all the challenging problems that they face in the months to come .
Overall , I sincerely hope that Afghanistan will again be a respectable member of the international community as it once was .
( Applause on the right )
Mr President , wars , the Soviet presence and the Taliban have left a State without institutions or industry and with its agriculture struggling to survive . It has left a State with levels of poverty and illiteracy , including returning illiteracy , in men as well as women , which are truly incredible .
Furthermore , the lack of integration between the different cultural , social , religious and ethnic identities making up Afghan society increases the complexity of the problem with which the transitional government has to deal on a daily basis .
As has been said , governing this country means not just carrying out essential institutional reforms , starting with the Constitution , but creating a basic banking system from scratch with all speed , disseminating education and promoting respect between the citizens and ethnic groups , rebuilding cities and infrastructure , separating military and civil affairs and creating anew industry and agriculture which will be able to survive in a globalised world .
The challenge facing the transitional government is not inconsiderable , for it is a question of doing everything at once with all possible speed , as cheaply as possible and with the widest possible participation .
Clearly , these tasks are not easy , particularly if they have to be carried out within a relatively short space of time .
Moreover , Mr Karzai has explicitly undertaken to achieve a stable peace between the citizens , between ethnic groups and between the sexes , to establish the bases for democratisation of the country in the transitional government 's two years of office .
However , as Commissioner Patten said , the path is still very tortuous .
There has been no real , practical improvement in the situation of women , in particular , despite Mr Karzai 's statements .
The level of illiteracy among women is incredible - six or seven percent compared to 39 % previously .
Even the new government has deteriorated from this point of view , with some warlords assuming a political role not just in the decentralised administrations but in the Kabul government too .
Censorship has increased , as has been mentioned , and women continue to wear the burka and are marginalised , particularly in the southern and south-eastern regions .
The Union must multiply its endeavours to ensure that the hopes which were raised at Bonn are not completely dashed and that the present situation of far-reaching inequality , discrimination and failure to respect human rights does not become established in the long-term .
Mr President , I think everyone agrees that big improvements have taken place in Afghanistan in the last eight months , and I should like to thank MEPs for the debate that has been conducted , but there is also agreement that there are still major problems , as emphasised in , for example , some of the most recent speeches .
I should like firstly to add a couple of remarks about the issue of possible infringements of human rights , for example in connection with the recent discovery of mass graves in northern Afghanistan .
There must be no doubt that the Council attaches crucial importance to the Afghan Government 's and the Afghan people 's taking responsibility for the past and for the war crimes that might have been committed .
That does not of course mean only the atrocities committed by the Taliban regime .
In that connection , President Karzai 's statement that the issue of the mass graves is to be investigated is encouraging .
The UN will play a central role in assisting the Afghan Government with this work . The EU too will of course help as far as possible , partly through our special representative , Mr Vendrell .
Regarding the difficult security situation , especially in the areas outside Kabul , it is my view that the most realistic and forward-looking approach at the moment is to strengthen the transitional government 's ability to take care of security itself , partly through assisting with demobilisation , building up the army and the police , developing programmes designed to root out drugs production and setting up an efficient judiciary .
A number of EU Member States are making valuable contributions to this work .
That also applies to the important task , to which Mr Van Orden referred , of clearing the many mines which are a constant danger to the civilian population and make economic regeneration more difficult .
The Council is also alert to the large need for aid of various kinds which has been highlighted on many sides of this Chamber and which is perhaps greater than first assumed , partly because of the large number of refugees who have returned .
In order to contribute to stability in the country , we must , as has been stated , secure a visible peace dividend for the Afghan population .
Aid is also an important tool in our efforts to strengthen the transitional government at the expense of the local warlords .
I might point out that , at the meeting of the General Affairs Council in July , the Chairman of the Council reminded the Member States of the need to ensure that the promises made at the Tokyo Donor Conference earlier in the year are complied with in good time .
Finally , the issue of the situation of women in Afghanistan was raised on quite a few sides of the Chamber .
Right from the beginning , the strengthening of women 's rights has been an absolutely central feature of EU policy , and we shall pursue this objective both in our dialogue with the Afghan parties and through the aid we provide .
As Mrs Izquierdo Rojo said , it is a question of replacing burkas with driving licences .
I agree entirely .
Commissioner Patten will no doubt also say a little about this .
In an overall assessment of the situation in Afghanistan and of the efforts by the international community , it is important to keep a sense of proportion .
As many have pointed out , there are serious problems in Afghanistan today . There are problems with security , with drugs production and , especially , with women 's rights .
Compared with the situation less than a year ago , the conditions under which ordinary Afghans live have improved no end .
It may be said that still more might have been expected , but I do not in actual fact think it could have been .
In view of the circumstances , there was reason to fear the worst .
The EU and the Member States reacted quickly and generously , as soon as the opportunity presented itself .
Thousands of Europeans , soldiers , police , emergency aid workers and officials are now making invaluable efforts to help Afghanistan get back on its feet .
It is a difficult , thankless and dangerous task . Many had to lose their lives .
We must , of course , always be receptive to criticism , but the efforts of all the courageous and committed people who have helped rebuild Afghanistan must not be belittled .
On the contrary , we owe it to them to point out the major results that have been achieved .
Europe has nothing to be ashamed of in Afghanistan , and I would just add , last of all , that 100 000 Afghans are now returning home to Afghanistan .
Only very few are obtaining asylum in our countries , because it is now safe in Afghanistan , in any case in large areas of the country .
In this connection , it is a question of acting in accordance with the declaration from the Seville Summit and making vigorous efforts to facilitate repatriation .
That is something we owe to Afghanistan and to those people who are now taking the courageous step of returning .
Mr President , let me make one or two comments in reply to this debate .
First of all , I am grateful for the kind words expressed about the work that has been done by our Commission staff in Kabul and Afghanistan as a whole .
Those tributes are wholly justified .
The remarks made about the International Security Assistance Force underline the importance of the role that has been undertaken by the military in extending security .
I am sure that Member States will note what a number of Members of this House have said about the possibility of extending the role of ISAF and extending its mandate .
It is certainly the case that , if we want to see the authority of the Transitional Authority run right across the whole of the country , then it is imperative that we do not undermine that authority by reinventing the warlords as part of the continuing campaign against al-Qa 'ida and the Taliban .
It is absolutely imperative that we give all our support to President Karzai and his team .
I want to make three other points .
First of all , Mrs Maes reminded us of the great importance of not making the same mistakes that we made after the withdrawal of Soviet troops .
We are not engaged in what has occasionally been rather derisorily described as nation-building or , by one distinguished politician , as social work .
All I can say is that it is a pity there was not more social work and nation-building in the 1980s after the withdrawal of Soviet troops .
We might have avoided some of the excesses of the Taliban if that had been the case and avoided the problems that have been visited upon us .
What the honourable Member said is a reminder that the task that we have put our shoulder to is not going to be a short one .
We have to be in Afghanistan , we have to be working in partnership with Afghanistan for many years to come .
It is going to take a long time to complete this work .
Several honourable Members - principally ladies , although it should be an issue of just as much importance to people of my sex as well - referred to gender issues .
We must ensure that they get proper priority in our development assistance and development programmes .
Mrs Izquierdo Rojo asked about exchanging burkas for car licences .
She has not , alas , been able to stay with us for the end of the debate , but I will examine the point that she made and we will certainly ensure that the delegation to which she referred gets as much help as is required .
It is extremely important for Members of this House to visit Afghanistan , see for themselves what is going on and give their support to the early stages of the democratic process in that country .
Let me now deal with the issue of implementing the pledges and promises that were made in Tokyo .
It is obviously important , as we discovered in Kosovo , in East Timor and in other countries and societies recovering from crisis , to ensure that the help which is pledged arrives as swiftly as possible .
Not all is perfect by any means in Afghanistan .
When Mr Tannock said that only humanitarian aid had arrived so far , that was a tad exaggerated .
Certainly , as I made clear in my own speech , a great deal of reconstruction assistance has already been provided by the European Commission and others .
It is particularly notable that the money we have been providing for budgetary support just to get government running - and we have probably been the biggest providers of that support - has certainly been provided rapidly and has been well used .
I want to refer to the point made by Mr Van Orden about ensuring that even as one spends money rapidly , it is spent prudently and transparently because we have to be aware of the Court of Auditors , we have to be aware of the terrors of appearing in front of the Committee on Budgetary Control or the Committee on Budgets , we have to be aware of the importance of keeping European public opinion on our side .
Just as in the case of the Palestinian Authority , to which he referred , it is the European Commission which has actually led the way in ensuring that reformed and transparent financial controls are put in place .
We have led the way in reforming those financial controls which everybody is now supporting and using .
Equally in Afghanistan , it was the European Commission which made itself tiresome by arguing initially for dollarisation of the budget , just as we did in Kosovo .
We were in fact the only people arguing for dollarisation of the budget .
We have settled reasonably happily for other arrangements , in close consultation with the International Monetary Fund .
I do get fed up with the suggestion again and again that we are more lax in the way we support other countries and other governments in crisis than anybody else .
On the whole , what we are now managing to do is to provide assistance more rapidly and in ways which will actually stand up to the closest scrutiny by this Parliament and by the Court of Auditors .
Sometimes we should actually recognise what we are achieving and not just assume that what tabloid newspapers say about us is correct .
Mr President , Mr Van Orden extends his apologies to the Commissioner .
He had to meet a four o 'clock deadline , but he will read the Commissioner 's reply in the transcripts tomorrow with great interest .
I have received six motions for resolutions tabled pursuant to Rule 42 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , the fourth Asia-Europe summit , or ASEM Meeting , is to be held in less than three weeks ' time in Copenhagen on 23 and 24 September , thereby giving ASEM cooperation a prominent place in European policy on Asia .
Since its first summit six years ago , ASEM has been characterised by ever broader and more fruitful cooperation in a range of areas of common interest to Europe and Asia .
More than 40 initiatives have been launched in areas as diverse as money laundering , illegal migration , people smuggling , child welfare , human rights , environmental protection , educational exchanges , lifelong learning and international cooperation .
The number of meetings has also increased .
In between the summits , ASEM 's foreign ministers and ministers of finance and economic affairs meet annually , for example , partly for the purpose of improving the summits and making efforts to ensure that the best possible results are achieved through the ASEM process .
There are more than two billion people living in the ASEM countries .
Together , they produce more than half of what is produced throughout the world .
The Asian ASEM countries form the EU 's second largest trading partner .
This state of affairs illustrates the considerable significance of ASEM and the importance of the two regions ' continuing to cooperate fruitfully and in promising ways .
A successful summit at the end of this month is therefore a high priority for the Danish EU Presidency .
In common with the three previous ASEM summits , ASEM 4 will be divided into three work sessions , one for each of the main areas of cooperation .
These are : 1 ) political dialogue , 2 ) economic cooperation and 3 ) social , cultural and educational issues .
Moreover , the forthcoming summit will include , as an innovation , an informal breakfast debate under the heading , ' Dialogue Between Cultures and Civilisations ' .
The idea is that the political dialogue should be based on the new international situation following 11 September , and it will involve a debate on the new challenges we face in terms of security policy .
That means , for example , organised cross-border crime that affects us all .
It is first and foremost a question of how , in the context of ASEM cooperation , we can unite in combating international terrorism , as well as other transnational threats such as the drugs trade , money laundering and illegal migration .
A broad approach is required in this connection , with the emphasis on combating the underlying factors that can form a seedbed for extremism and intolerance . Among the matters to which we must attach importance are the fight against poverty and better access to education .
With a view to translating words into action , the expectation is that the discussions will result in the adoption of a declaration on cooperation between Europe and Asia on the combating of international terrorism , combined with a cooperation programme based on existing ASEM activities for combating cross-border crime .
The political dialogue traditionally involves an exchange of opinions about development in the two regions .
The subjects will undoubtedly include the most recent developments in the Korean Peninsula , and a declaration concerning the Korean Peninsula is expected to be issued at ASEM 4 with a view to promoting reconciliation and cooperation .
Other subjects might include EU enlargement and the development of cooperation under ASEAN + 3 .
Discussion of economic matters will concentrate on economic and financial priorities in the light of the global economic recession , the consequences of the recession for the two regions and the opportunities for cooperating with a view to rectifying the situation .
The current efforts to promote trade , investment and economic cooperation may , for example , be continued by working towards the implementation of the objectives formulated in the two ASEM economic action programmes , the Trade Facilitation Action Plan ( TFAP ) and the Investment Promotion Action Plan ( IPAP ) .
Economic , financial and monetary integration as a growth factor is also expected to be discussed at the summit , as is the WTO Development Round as an essential prerequisite of sustainable economic development .
It will be natural to use the ASEM process to add momentum to the Doha Development Round .
In light of the results achieved in the Doha Round , there will be the possibility of strengthened regional cooperation with a view to achieving further progress in the economic relations between the EU and the Asian ASEM partners .
ASEM 's efforts to break down barriers to trade and investment are based on proposals from high-ranking private sector business leaders via the Asia-Europe Business Forum ( AEBF ) whose tasks include that of helping improve trade relations between Asia and Europe .
This organisation 's annual forum will take place - under my own chairmanship , incidentally - directly before the ASEM 4 summit .
In the third main area - that of social , cultural and educational issues - the general theme will be that of measures for combating the unintended consequences of globalisation .
The importance of developing human resources , including educational cooperation and lifelong learning , is expected to be given a central place in this context .
One objective is to ensure that economic growth is reflected in progress in the social sphere that will go on to form the basis for social stability .
A seminar on the subject is intended as the first step on the way .
The discussions during the third work session will also relate to environmental issues and include a discussion of the ASEM partners ' opportunities for consolidating and developing cooperation in the environmental sphere , partly in the light of the Johannesburg summit .
ASEM brings together a broad range of different civilisations and cultures across geographical , ethnic , religious and socio-economic boundaries and , in that way , the ASEM process helps create trust between the regions .
By , as it were , building bridges between the European and Asian cultures and civilisations , ASEM is a forum well suited to the dialogue that is necessary in the fight against international terrorism 's attempts to split the international community .
That is the background to the fact that the informal breakfast discussion I mentioned , under the heading ' Dialogue Between Cultures and Civilisations ' , is to be arranged at ASEM 4 with the purpose of promoting mutual understanding between Europe and Asia .
The subjects might well be the significance of education in the efforts to promote understanding of other cultures and civilisations , the importance of equal access to information and significance of closer contacts between the nations of Europe and Asia .
The expectation is that this special discussion will form the basis for an ongoing dialogue within ASEM concerning cultures and civilisations .
I have noted with great interest the observations and recommendations by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , contained in the European Parliament 's report of 16 July 2002 on the Commission Communication on a Strategic Framework for Enhanced Partnerships between Europe and Asia .
I would point out in this connection that , with the forthcoming summit , we in the Council view ASEM-based cooperation between Europe and Asia as having advanced a stage further so that it now forms a better basis for meeting the common challenges we face .
I hope we can achieve the objectives , with which I am in agreement and which are to be found in Parliament 's report .
As someone who was present here in Parliament at the start of European cooperation - I was chairman of the Japan delegation - I am impressed by what it has grown into .
I should like to thank Parliament for the interest it has shown and also draw attention to the personal contacts that exist between members of the European Parliament and the Asian parliaments .
The importance of these cannot be overestimated , and the Presidency therefore attaches importance to Parliament 's report on ASEM cooperation .
Mr President , allow me to start by congratulating the Commission .
The Commission 's document , its view of EU-Asia relations , which is the topic of my report , is clear , coherent and shows understanding for the situation Asia is facing , and there is a desperate need for this .
One of the flaws in the Europe-Asia relations is , in my view , the Council 's minimalist approach to date , particularly by Foreign Affairs Ministers .
An all-time low was , to my mind , our Ministers ' paper-thin contribution to ASEM III in Seoul , which was in sharp contrast to the Commission 's contribution over there .
This is no longer acceptable .
Anyone who has worked on this over the past year knows that firm and concrete steps need to be taken , for this is what Asia and Europe 's challenges require .
Steps that go beyond strong , economic cooperation - of which , I , incidentally , am greatly in favour - and that go beyond window dressing and the endless symbolism that is meant to be taken as policy .
I am therefore pleased with the Commissioner 's announcement that a South ? East Asia strategy will be adopted soon , for that is indeed the missing piece in the jigsaw puzzle .
I can easily illustrate the challenge we are facing in the area of human rights by quoting an example from everyday life .
In October last year , I reported in this Parliament on the case of Mr Bin Vinh Trinh in Vietnam .
Following a lengthy stay abroad , Mr Trinh had made investments in his own country .
He was subsequently detained under false pretences and his possessions were seized .
This was a tragic event for him and his family , but , above all , sent a very negative signal to possible investors in Vietnam .
We are now a year on .
Some progress has been made , but not anything like enough .
Mr Trinh 's possessions have still not been returned to him and those who falsely accused him have still not been brought to justice .
The European Union is currently Vietnam 's key donor , but a parallel focus on respecting human rights is lacking .
This makes the policy incoherent and certainly lacking in one of the areas in which Europe always prides itself .
Not without reason did the UN human rights committee recently report on a large number of human rights abuses in Vietnam .
Other Asian countries , including Cambodia or North Korea , did not escape the UN committee 's condemnation either .
It would be impossible to list them all one by one , but I hope that the message is clear .
The observation of human rights , including , for example , the protection of investors , cannot be seen in isolation from economic cooperation .
They are both interdependent .
Not only does the European Union consider itself to be the guardian of human rights , but also the supporter of democratisation processes and young democracies across the world .
Across the world ?
Not quite , for surprisingly , there is a young democracy in Asia which should not count on any support , namely Taiwan .
The way in which Europe and our Council treat this country is hypocritical .
This is the only way I can describe it .
Taiwan is a budding democracy with which we maintain sound economic ties .
To give you an example : last year , President Chen Shui-bian was unable to receive his Liberal International Prize for Freedom , because he was refused a visa , whilst representatives of the People 's Republic of China had a great time travelling across the entire Continent .
We are all acquainted with the democratic content of the regime in Beijing .
I can totally understand that Saddam Hussein and Robert Mugabe are refused visas , but surely it is very bizarre to bar an elected leader from a democratic country , who is on a private visit .
Not one Member State wanted to grant the liberal-democratic guest a visa , and the Council showed its weakest side by not lifting a finger .
I therefore warmly welcome the Commission 's plans to open an office in Taipei .
In fact , I do this for other Asian countries too .
Commissioner , you asked for credit , well , here it is .
Following the harsh words I have spoken about the Council , I should like to say to my good friend , Mr Haarder , that I was pleased with his comments about the preparations of ASEM IV .
His words inspire confidence .
A comprehensive and serious approach to ASEM IV was needed , and I hope that he will receive actual support within the Council for this .
Economic cooperation - investments by SMEs spring to mind , but also political dialogue and exchanges - the Minister has quoted the entire list - are of major importance .
By way of conclusion , it is not as if we were still living in the Rudyard Kipling 's era , who observed : east is east and west is west , and never the twain shall meet .
Democratic rule of law is central in Asia too .
There is no Asian model , or , in fact , a European model .
This is why I should like to finish off by reminding you of the words of a famous Asia expert , which he wrote some four years ago in his book on China and Hong Kong . He said ' it is absurd to argue for the existence of any fundamental difference between the personal standards and moral principles of Asians on the one hand and Europeans and Americans on the other , for decency is decency , East and West ? .
These are wise words , Commissioner Patten , that have not lost any of their truth .
Mr President , Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , my dear Bertel , Commissioner , I will start by saying how glad I am that , as well as people watching the debate , there are in the galleries diplomats from the People 's Republic of China and also representatives of the freely-elected parliament of Taiwan .
I think it is a great thing that both sides of the straits are following our debate today .
Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I speak on behalf of the PPE Group when I make the observation that we very much welcome your statements on the preparations for the fourth ASEM process .
I believe that your statements constitute impressive evidence of the careful and committed way in which both the Council and the Commission have prepared for the ASEM IV meeting .
My group , however , calls for something about which I would ask you to say something in greater detail , namely , in view of the plethora of issues to be discussed , which the President-in-Office of the Council has mentioned , for there to be definite action by the Heads of State and of Government , with firm timetables and defined objectives .
It is not enough to do as we did at ASEM III and discuss all the problems we have in the world , taking in the economy , culture , politics and education , leaving the public to wonder after the event what actually came out of it all .
Hence our preference , and our demand , for fewer but definite plans for closer cooperation between Asia and Europe .
Please allow me to pick out from the abundance of issues that have been mentioned , just three on which I believe it important to us in Parliament that the Heads of State and of Government in Europe and Asia should bring forth definite results .
The first is that a start be made on a special process of bringing the two cultural horizons together .
It is precisely in view of the anniversary of the terrible events of 11 September that Europe and Asia , whatever their many historic , cultural and religious differences , must define , for the sake of our co-existence and peace in the world , what they have in common , what binds them together and draw conclusions from this .
We expect this political and cultural dialogue to have a definite starting point .
The second issue is one that Bertel Haarder , being a Dane , will well understand . As regards terrorism , there is one point on which we want something definite , namely the combating of terrorism at sea .
Over and over again , our ships , when sailing between Asia und Europe , fall prey to pirates in certain narrow stretches of sea .
We cannot explain to the public how it is that we are in a position to combat terrorism throughout the world , but apparently incapable of facing up to terrorists in narrow stretches of sea , terrorists who endanger our ships ' crews and kill them !
The third is the problem of migration .
In the President-in-Office of the Council , whose remit not only includes European policy but also immigration , we have a good partner , one who will see to it that definite decisions will actually be taken in the course of ASEM IV on how we can cooperate better in combating the illegal movement of people between Asia and Europe .
I will now turn briefly to Mr Maaten 's report , which is of course an excellent one .
Time compels me to highlight only five aspects of it , so please forgive me for that .
Commissioner Patten , you pointed out that the issue of enlarging ASEM 's membership calls for a consensual approach , but you quite rightly understood that we in Parliament want to encourage you to talk with our Asian partners in ASEM IV in preparation for the Hanoi conference .
What is at issue is the assertion that ' we will enlarge from 15 states to 20 ' .
As Europeans , we consider it important that Asia should concentrate particularly on including such countries as India and Taiwan in the Asia process .
You yourself pointed out the special role that India and Taiwan play .
I believe that we should , so to speak , ' push ' these countries in order to get them accepted .
You have already demonstrated political commitment to a dialogue on human rights , and on that you have our full support .
I believe that the human rights dialogue with the People 's Republic of China , which has just begun , has demonstrated that both sides will from now on be working on the basis of human rights being universal in character .
Let there be an end to the appalling argument about whether there are Asian or European human rights - on the contrary , human rights are universal , and it is on that basis that the dialogue should be proceeded with .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , Europe should also perhaps play more of a part in the prevention and resolution of conflict in Asia .
The security of the region is of crucial importance for the world as a whole .
That is why we should also give constructive support to the political dialogue between the People 's Republic of China and Taiwan on the basis of democracy , peoples ' right to self-determination , respect for human rights and for the rule of law .
We should also be endeavouring to play some sort of role in reducing the tensions between India and Pakistan .
This has to do not only with the protection of cultural minorities , but also with the protection of Christian minorities in the region .
We are very grateful to you , Commissioner Patten , for referring , in your capacity as the Commission 's spokesman , to the prompt inauguration of the delegation to Malaysia , Singapore , Taiwan , Cambodia , Laos and Nepal .
That is something that Parliament has long desired .
We need to have higher-profile representation in a continent comprising half of the world 's population .
On that you have our support .
Please permit me to conclude on a note of mild criticism .
Today finds us discussing the great importance of Asia and Europe , and the two continents ' relationship with one another .
I hope I am not off beam in saying that there will soon be , and also in September , a meeting , a summit between the European Union and China , which is scheduled to take one day .
I wonder whether the Heads of State and of Government should not perhaps take longer than just one day to embark on a truly in-depth dialogue with the People 's Republic of China .
I think that would be appropriate in view of that country 's significance and that of the continent .
Madam President , I welcome the Commission 's communication , ' Europe and Asia : A Strategic Framework for Enhanced Partnerships ' , and Mr Maaten 's report , for which we congratulate him .
We have in the past too often neglected Asia and focused more on other regions of the world , but in fact it contains a majority of the world 's population .
We welcome the recognition , both in the report and the Commission statement , that we must engage with Asia , not only in trade and economics , but in other areas as well : cultural exchanges , for example , particularly between Europe and Asia 's moderate Islamic states ; justice and home affairs , in the war against terrorism , drugs traffic and organised crime , all self-evidently with a global dimension ; environmental policy , where Europe and Asia face the same threat from pollution and environmental degradation ; security policy , where , in an increasingly globalised world , a crisis on the Korean Peninsula - as Commissioner Patten mentioned - would threaten the peace and stability of the whole world .
That is one reason why the European Union is engaged in the KEDO process .
We therefore welcome the emergence of Asian voices speaking together through ASEAN and other regional fora .
We also welcome and would like to encourage and deepen the widening of the ASEM process and its parallel parliamentary dialogue through ASEP .
I had the opportunity to participate in the first ASEP meeting here in Strasbourg back in 1996 and in last week 's second ASEP meeting in Manila , where we achieved a unanimity of views with statements on terrorism , the environment , on human rights for women and children .
Here Members of the European Parliament from Germany , Spain , Belgium and Italy joined with colleagues from China , Japan , Korea and the Philippines to agree that Kyoto needs to be ratified ; the UN must be the basis of the global war against terrorism ; positive action is required to address discrimination against women ; we should work with trade unions and other representatives of civil society to combat child labour .
The fundamental problem is poverty , with hundreds of millions of people around the world , particularly in Asia , living on less than one euro a day .
We hope Parliament will agree to the proposal in the amendment that I and other Members of Parliament have tabled to host ASEP III early in 2004 .
We can support the broad thrust of Mr Maaten 's report .
My only criticism is that an attempt has been made to hijack the report on behalf of the Taiwan lobby .
Of course Members of Parliament have a perfect right to do this , but we should be aware of what we are being asked to approve .
I would remind Members of the provisions of Rule 9 ( 1 ) , Annex I , Article 1 on declarations of interest .
On behalf of the Socialist Group , I have tabled amendments to attempt to correct these distortions .
Yes , we must recognise Taiwan as one of the most important trading entities for the EU , but here we are being asked to go further .
If we want to abrogate our support of the one-China policy we followed in the past , we should do so directly , rather than by hiding it within paragraph 35 on the WHO .
Membership of the World Health Organisation is restricted to nation states .
To demand membership of the WHO for Taiwan is to recognise it as a nation state ; to grant it an independence that its own government has not even requested .
Equally I am at a loss to see why , if the PPE-DE Group is genuinely interested to allow the fundamental rights of freedom of travel for the President and senior officials of Taiwan 's Government , it wants to restrict this to strictly private visits , rather than leave it more open .
Otherwise we can only conclude , if they maintain their position , that this is really a subterfuge for opening up a political process that as yet we have not agreed .
With these reservations , we support the report .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Maaten who has produced a distinguished report on a particularly wide-ranging subject .
Asia is not only huge in terms of area . It also embraces a range of economic , political and religious differences , which mean that it is particularly challenging to deal with the area in a single report .
This has been achieved , however .
I shall just highlight a couple of points here .
In anticipation of the forthcoming ASEM summit in Copenhagen , it must be crystal clear that there is full support for maintaining and developing relations between the EU , the ASEM countries and Asia as a whole .
It is first and foremost a question of supporting the struggle to obtain respect for democracy and human rights in Asia .
With regard to the global campaign against terror , it is also important for the EU to forge sound alliances with the Asian countries .
More extensive relations between the EU and Asia must also play their part in supporting the market economy and sustainable development and , in that way , promoting a prosperous Asia .
Simply take a look at recent history and the examples of Japan and Taiwan and it will quickly be very obvious that democracy , the market economy and respect for human rights are the way forward .
I must naturally express my delight at the fact that both China and Taiwan are now members of the World Trade Organisation , or WTO .
It is of course gratifying to hear the Commissioner confirm that the EU is to open an office in Taipei within a year .
Taiwan is the EU 's eleventh largest trading partner and is therefore a very important partner of the EU .
Braving possible accusations from Mr Ford , I regret that Taiwan cannot participate in the ASEM Meeting , for example as an observer .
By the same token , I also regret that Taiwan is not a member of the World Health Organisation , or WHO , not even as an observer .
In my view , every democracy in the world should have a place in these international institutions .
Madam President , there are large parts of Mr Maaten 's report with which I can agree entirely .
There , are , though , a number of problems .
Firstly , any consideration of Europe and Asia has to include Russia as well .
All the issues touch on the interests of Russia as a great Eurasian power , as became clear only recently in the Korea issue .
Both the North Korean president 's journey to Siberia and the plans to build a rail link crossing North and South Korea are worthy of a great deal of attention .
On the other hand , considering the problem more in the unclear light favoured by the USA , and failing to involve Russia and China to the extent they deserve , makes it difficult to achieve a peaceful and fair solution to the problems before us .
Secondly , to have an Asia policy without due consideration of the Shanghai Group and its place in Eurasian political events is to ignore the realities of the situation .
We must now decide on what the place of Central Asia , for example , is to be and what attitude we take towards the USA 's Eurasian strategy , which envisages a new geostrategic situation in this area .
The end of the Cold War saw the budding of hope for a peaceful world , and that hope is , unfortunately , waning fast .
Thirdly , the States of the European Union have long disregarded or underestimated developments in Asia and are still persisting in deliberations that are one-sided and sometimes limited .
The Commissioner observed that reality has overtaken the report 's reference to India and Taiwan in the same breath .
That I consider to be a political error that takes inadequate account of the realities .
Realpolitik always has something to do with interests , and the EU does well to strike a balance between its own well-understood interests and those of its partners .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I will start by congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Maaten , as there is a massive amount of lost ground to make up in relations between the EU and Asia .
We are behaving as if Europe were something other than an appendage to the Eurasian continent , as if it were the centre of the world , and as if Asia were on another continent .
The ASEM is certainly a useful forum on cooperation , but it is that only if all the Asian countries belong to it , with , at the least , prominence given to those that are striving to become democratic .
For example , I see the ASEM as unthinkable without India .
Only with the EU 's firm commitment is the creation of democracy in Asia a feasible process , and the democratic countries , of which Taiwan is an example , can and must be planted and nurtured as a leavening influence .
Taiwan can , one might say , become the engine for the continuing process of democratisation that we want to advance in Asia .
Moreover , cooperation agreements between Asian countries and the EU - one thinks of Laos and Vietnam - are meaningless unless they are actually adhered to .
My primary concern now is with the mountain areas , for Asia has the highest mountains in the world , including the Himalayas , the Karakorum , the Hindu Kush , and also the Pamir Mountains , and it is in these mountainous areas , which , when we look at them on the map , are bigger than the whole of the EU , that we find the greatest trouble spots .
Let us consider Tibet .
Tibet has its own history and culture .
Tibet is of about the same size as Europe measured from Gibraltar to the Urals .
Tibet was occupied by China in the 1950s .
The intelligentsia and the leaders of its society were driven out of the country .
His Holiness the Dalai Lama left the country in 1959 and now lives , with his government-in-exile , in exile in India .
The Tibetans were admittedly promised autonomy , which was formally introduced in 1965 , but this autonomy is a pure farce .
All things Tibetan were increasingly repressed , and the country is being plundered .
The railway that is now to be built from Golmod to Lhasa , and which , incidentally , runs across zones of permafrost , which makes little sense , does not serve to keep the country supplied , but to keep on exploiting it .
In this hybrid system , part-capitalist , part-communist , China has done everything to marginalise Tibetan culture along with this minority .
All efforts on our part towards human rights have to date been in vain .
This initiation will repress all things Tibetan unless the EU works to counteract it .
Our next stop is Sinkiang , still today belonging to China and with a sparse Muslim population . It is a vast region in the west of China between the Kuenlun Mountains and the Altai and Pamir ranges .
Here too there is repression , the violation of human rights and , after 11 September 2001 , yet more suppression under the pretext of combating terrorism .
No longer is autonomy even mentioned .
I wonder whether we Europeans might offer our experience of regional conflict resolution as aid here .
So we come to Kashmir , Asia 's number one trouble spot , a problem dragged out from 1947 onwards , with the divided Kashmir , called Jammu-Kashmir , torn between Pakistan and India .
Following many wars between the two countries , soldiers have been facing each other down , in summer and winter alike , at 6 000 metres above the sea , for 15 years .
Nuclear war has been threatened .
Attempts to resolve the conflict have been unsuccessful .
I am not concerned here with apportioning blame to one side or another , but with finding solutions .
The indigenous people , the Kashmiris , must of course also be asked , and here too , autonomy is a possible solution , perhaps even shared autonomy for this divided country , and we Europeans have a number of models to offer of how to achieve solutions .
As regards autonomy , the same is true of Tibet , of Sinkiang and of various regions in the Caucasus .
Let us move on to Nepal , a small but very densely populated country .
Here there are situations resembling civil war and plunging this country - one of the world 's poorest - into virtual self-destruction .
On the one hand there is a corrupt government , and on the other there are rebels describing themselves as Maoists , fighting each other , each under the pretext of supporting the impoverished rural population .
While this is going on , the rural population and tourism , which is this country 's sole surviving source of income , get trampled underfoot .
This means that our non-governmental financial aid , which has indeed hitherto alleviated a certain amount of poverty , is no longer possible .
At the moment , I see no chance of giving this little kingdom at the southern foot of the Himalayas some degree of freedom from its self-destructive dilemma .
Nor has peace been brought to the situation in Afghanistan .
The mountainous areas of the Hindu Kush have been laid waste , tourism is impossible there as an economic activity , and the mountainous areas are becoming more and more desolate .
What we Europeans have to bring about is , firstly , respect for all other lifestyles , the protection of minorities , and , of course economic aid , peacekeeping , education , conflict resolution , and , where necessary , intervention .
How , though , are we to play our part in influencing political interaction in the complex entity that is Asia , and how is the EU to play its part in shaping it , if we do not learn to speak with one voice ?
For as long as the EU fails to thrash out a common foreign and security policy , much of what we want to implement , and should put great effort into implementing , will unfortunately remain nothing more than wishful thinking .
This last point is unfortunately the most important for us to resolve before we take on our real task in Asia .
Madam President , I can hardly conceive of a region that would be more difficult to draft a policy strategy for than Asia .
It is a powder keg from a security point of view , a baby elephant economically speaking and mainly a source of concern from the point of view of human rights .
What is the European Union to do with this region ?
Mr Maaten 's report contains many valuable building blocks for a coherent vision .
These are of such high quality that I will support the report , even though I do not see eye to eye with the rapporteur on all scores .
I should like to raise two points .
I will start on a critical note .
The report says a great deal about the role that the European Union should play in all kinds of conflicts in the region , but nothing about the relationship with the United States .
According to Paragraph 14 , the European Union is to point out to the East that Europe has a role of its own , independent of that of America .
This is not terribly realistic , for , as is also recognised in Paragraph 14 , the EU does not yet have an effective foreign policy and certainly not an effective security policy .
I am therefore noting , without any perverse delight , that if Europe is to play any role whatsoever in conflicts of this kind , the EU will inevitably need to work more closely with the United States .
After all , not only does the US 's military presence guarantee stability , it also adds political weight to the region .
The lack of this notion in the report is an oversight , in my view .
Secondly , along with the rapporteur , I should like to underline the importance of the principles of the rule of law and respect for human rights .
Our relations with , for example , China , Indonesia , Burma and Vietnam should be subject to compliance with these fundamental principles .
I completely agree with the rapporteur that the only true basis for economic and social progress in the region is to respect human rights and the rule of law .
Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , rapporteur , ladies and gentlemen , I agree with the President-in-Office of the Council : this is a good report .
However , as he is quite aware , it is very often the case that Parliament produces good resolutions but there is a problem afterwards , and that problem is the Council .
Mr Messner is clearly right : there is an institutional problem , but that is not all , There is the problem of the Commission too .
Mr Belder was right to remind us of the need for the strategy .
I cannot believe that , even today , we are unable to distinguish between democratic Asian countries and non-democratic Asian countries .
We lump them all together with China , with which we have been pursuing a difficult dialogue , not just since yesterday but for a decade now , a difficult dialogue in which we are repeatedly informed by the Chinese leaders that China is a specific case , that there is a specific Asian approach to human rights .
Have you never thought to tell them that Engels , Marx , Stalin and Lenin were not exactly Asian and that they must stop talking such rubbish ?
The problem is not economic , President-in-Office , and our Taiwanese friends are the best illustration of this , for , quite apart from any political or institutional relationship with our countries , they have become a country with 20 million inhabitants which is the European Union 's third largest trading partner .
The businessmen of Taiwan and the European Union have found their own way .
It is we who have a problem , and the problem is that a number of countries are at war : in Vietnam , there is currently a Vietnam war against democracy and freedom , there is currently a war being waged in China against democracy and freedom , there is currently a war being waged in Laos against democracy and freedom .
This problem cannot be addressed here .
Mr Ford has condemned the initiatives of Mr Jarzembowski and other Members in support of democracy in Taiwan .
All this seems to me to be completely incredible .
I fail to understand this cooperation policy , Commissioner Patten . I fail to understand why we should continue to give money that we know full well will end up in the wallets of the Vietnamese , Chinese and Laotian leaders and have no impact at all .
Why , Commissioner , do you not do what you are starting to do with other countries ? To do away with all these cooperation projects and give countries EUR 1 million once they have completed this specific democratisation reform .
This would eliminate all the European bureaucracy and , therefore , fraud as well , all the disgraceful wastage of our and taxpayers ' money .
I would also like the Council and the Commission to inform us whether there really is no hope of succeeding in obtaining the release of five ' disappeared persons ' .
Twenty years ago , hundreds of thousands of Europeans marched down the streets calling for the release of the Chilean disappeared .
We are incapable of saving five missing civilians , five ' disappeared persons ' , in Laos , a country of 5 million inhabitants of minor geopolitical influence .
We are not even capable of obtaining the release of the leaders of the Unified Buddhist Church of Vietnam , who have been in prison for 20 years now .
I find all this absolutely unacceptable , not to say incomprehensible .
Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I should also like to start by thanking Mr Maaten for an excellent report .
Although not a member of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , I have followed the matter and read the report , and I found it excellent .
I have a few reservations about some of the details , but on the whole it is an exceptionally good report .
We all , of course , believe it is important for the ASEM meeting in Copenhagen at the end of the month to be a success .
The economic issues , which are extremely important for relations between the EU and the ASEAN countries , will naturally be discussed .
These key issues have been developed further in recent years .
Something we ought to develop further is cooperation in the area of foreign policy , i.e. the EU should join with Asia in adopting a committed role in conflicts around the globe and play a more active part .
I therefore believe it was positive that Sweden addressed the Korean question during the Swedish Presidency , and I hope this cooperation can continue .
I have some experience of environmental issues .
With regard to the global environment , I believe it is very important to cooperate with the Asian countries .
We have a lot in common and we have the same viewpoints .
Since these are global issues , we see that the US is dragging its feet in this area .
We know that we need to get the US on board .
We stand a better chance of succeeding if we can create a coalition with the countries in Asia around these issues .
We must also continue to cooperate on human rights issues , an area in which it has - quite rightly - been said that many of these countries have considerable problems .
I remain , however , convinced that dialogue will improve our chances of moving forward in this area , too .
I should now like to turn to dialogue-related issues .
I am back from the ASEP meeting in Manila , where I was one of the delegates .
Although there were differences between us , I must say that the atmosphere was good .
We managed to agree on a joint communiqué .
At the Manila meeting we tried to focus on three areas : firstly , terrorism ; secondly , environmental issues ; and thirdly , human rights issues .
We managed to agree on all three .
What I would stress above all with regard to the fight against terrorism is that it must be conducted under the auspices of the UN and within the framework of international law .
It is also important that the UN 's various conventions be ratified .
I have already mentioned the environmental aspect , which is a global issue .
Global warming is the most important question .
It is important that we should all ratify the Kyoto Protocol .
Furthermore , we must try to get the US first to sign it , and then ratify it .
We also discussed the need to mobilise civil society in the context of the environment and of human rights .
We are very concerned about the human rights situation , which has been deteriorating in recent years .
More cooperation is needed in this area .
As Mr Ford said , it is important to have continuity in our relations at government level .
At the same time , it is important to have continuity in relations at parliamentary level .
I therefore hope that an ASEP meeting can be organised in connection with the next ASEM meeting in 2004 .
Our relations with Asia have greatly improved over the past few years , and this is something to be welcomed , for Asia accounts for 56 % of the world population , 26 % of the total global BNP and for 25 % of world trade .
Despite the crisis in Asia , trade and investment relations have expanded to such an extent that Asia is currently the EU 's third largest regional trading partner .
We can even say that we in Europe have contributed to a relatively swift economic recovery in Asia by means of our open markets and investments .
Despite this , a great deal still needs to be done .
Our political ties need to be strengthened and broadened .
We still do give Asia enough consideration as an important partner in multilateral discussions within international forums , such as the World Trade Organisation .
I would , in this connection , refer to China 's recent endorsement of the Kyoto Agreement .
This is a positive point .
Asia is indeed gradually realising that it faces the same global challenges as we do : promoting peace , security , minimum social standards , environmental protection and the fight against cross-border crime and trafficking in human beings .
Finally , I know from my own experience that Asians still do not know Europe well enough .
This results , for example , in the EU 's trade deficit with Asia which , partly due to the crisis , has increased almost tenfold over the past five years .
We must therefore step up our presence in the region as a matter of urgency , and make the Asians aware of Europe 's - and , above all , of the EU 's - significance , so that the trade and investment potential of our companies can also be enhanced .
Madam President , I would like to congratulate the Presidency of the Council on the ambitious programme for the Asia Summit in Copenhagen .
It is , in my view , particularly gratifying that there is a specific focus on dialogue on culture and civilisation , for it is particularly in these times that mutual understanding in this area is particularly important .
All too often , there is still great misunderstanding despite the progress made in relations between Europe and Asia , which are distant rather than close , in contrast to relations with the ACP States or Latin America .
We have to come to understand that the Asian states are not merely in economic or trading competition with us , but that they are genuinely important partners .
Both Mr Maaten 's report and also the communication from the Commission make it very clear that the strategic framework also has to highlight priority areas for political and strategic cooperation , in which area the strengthening of the United Nations will , on the one hand , certainly be a point of view that will carry weight , as will without any doubt , on the other hand , the bilateral and , as far as possible , joint efforts at tying the USA into a multilateral relationship .
In this time of conflict , when we are faced with problems and challenges , it cannot be too often emphasised that it is most important that Asia and Europe should support a multipolar world .
This is where we , as Europe 's Parliament , can certainly play an important role with these reports and these debates , and the ASEP Summits could emphasise this .
I really do consider that important .
I would also like to emphatically underline the role to be played by the principle of detente and change through rapprochement in giving human rights and democracy issues priority .
What have we achieved in Europe by means of this policy ?
Why can it not used to give us leverage in Asia ?
That we should be cooperating with the Asians in this way in the ASEAN Regional Forum , and in other areas affecting stability , is something I consider right and proper .
I would like to take this opportunity to make another appeal .
Another issue here is certainly cooperation between non-governmental organisations , as is the new relationship on the basis of equal rights , partnership and mutual understanding .
What , though , will we have achieved if this remains confined to the heads of government , to the business world , or even to the parliaments ?
We have to include the young people of these continents of ours .
With that in mind , I would like to encourage the Danish Presidency of the Council to do even more for the European-Asian summer schools and even more for mutual understanding between the young people of Asia and Europe .
Madam President , first of all , I should like to express my support and praise for Mr Maaten 's report .
It is an excellent document .
I should also like to express my appreciation for the communication by Commissioner Patten .
Over the past ten years , the attention given to Asia by the EU has not always been what it should have been .
Partly thanks to Commissioner Patten , this attention has been rekindled .
This , of course , has something to do with his great knowledge and experience in the area in question .
At parliamentary level too , contacts have improved over the past few years , as witness the recent ASEP meeting in Manila .
It is also vital that talks should not simply be held at ministerial and official level , but also at parliamentary level .
This reinforces the debate on mutual contacts , and the contacts are thus guided and controlled at parliamentary level too .
Reinforcing the democratic substance in Asia is certainly no hollow exercise .
I should like to make a few more additional comments , starting with Indonesia .
I am pleased that Commissioner Patten has spoken so highly about Indonesia .
I should like to say something about Indonesia , because I know the country well and I am also co-Chairman of the newly formed working group ' Friends of Indonesia ' .
Indonesia is in the throes of becoming a democratic system .
The authoritarian Suharto regime has fortunately made way for a democracy under the leadership first of President Wahid and now of President Megawati Sukarnoputri .
This process is far from easy , and this is why it is important for that country to receive our support .
After China , Indonesia is the region 's largest country .
We should not forget that Indonesia , in terms of inhabitants , is the world 's largest Islamic country .
These two elements together mean that Indonesia is of great strategic importance in the region and of great strategic importance in present-day world politics in the light of the events of 11 September last year .
Over the summer , the Indonesian Congress , which is a combination of national and regional parliaments , took important decisions which further reinforce democracy .
In future , the President will be elected directly by the people and the military power will withdraw from the national parliament in which it still had a preferential position .
At the same time , however , we also notice the emergence of an increasing number of fundamentalist Muslim groups which are opposed to freedom of religion in Indonesia .
Christian communities too , are under attack on a regular basis .
The situation in the Moluccas has often been discussed in this House .
Indonesia is vulnerable in this transitional phase to democracy , and this is why the Indonesian government deserves extra support from the European Union .
My question to Commissioner Patten is : how could this support be stepped up ?
Secondly , I should like to make an observation about Burma , or Myanmar .
Mr Maaten 's report states that that country should also become a member of the ASEM group .
I would strongly question that .
Burma still has a military regime that came to power by deposing a President who had 80 % of the votes behind him , by depriving a parliament of its powers , by imprisoning many MPs or having them killed and by adopting a disastrous policy on ethnic minorities , resulting in more than 100 000 refugees in Thailand , among other countries .
I have visited these refugee camps .
Neither should we forget that Burma tolerates slave labour and is Asia 's largest drugs exporter .
In this respect , it is in close competition of Bolivia .
In my view , such a country does not belong in ASEAN and in the ASEM group .
We should instead try to ensure that Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi is reinstated as President of the country in a democratic system .
I should like to finish off with a remark about Vietnam .
It is interesting to hear that the next Ministerial Conference will be taking place there .
Although I am positive about Vietnam , I hope that attention will also be focused on the high number of political prisoners in that country .
Mr Pannella has tabled an amendment to this effect .
In my experience , it is useful to ask questions about this - and I have done so on numerous occasions - and for the Commissioner to assure that the European ambassador in Vietnam give this matter his urgent attention .
I have letters which show that Vietnamese prisoners have been released following pressure brought to bear by Parliament and the European Union .
It therefore works .
I hope that this aspect will be given due consideration in the debates in Hanoi .
One final word .
The Commission 's line on Taiwan receives my unqualified support .
I hope that Taiwan will be accorded a place in the ASEM and I also hope we can appreciate that Taiwan is a more important democracy than the vast country of China , which , it is of course also to be hoped , will yet develop in that direction .
Madam President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , although , when cooperation between ASEAN and the EU is mentioned , most people take it to refer to the ASEM process , that is to say the meeting of Heads of State and of Government , ASEP , the important meeting of parliamentarians from Europe and Asia , must not be overlooked .
Cooperation in this area is so important that one of our partners must not be forgotten .
We need both of them !
We have , in the course of time , built up very intensive ventures in economic cooperation , and Asia is in any case the European Union 's most important trading partner .
We have built up good relations in the cultural sphere , but what we need is to step up political cooperation , quite simply because geopolitical conflicts and problems have an effect on the European Union .
Consider terrorism , consider internationally organised crime , consider migration , consider environmental issues and the many other problems we have .
So I welcome the initiatives taken in this report , as well as the Commission proposals , and congratulate the rapporteur on the very precise proposals he has made . I would , though , like to add some of my own , which I believe will further improve cooperation .
The first is that we should arrange , in future , for an ASEP meeting to be held , if at all possible , prior to every ASEM Summit , in order to draft tangible proposals and , in second place , in order that we should move on , as Mr Jarzembowski has just said , instead of just putting dialogues on the record in broad terms , to coming to definite decisions and setting out in definite terms for these summits resolutions and objectives that can and must be put into operation .
A number of us from this House , led by the distinguished Lord Inglewood , took part in the ASEP meeting from 26 to 28 August , at which we were exemplary in so far as we wrapped up a very solid package in the area of counter-terrorism .
There I had the opportunity to act as coordinator , and I will ask you , as President of the Council , and you , as the Commission 's representative , to incorporate these specific points from the terrorism package at the next ASEM Summit .
Let me pick out a number of proposals .
We proposed unanimously that the UN should attempt to come up with a uniform definition of terrorism that would then be binding on all our States .
We decided on the establishment of a network facilitating cooperation in counter-terrorism , the exchange of information , mutual aid - including aid of a technological nature - in dealing with chemical or bacteriological weapons or the training of experts .
At this meeting , we made proposals for security systems in transport by land , sea and air to be improved to defined standards , and we also proposed that , at last , all terrorist acts , including conspiracy , incitement , and membership of terrorist organisations should be classified as serious offences and punished as such in all Asian states .
Finally , we also resolved that protection and help be afforded to the victims of terrorism .
We will be successful in the struggle against terrorism only when Europe itself takes measures that work , when cooperation with the USA is developed and made to work , and if , at the end of the day , we also succeed in developing first-rate cooperative projects with our Asian partners in the fight against terrorism .
I beg you , Commissioner , and you Bertel Haarder , my much-respected former fellow Member of this House , to take account of these proposals from ASEP at the Copenhagen Summit and take them on board .
Madam President , we are in the happy position today of debating this report just three weeks before the Copenhagen summit and this happy position is enhanced by the fact that , if anyone knows the area , it is the Commissioner responsible , Mr Patten .
The subject of this debate is the European Union 's policy towards Asia .
However , the policy discussed in Copenhagen will , of necessity , focus on the institutionalised dialogue with the members of ASEM which , as you know , are the fifteen Member States of the European Union , ten Asian countries and the European Commission .
In this sense , it is very difficult to deal with all aspects of this area under this one umbrella .
However , it is a step in the right direction and I believe that this modus operandi and our involvement in this process is helpful to the European Union 's strategy in political and regional partnerships and the multipolar world .
However , I would point out that , so far , this dialogue has , for the most part , been held solely at the economic level and it needs to move on to political , educational and cultural issues .
It is no accident that China , which recently joined the World Trade Organisation and is staging the 2008 Olympics , is also party to this debate , and clearly the economy and culture also exert a great deal of influence on the development of democratic institutions and human rights .
However , one very important issue which needs to be addressed is the enlargement of ASEM .
The European Union will soon have ten new members , making a total of twenty-five .
All the members of the European Union belong to ASEM .
Obviously , once we enlarge , the other side will ask for other countries in Asia to be allowed to join .
This means that this political factor is urgent in the extreme and enlargement criteria need to be laid down .
I think that the criteria which must , without fail , be adhered to by both sides are the Copenhagen criteria , which improve economic , cultural and , above all , human relations and human rights .
I hope , in fact I am certain that successful developments will result from Copenhagen and I believe that this European Union policy will be more widely accepted in an area wracked by conflict and crisis , by which I mean the whole of Asia .
Mr President , as Mr Pirker pointed out I had the honour to lead the European Parliament 's delegation to the ASEP II meeting in the Philippines last week .
This event , which was efficiently and successfully organised under the auspices of the Philippine Senate , concluded , as a number of colleagues have said , by issuing an agreed communiqué and statements which dealt with human rights , with special reference to women and children , terrorism and the environment .
But at least as importantly , it provided some parliamentary input into the ASEM process , which culminates later in the year with the Copenhagen meeting .
In an increasingly interdependent world , where modern economics propelled by science , technology and improved transport systems breaks down the significance of national boundaries and with them the practical relevance of ringfenced national jurisdiction , the democratic political process must not get left behind .
The evolution of governmental , ministerial and Heads of Government meetings that take decisions , which either de facto or de jure legislate or commit their component participants to legislate , should have a proper parliamentary angle and aspect .
In my view this is at least as important as many of the conclusions reached by parliamentarians ' meetings such as ASEP II .
They are the first step towards finding collective parliamentary institutions to work with collective governmental and administrative developments such as ASEM .
I very much hope that the decisions reached by ASEP II in Manila , and the decision of this Parliament in voting for the Maaten report , will endorse the call for another meeting of ASEP to be held to complement the proposed 2004 ASEM meeting in Hanoi .
I also hope that this parliamentarians ' meeting will be held in Europe , although not necessarily here in the European Parliament in Strasbourg , the location of the first ASEP meeting in 1996 .
Mr President , I should like to thank Members for an interesting debate and for the many kind words and requests received by the Danish Presidency in connection with the preparations for ASEM 4 .
I would join in the praise of Mr Maaten 's excellent report .
I do not entirely agree with his view that the Council has a minimalist approach towards Asia , for it might just as well be said that relations between the EU and Asia have never been stronger than they are today .
It must be remembered that all this activity was certainly not a foregone conclusion .
It is in itself an achievement that dialogue is taking place , that trade is increasing , that there are more frequent exchanges between us and that human contacts are being further developed at all levels , including the very highest .
That is an achievement in itself . It is very important , and vital as well to our economic well-being in this part of the world .
I would mention the first six meetings that are to take place under the Danish Presidency : the big ASEM Meeting , the meetings of business leaders and of ministers of economic affairs , as well as the summits with Japan , China , South Korea and India which are all to take place in Copenhagen during the Presidency .
In addition , there is the summit with Japan which has already taken place .
Over and above these , there is a range of contacts at ministerial level and among officials .
Mr Solana undertook a major visit to four Asian countries in July , participating in the annual ministerial meeting on security cooperation in the ASEAN Regional Forum where , as is well known , the EU makes efforts towards intensifying cooperation and presses for the move to be made from mainly confidence-building measures to what we call preventive diplomacy .
Basic conditions such as respect for human rights , the promotion of democracy and the principles of a state based on the rule of law are central themes in the EU 's relations with Asian countries , and I can assure Mr Messner and others that we shall raise the Tibet issue at the summit with China .
The EU is also involved in a range of problems of regional significance such as relations between India and Pakistan , the situation in the Korean Peninsula and developments in Burma .
In my view , the activities we have under way are , then , particularly wide-ranging . Nothing just happens of its own accord and there is nothing that is here and now giving rise to tremendously visible practical progress , but relations are slowly but surely improving , and that is of course how cooperation takes place in terms of the larger frame within which Euro-Asian relations must be conducted .
If it comes to making a list , there have of course been very many examples of practical progress , some of them of benefit to our citizens .
There is a host of tasks waiting to be carried out , however , and both the Commission Communication and Mr Maaten 's report are very useful tools in this regard .
I have also heard Mr Patten say that relations with South-East Asia are an area in which we could well do more .
An EU-ASEAN meeting of foreign ministers is planned for January 2003 , and this will be a good opportunity to discuss how we can strengthen relations .
The communication on relations with South-East Asia , mooted by Mr Patten , may prove to be a valuable contribution to the debate .
I can give an assurance that the Council shares the desire to strengthen relations between the EU and Asia .
With all the activities mentioned and with everything which has been said here in Parliament and which , I know , is taken note of in the countries we wish to cooperate with , there is a particularly sound basis for the range of activities we are now getting under way under the Danish Presidency .
Finally , I want to say that we shall follow with interest the efforts to arrange another ASEP meeting , or Asia-Europe parliamentary meeting .
I myself took part in the first meeting here in Strasbourg , and I look forward to its being possible to arrange something .
Thank you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council .
The debate is closed .
Question No 1 by Bart Staes ( H-0524 / 02 ) :
Subject : Charter of EU Fundamental Rights and a tightening up of aliens policy in various Member States of the EU
Governments throughout the EU are tightening up their aliens policy and creating more and more obstacles to asylum-seekers , for example : tightening up family reunification provisions , with those concerned being required to deposit large amounts of money as a guarantee , an increase in the minimum age for marriage to 24 , expulsion of children born to parents who entered the country illegally , the obligation on immigrants to prove that they have a job to go to , and restrictions on the right of immigrants ' parents to come and live with their children .
The measures referred to above constitute a downright violation of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Can the Council indicate whether or not it agrees that the measures referred to above and implemented by the Member States do indeed constitute a breach of the spirit of , inter alia , Articles 7 , 9 , 15 ( 3 ) , 18 , 20 , 21 , 24 , 25 , 29 , 33 , 34 , 41 and 47 of the said Charter , and it is prepared , where appropriate , to intervene ?
Illegal immigration is a considerable problem for the EU 's Member States and an issue that occupies their populations a good deal .
The Seville European Council decided to reinforce the EU 's efforts in this field .
There was agreement that the measures taken in the short or long term for the joint management of migration flows must strike a fair balance . On the one hand , there should be an integration policy for lawfully resident immigrants and an asylum policy complying with the international conventions , principally the 1951 Geneva Convention .
At the same time , our policy must involve resolute action to combat illegal immigration and trafficking in human beings .
That is what is stated in paragraph 28 of the conclusions agreed in Seville .
The measures to which the honourable Member refers are legislation adopted by the individual Member States as national measures for combating the problems faced .
It is outside the Council 's competence to decide whether the measures taken by the Member States are , or are not , in accordance with the European Union 's Charter of Fundamental Rights .
I should like to refer to Article 51 ( 1 ) of the Charter , affirming that the Member States are bound by the Charter when they are implementing Union law and only when they are implementing Union law .
There is generally no question of the regulations to which the honourable Member refers being adopted in implementation of Union law , and I do not therefore think that there is any point in asking me to assess whether the measures taken by the Member States are in accordance with the Charter .
The Charter is of a different character .
It is aimed at the implementation of Union law .
Wearing my other hat as Danish Minister for Integration , I should like to say , however , that , when it comes to Danish legislation in this field , it complies fully with all the international standards .
That is something I should like to emphasise .
I should obviously like to thank the Minister and former fellow MEP for his response , but surely we cannot concern ourselves with word games .
I clearly asked whether the Council could indicate whether or not it agrees that the measures enacted by the Member States do indeed constitute a breach of the spirit , I repeat the spirit , of the Charter .
I am aware of the fact that the Charter is a solemn declaration , Mr Haarder , but it contains very fine passages about respecting privacy , the right to marry and start a family , the right to equal working conditions , the right to asylum , the ban on discrimination , and I could carry on for a few minutes yet .
Surely you have to admit , Mr Haarder , that in your country too , legislation is now being enacted which is at least in breach of the spirit of what is written in the Charter .
I should like to call on the Council , the Ministers of the Fifteen Member States , to respect the spirit of the Charter .
I believe that a better society could be the result .
Mr President , I completely disagree with the questioner and should like to emphasise in no uncertain terms that there is no question of any breach either of the letter or of the spirit of any international agreement whatsoever .
I should also like to add that what the question says is false in certain respects .
It states , for example , that a country has a minimum age for marriage , and that is incorrect .
There are conditions governing the circumstances under which a permanent residence permit can be obtained solely on the grounds of marriage , and that is something quite different .
It is self-evident that no condition of this kind applies , of course , to refugees for , if it did , it would be contrary to the conventions .
I can assure Mr Staes , when he talks about Danish legislation , that we are up to speed on the conventions .
We are well aware of how they are to be interpreted , and I could not contemplate taking responsibility for any breach at all , either of the spirit or of the letter , of any convention whatsoever .
I was myself the European Parliament 's human rights spokesman in 1998 and 1999 .
The reports are there to be found and read .
I have no intention of infringing either the spirit or the letter of any international convention whatsoever .
Question No 2 by Gerard Collins ( H-0526 / 02 ) :
Subject : Southern Africa and serious food shortages
Last February the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations warned that nearly 4 million people in southern Africa would need emergency food assistance this year .
This is due to reduced 2001 cereal harvests caused by adverse weather and reduced planting .
Christian Aid has just published a position paper warning that over 12 million people in the southern Africa region risk starvation in the coming months after poor harvests , drought , flood and mismanagement .
Will the Council outline its response to this alarming situation and state how it considers the issue of providing adequate food aid can be addressed and how support for civil society organisations can be strengthened ?
The food crisis in southern Africa was discussed at the most recent Council meeting on 22 July of this year , that is to say the meeting of foreign ministers .
The Council expressed its concern about the situation in southern Africa where up to 13 million people are feared to have been hit by the crisis .
The Council is disturbed by various political decisions and initiatives that have been taken and that have apparently contributed to exacerbating an already alarming humanitarian situation , involving drought and floods .
The Council is of the view that solving the humanitarian crisis is one of the most important political priorities , and it therefore calls upon the countries in the area to direct their respective policies towards fulfilling that objective .
Regional efforts to solve the crisis should be encouraged in line with principles , such as that of good governance , laid down in the initiative concerning the New Partnership for African Development , NEPAD , in which the states of southern Africa play a crucial role .
The Council calls upon the countries in the region to do their utmost to facilitate the regional and humanitarian operations that are under way , including those designed to provide logistical and administrative support and to secure access to , and the distribution of , emergency aid .
Organisations forming part of civil society ought to play a decisive role in the distribution of food aid so as to prevent such aid being misused for political ends .
The EU has already responded by providing extensive food and humanitarian aid to the area .
There is , however , a need for further efforts .
The EU and its Member States are prepared , in close cooperation with the SADC countries , to continue to contribute to these efforts .
I surely do not need to say anything about Zimbabwe and Mr Mugabe .
It is surely self-evident what the Council thinks about the matter .
Mr President , I would like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council for the very comprehensive reply which he has given .
The UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is now warning that some 13 million people are threatened with starvation over the next six months as a result of food shortages brought about by adverse weather conditions and flawed government planning .
The UN Special Envoy for Humanitarian Needs in Southern Africa is to visit six drought-stricken countries in the region from 6 to 16 September , and I understand that representatives of WHO , the UN Children 's Fund and the Food and Agricultural Organisation are expected to join the mission .
What strikes me is that there is no reference to EU participation .
Would the Council take appropriate and urgent action to ensure that the EU is involved in this mission and in the coordination of international food aid with other international organisations ?
Finally , I would like to know what the Council 's response is to the FAO warning in a report last August that only 24 % of the USD 507 million needed to provide food assistance until the next harvest in April 2003 has been pledged and that agricultural inputs are needed to help farmers recover from the crisis .
I fully understand the view put forward here by my good friend and colleague , Mr Collins .
I should like to emphasise that the European Union is involved , but that it is the UN that takes action .
It is therefore the UN that is the contractor and in charge of the work , while the EU to a very large degree supports the work financially and , of course , also diplomatically and politically , if need be .
The EU is involved , then , but it is the UN that is responsible for actually carrying out the work .
Question No 3 by Liam Hyland , which has been taken over by Mr Crowley ( H-0527 / 02 ) :
Subject : Promoting the participation of young people in political and civil life
How does the Council intend to follow up the positive comments of the Education and Youth Affairs Ministers who met on 30 May last and highlighted the need to promote the participation of young people in political and civil life in the Member States and acknowledged that it is necessary to be more receptive to young people and to take their views into account , both formally and substantively , and will the Council outline the areas in which it considers that the views of young people should be taken into account ?
The honourable Member is undoubtedly aware that the discussions in the Education and Youth Council on 30 May , discussions concerning the participation of young people , took place in connection with the adoption of a resolution on the framework for European cooperation in the youth field .
In accordance with this resolution , the open coordination method is to be applied in a flexible and appropriate way to certain priority themes in the youth field .
The Commission has drawn up proposals on this in a white paper entitled ' A New Impetus for European Youth ' .
It was published in November of last year .
Information and participation are some of the subjects which will be tackled initially .
In consultation with the Member States , the Commission has drawn up a questionnaire on these subjects .
The questionnaire has now been submitted to the Member States , which should answer the questionnaire with due regard for prevailing opinion among young people themselves , youth organisations and other relevant bodies .
The issues concerning young people 's voluntary work and greater understanding and knowledge of young people will be tackled at a later date .
I would like to emphasise on the Council 's behalf that the new framework for European cooperation in the youth field is still at a preliminary stage .
An evaluation report is to be presented in 2004 .
Mr President , I would like to thank the President-in-Office for his response .
The reason for Mr Hyland asking this question , and why I am taking it on his behalf , is that over the last few years we have seen more and more young people becoming disconnected from political and civil life .
Indeed those same people who feel no connection with the political movements or the political parties in their own countries are very likely to turn up at demonstrations about anti-globalisation , about reclaiming the streets or eradication of poverty and so on .
Surely , through the Council and the good offices of the minister himself , there must be some mechanism whereby that energy and that idealism can be harnessed for the good of all of society and not just for the good of the few .
I am particularly anxious to hear an answer concerning the initiatives they hope to undertake during the Danish presidency .
I am entirely in agreement with the presentation of the problem , as outlined here by my esteemed colleague .
On the one hand , we have a group of young people who are more internationally minded than ever before and who are deeply committed .
We saw this in the summer at the ' Youth 2000 ' forum , where a thousand young people from throughout Europe met at 13 folk high schools in Denmark , where they each drew up proposals for a constitution for Europe and finally came together and combined them all into a single proposal which they presented to the Convention .
I also want to mention the youth convention as exemplifying these very committed young people .
Next , there is a very large group which is extremely passive .
They are perhaps not opposed to European cooperation , but it does not interest them .
Finally , there is a very small group which demonstrates and throws stones .
As for this small group , I would say that one of the gratifying features of the meeting in Elsinore at the weekend was that there were twice as many police officers as demonstrators present .
That is a step forward - let us hope that this will characterise the rest of the presidency and also future presidencies .
I can only declare myself in agreement with the honourable Member .
The Council is very aware of this issue , and I think this has been stated so well that I do not need to repeat it .
The Council considers that the Seville decisions concerning the European Council merely elucidate the relevant provisions of the Treaty on European Union , in particular Article 4 , which states that the European Council shall provide the Union with the necessary impetus for its development and shall define the general political guidelines thereof .
At a time when the Union 's activities are characterised by increasing development and differentiation , and immediately before major enlargement to include a number of new Member States , the European Council has found it necessary to strengthen the Council 's powers as a provider of guidelines and impetus .
This is precisely what the role of the European Council is according to the Treaty .
The Council cannot see that these practical guidelines are in any way incompatible with the Commission 's executive powers , which cannot in any way be affected by a decision , the sole purpose of which is to enable the European Council to exercise as effectively as possible the responsibility which the European Council has been given .
In this respect , I would point out that the President of the Commission is of course a member of the European Council , and I have not heard any objections to the Council 's trying to reform itself .
As regards any possible democratic deficit and the lack of separation of powers within the Union , the Council considers that the current situation , regardless of what one thinks about it , cannot be affected by a reform the sole purpose of which is , as has already been observed , to implement the existing provisions of the Treaty more effectively .
As the question concerning the separation of the executive and legislative powers - whether it is a matter of the principle in general or its application in the Union - has not been discussed as such by the Council , the Council is not in a position to respond to the exact point raised in Question H-O 535 .
Of course , the Council is not unaware of this classic problem , which is indirectly taken up in the Laeken declaration , for example , adopted by the European Council in December , and which will , in all probability , also be taken up in the Convention and later at the subsequent intergovernmental conference .
The honourable Member must understand that , beyond purely academic considerations which do not belong here , the Council cannot comment on the possible outcome of a debate which will not be conducted in the Council itself and which , in any case , has not yet taken place .
I hope that , with this explanation , I have made it clear why I cannot go further into the question which has been raised .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , many thanks for your response .
I might be asking the impossible , but I would have liked the period for responding to our questions to be shorter , so that the Spanish Presidency could have replied to my question , as it , in its time , was responsible for the Seville European Council .
Having said this , it is undeniable that in Europe , in the European Union , it is the Council that wields the most legislative power and , furthermore , controls executive power through the comitology procedure .
I would like to ask you if you believe that the United States would be the world leader if its legislative power , instead of residing with the House of Representatives and the Senate , resided with a Ministerial Council composed of representatives of the various North American States , from New York State or Washington State to California , Florida or Colorado .
If the American President , Mr Bush , had the level of attributions , competences and powers that our President , Mr Prodi , has , do you think he would have the influence and capacity he has in international relations and at domestic level ?
Would he have the same influence and capacity ?
I believe we must make Europe a true democracy , with separation of powers , as suggested by other speakers : legislative power should reside with this Parliament , and executive power with the Commission .
I will confine myself to saying that I am as exercised by Montesquieu 's theories on the separation of powers as the honourable Member is .
I am , as it happens , a political scientist by training and think that it is absolutely fundamental that we should keep this separation of powers in mind .
I said this as recently as yesterday , when I represented the Presidency in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs here in Parliament .
With the best will in the world , I cannot , however , see the Council 's efforts to reform itself as being in conflict with Montesquieu 's theories on the separation of powers , and I cannot see that the Council has taken powers or in any way hampered the Commission .
As a matter of form , I would like to report what I said on behalf of the Danish Government in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs yesterday , that is that the Danish Government is an ardent adherent of the Community method and does not want the Council to take powers from the Commission .
That is what was said - but it was as a Danish Minister that I added this .
The President-in-Office made an extremely interesting remark in passing in the first half of his first answer when he referred to the President of the Commission having been a former Member of the European Council .
So it is in order for people who have been members of other EU institutions to express an opinion in their present position .
The President-in-Office was a very distinguished Member of this Parliament so he is therefore able to express an opinion , by his own words , on the state of the Council now .
Would you agree Mr President-in-Office of the Council , based on your experience in the Parliament , that we do need separation of the powers and will you be urging the Danish presidency to put this forward at the Convention ?
This is Question Time and concerns questions to the Council .
The Council does not deal with the Convention , the Danish presidency does not deal with the Convention .
We respect the procedure that has been laid down for the Convention so I have no further comment .
Yet I hope that what I just said indicated that the honourable Member might tend to agree on the need to separate powers in a democracy .
As the author is not present , Question No 6 lapses .
Question No 7 by Alexandros Alavanos ( H-0536 / 02 ) :
Subject : Cyprus - expiry of the deadline for a political solution to the problem
In June 2002 the deadline that had been set for a political solution to the Cyprus problem , to be achieved by means of talks between the two Cyprus communities under the auspices of the Secretary-General of the UN , expired without producing a result , because of Turkish intransigence .
Could the Council assess any results attained by the talks so far ?
Could it outline the next steps leading up to the accession of the Republic of Cyprus to the European Union , together with the nine other applicant countries ?
As the honourable Member no doubt knows , the current direct talks concerning Cyprus are confidential .
The Council is well aware that no breakthrough has yet been made in the talks , and that disappointingly little progress has so far been made , which has also been stated by the UN Security Council according to the report which Mr de Soto , the UN Special Envoy for Cyprus , issued on 9 July .
As the talks are now continuing , the Council expects the parties to increase their efforts with a view to taking advantage of the current unique opportunity and finally make the necessary progress towards a solution - hopefully before the accession negotiations are concluded .
The decisions concerning the accession of the candidate countries must be taken before the end of the year within the normal enlargement procedure on the basis of the Commission 's report and the recommendations which the Commission will put forward in its document on the enlargement strategy , which we expect by October .
With regard to the accession of Cyprus , the EU 's view , which was put forward once again in Seville , is in line with the Helsinki conclusions , to the effect that a solution of the Cyprus problem will facilitate Cyprus 's accession to the EU .
A solution is not , however , a prerequisite for Cyprus 's accession .
When it takes its decision , the Council will take into account all the relevant factors .
That is a position which it is wise to adhere to , and so we all hope , and cross our fingers , that advantage will be taken of this ' window of opportunity ' , this unique opportunity which there will be this autumn to resolve this extremely old and tragic problem on this wonderful island .
I thank the minister and former member of this House .
I have listened very carefully to his views , which are the same views as those expressed by his prime minister , Mr Rasmussen , in a recent interview in the Politiken newspaper .
I should merely like to ask the President-in-Office a straight question : what message is the presidency of the Council of the European Union sending Turkey .
Why , if the talks are not succeeding , must someone be to blame ?
There are those who stand to gain if the talks do not succeed .
Is the message which the presidency of the European Union is sending Turkey , yes , we will make every effort to resolve the Cyprus question , but if no political solution can be found , that will not stop the Republic of Cyprus from joining the European Union ?
I think that it is important that , in my answer , I should adhere entirely to the well-established and sensible formulation which was adopted in Helsinki and which has been repeated time and again , namely that a solution to the Cyprus problem will facilitate the accession of Cyprus , but that a solution is not a prerequisite for accession .
The Council will take all factors into account when the decision is taken .
That is what can be said , and I think that everyone understands what is meant , and I have nothing to add .
Mr President-in-Office , that we are concerned about the impasse in cross-community talks goes without saying .
You said in your first reply that the interested parties will need to step up their efforts .
However , as everyone knows , the key to resolving the Cyprus problem is to be found in Ankara , not in Cyprus itself .
I should like to ask if the Council intends to put pressure on the Turkish government to take the steps needed in order to help resolve the Cyprus problem . Otherwise , I fear that , as things stand , we may well end up partitioning the island , with the Turkish side , with Turkey behind it of course , as always , insisting on recognition of the independent sovereignty of the Turkish Cypriots .
I would like to emphasise that the negotiations have certainly not broken down .
There is a continuing dialogue , and there should be a meeting very soon between UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan and the parties on Cyprus , so there is absolutely no question that anything has broken down .
Nor will I accept the description of Ankara 's shadow .
I will not comment on whether there is a shadow , but I can say that this process , which was adopted in Helsinki and has been confirmed , is going ahead .
It will not be affected by any shadow .
Question No 8 by Ioannis Marinos ( H-0539 / 02 ) :
Subject : Discrimination against Greeks in Albania
According to reports in the Greek press , hundreds of Greek residents of the town of Himara , in southern Albania , have protested formally to the Albanian Government concerning the non-restitution of their property in the part of the town located by the sea , which Albania 's former communist regime took from them .
The residents of Himara have not yet managed to obtain the title deeds to their property , and much of it has been illegally transferred to Albanians by the authorities , who took advantage of the absence of the owners outside Albania for a period of many years .
There is also a similar problem with the property of the Autocephalous Orthodox Church of Albania , whose land was also confiscated by the communist regime and has not since been returned .
Is the Council aware of the problems faced by property-owners in Albania ?
What action does it intend to take to ensure that they receive the title deeds to their property as soon as possible ?
The Council is aware that the Greek minority in Albania claims property rights in the same way as other citizens .
It has also emerged that the Autocephalous Orthodox Church makes similar claims .
Pursuant to Article 181 of the Albanian constitution , the Albanian Parliament must adopt laws before the end of November with a view to finding a fair solution to questions concerning expropriations and confiscations that took place before the constitution was adopted .
The Albanian Parliament has set up a special committee on the restoration of property .
This committee is now starting to scrutinise the legislation with a view to restoration of , or compensation for , property which was seized under Communist rule .
The committee has not completed its work .
The Council is fully aware that a solution to the property question is also an essential prerequisite for encouraging domestic and foreign investments in Albania , just as it is a prerequisite for the development of agriculture .
The Council was able to subscribe fully to the assessment of the individual countries , given by the Commission in its first annual report on the stabilisation and association process .
On 13 May of this year , the Council approved the recommendations in this report and requested that rapid progress should be made in each of these areas over the next few years .
In one of these recommendations , Albania was specifically called on to adopt new legislation on ownership and restoration of property , to remedy the existing shortcomings in the legislation in this field and to ensure better enforcement of property law in Albania .
Albania is the EU 's partner in the stabilisation and association process .
The EU maintains a regular dialogue with Albania , especially in the form of the meetings in the advisory EU-Albania taskforce .
Here , the EU has the opportunity to stress the importance which is attached to solving this issue , now that the country is starting to approach integration into Europe , at the same time as acquiring closer ties with the EU .
It also gives the EU the chance to ensure that Albania continues with the measures which it has promised in this field .
I thank the President-in-Office for his reply , from which I understand that the Council really is aware of the problem and is making efforts in the right direction .
However , it is not clear exactly what the Council is calling for or I , at least , fail to understand what he means by ' dealing with the problem ' .
I would expect him to decide how the problem should be dealt with .
The State Department wrote to the Albanian government a few days ago , calling quite specifically for Greek schools to be opened at once , for recognition of land ownership by members of the Greek community and for trespassing on Greek property in Himara to stop .
As far as I know , the Greek government has taken similar steps .
I would remind the President-in-Office that Greece sends generous financial aid to Albania and that over 600 000 Albanian immigrants work legally and without obstruction in Greece , earning wages that workers in Albania can only dream of .
Perhaps the European Union which also sends various forms of aid to Albania should take more persuasive measures ?
And surely it considers it urgent and imperative , Minister , to put a stop to the plan to move 15 000 settlers from northern Albania and Kosovo to the Himara area , in order to tip the ethnic balance against the Greek minority ?
I understand my colleague 's concern very well , but I would like to stress that Parliament has taken up the matter , and a special committee has been set up .
The constitution envisages that a solution will be found .
The Council has expressed its opinion , and there is an ongoing dialogue between the EU and Albania , in the context of which I promised here a little while ago that the EU would ensure that Albania pursued the measures promised .
There is therefore no question of either the Greek minority or others being left in the lurch or forgotten .
The situation will be monitored continuously and closely .
Mr President , first a comment on the manner in which the President-in-Office replied .
Perhaps he thinks his questioners are stupid .
But I can assure him that we are not that stupid .
He has no right to say that the matter is not overshadowed by Ankara when both Ecevit and his foreign secretary have stated that they will go ahead and integrate occupied Cyprus into Turkey .
How dare he reply like that .
What does he take us for ?
I did not think at all that I had brushed it aside ; I think that my last remark was extremely binding .
It was a little shorter than the first one , but no less binding .
Without wishing to correct anyone here , I shall simply remind you all that this is Question Time , which has its own rules , and ask you to adhere to the Rules of Procedure .
Without setting a precedent and taking into consideration that Mr Lage had to leave the room for a few minutes at the time scheduled for his speech , I am going to give the President-in-Office of the Council the opportunity to respond to his question .
I repeat : this must not set a precedent .
If you leave the room , you lose your turn , but Mr Lage had to leave for a moment .
I would also ask him to avoid doing this again .
Question No 6 by Carlos Lage ( H-0530 / 02 ) :
Subject : Free movement of persons in the Schengen zone
On 22 June a group of 500 Portuguese citizens travelling to Spain to take part in an authorised demonstration to be held in Seville during the European Council meeting was prevented - in a violent manner - from entering Spanish territory by members of the Spanish police forces .
Nothing can justify this kind of behaviour and action , totally unacceptable in a Union which considers respect for fundamental freedoms and rights as one of its founding principles .
It seems unlikely that the Portuguese citizens represented a particular danger , or indeed any danger , to the Spanish State .
And , even if they had , the forceful and heavy-handed behaviour which , unfortunately , characterised the reaction of the Spanish police authorities , would have been quite unacceptable .
Can the Council therefore say what measures it will take vis-à-vis the Spanish Government to clarify the facts ?
Does it not consider that a clear definition and common agreement should be sought concerning the circumstances and conditions which may lead to the suspension of the rules governing Schengen ?

I should like to answer Question 6 by Mr Carlos Lage .
As regards the first question , I would like to draw attention to the fact that neither Article 33 of the EU Treaty nor Article 64 ( 1 ) of the EC Treaty gives the Council the ability to intervene to maintain public order or security in the Member States .
This also applies to public-order measures which the Member States take when meetings of the European Council are held within their territory .
This is therefore something in which the Community cannot interfere .
As regards the second question , I would like to refer to the Executive Committee Decision of 20 December 1995 on the procedure for applying Article 2 ( 2 ) of the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement , which has a long reference number which I do not want to read out .
This Decision draws up detailed rules for when controls can be reintroduced at the internal borders .
It constitutes a part of the so-called Schengen rules , and it is thus binding for all Schengen States .
Incidentally , it is published in OJ L 239 of 22 September 2000 , page 133 .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I thank you for the information you have provided .
I must tell you that this episode , linked to the Seville Summit , has caused a small political storm in Portugal and has been used by many opponents of the European Union as an argument against the European Union itself .
Because we live in an area of free movement , the majority of public opinion in Portugal cannot understand how this area of free movement and these citizens ' rights could be breached by border controls carried out in a quite oppressive and arbitrary way by the Spanish authorities .
We do not want to make this a Portuguese issue .
We are simply asking the President-in-Office of the Council , when he has the opportunity , to look into the matter in order to establish , not even changes to the law but common and consensual procedures to ensure that such episodes do not reoccur .
As has been shown , it is not a matter for the Council to decide when it is reasonable to make use of the possibility under the Schengen rules for temporarily closing the borders .
I can state that the Danish Presidency reserves the right to make use of this possibility .
We have stated this expressly , but we were pleased that , during the weekend which has just ended , there were so few demonstrators at the summit of Foreign Ministers in Elsinore that there were twice as many police officers as demonstrators .
Let us hope that this sets a trend for the future .
This is not the first time this unacceptable practice has been used and the citizens of one Member State have been banned from crossing the border into another Member State and treated badly ; generally it is people protesting against the policy of the European Union who are on the receiving end .
It is what happened during the Nice summit , when thousands of Italian protesters found the French borders closed , during the Genoa summit , when hundreds of Greek demonstrators , who were badly mistreated , were prevented from disembarking in Ancona .
It happened to Danish demonstrators , your fellow countrymen , Mr President-in-Office , during the Gothenburg summit , when they tried to cross the border and meet up with people protesting against the policy of the European Union .
It is clear , despite the pronouncements , that Schengen was not introduced to facilitate the free movement of the citizens of the Member States of the European Union within the European Union ; it was introduced in order to turn the European Union into a fortress .
It applies when it is in the interests of the ruling circles of the European Union , so that capital can move freely , but it does not apply when it comes to the movement of people protesting against interests of big business and the policy of the European Union .
The Schengen cooperation means that the countries undertake to maintain open borders in respect of each other , except when there are exceptional reasons for temporary closure .
It is not a retrograde step ; it is a step forward .
The Council and I regard the possibility of temporary closure as reasonable .
We must bear in mind that it is not only a question of lawful demonstrations , it has been a question of something resembling terrorist activity in connection with these meetings .
We must protect democratic gatherings . That is something we owe to democracy .
Mr Haarder said , amongst other things , that the meeting in Elsinore had been very calm and that none of the expected , or feared , disturbances had arisen .
That is good , of course .
I wonder , however , whether this might possibly also have had something to do with the fact that there were strict border controls , so that any foreign demonstrators who might have wanted to get to Denmark and Elsinore were in fact unable to do so .
It would be helpful if Mr Haarder could deny that this is the case and state clearly that no one has yet been turned away from the Danish border during the Danish presidency .
If I may venture to answer as a Danish minister : I do not think that , in connection with the weekend meeting in Elsinore , we made any use whatsoever of the possibility under the Schengen rules of closing the borders .
Demonstrators were completely free to enter ; but fortunately only peaceful demonstrators came , and that is something I think we should be pleased about .
Question No 9 by María Izquierdo Rojo ( H-0540 / 02 ) :
Subject : Women who work in the fields in accession countries
What measures , benefits and activities connected with the accession process directly affect women who work in the fields in the accession countries ?
What measures will the Danish presidency be taking with regard to such women ?
Both the Member States and the EU institutions are obliged to incorporate equal opportunities for men and women in all EU policies and programmes , and the European Council has on several occasions set out guidelines for a special strategy in this field .
Furthermore , Regulation No 1250 from 1999 lays down that the Structural Funds shall contribute to removing inequalities between men and women and to promoting equal opportunities in the context of strengthening economic and social cohesion .
That also applies to pre-accession programmes .
In connection with this , the Union has set aside considerable financial aid for measures to develop the rural districts by means of the so-called SAPARD programme .
The Member of the European Parliament may apply directly to the Commission if she wishes to have a fuller overview of the specific programmes .
With particular regard to the pre-accession negotiations concerning the chapter on agriculture , the common position of the Union also contains a comprehensive section on development of the rural districts .
It covers the aid which will be given through the EU 's various financial instruments .
As the rural districts in the candidate countries require restructuring , modernisation and alternative production and facilities , the EU attaches great importance to the measures for developing the rural districts , which have a direct effect on the conditions under which women in these regions work .
During the negotiations on the chapter on employment and industrial relations policy , the Union has stressed the importance which this section has for the equal treatment of men and women , and it has also been emphasised how necessary it is for the candidate countries to comply with the rules in this field .
I would like to draw attention to Regulation No 1257 from 1999 , which groups together all Community actions in favour of development of the rural districts and in which it is expressly stated that measures aimed at removing inequalities and promoting equal opportunities for men and women should be supported .
Recently , the Council concerning agriculture , that is to say the Agricultural Ministers Council , at its meeting on 27 May of this year , adopted specific conclusions on the integration of the equality aspect into the Common Agricultural Policy .
The Council expressly recognised in these conclusions that women play a bigger and bigger role in the rural districts , and it calls on the Commission to use the Structural Funds to continue to promote entrepreneurial spirit , high-quality employment , training and the provision of life-long services for rural women .
Furthermore , the Council urges the Member States to adopt policies which actively strengthen women 's economic capacity in the rural districts .
The Council points out that all the candidate countries have now agreed to come into line with existing Community law regarding equality immediately on accession .
The Danish Presidency wants to follow the same line , inter alia in the context of the mid-term review of the common agricultural policy and the further negotiations on accession .
We want to make use of every opportunity to draw attention to the general fundamental principles of the Treaty establishing the European Community , as amended by the Treaty of Amsterdam , and in this respect to promote equality between men and women , as referred to in Article 2 and Article 3 ( 2 ) of the Treaty .
Finally , I should point out that the current Chairman of this Agricultural Ministers Council is herself from a farming background .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , how many of these female agricultural workers will become part of the European Union at the next enlargement ?
What number were you working with in your forecasts ?
I would also like to ask you if , during the Danish Presidency , any actions or campaigns will be implemented to correct the current salary discrimination .

I am not in a position to answer the question that has been asked , and I am not even sure that studies will make it possible to answer it . I shall gladly try , but I cannot answer the question here orally .
I cannot .
Mrs Izquierdo Rojo asked two questions , did she not ?
I believe the second question was this , but perhaps you would care to comment , Mrs Izquierdo Rojo .
Mr President , I would like to tell you that I would be interested to know the figure whenever the President-in-Office of the Council can provide it , in other words , how many female agricultural workers are expected on the first wave of accession .
Otherwise , we cannot carry out any advance planning .
For any action to take place , if we are to gear it towards female agricultural workers , we have to know how many there will be .
At the moment this is not possible , but I would be grateful if you could send me the figure .
With regard to the second question , I would also appreciate a response on whether or not a campaign will be carried out .

I do not think that we in Denmark have any information as to how many there are in Denmark . Nor do I think that people in other countries have any .
It may be regrettable ; but I do not think the information exists .
However , I shall willingly try to find the information , if it is wanted .
Yes , we have taken note , but , Mrs Izquierdo Rojo , Mr Haarder answers what he sees fit to answer .
We are not going to start a debate now .
Mr President , the Council must know how many female agricultural workers are going to join the Union .
Well , if and when the Council does know , it will answer you , but now you have asked your question twice .
If the President-in-Office of the Council wants to tell you anything else , however , I am not going to stop him .
Yes , of course we know how many farms are entering .
We know quite precisely , both in Poland and the other countries .
However , we do not know how many rural women are coming in .
We do not have the classification by gender .
I very much regret that .
Question No 10 by Jonas Sjöstedt , which has been taken over by Herman Schmid .
Question No 10 by Jonas Sjöstedt ( H-0542 / 02 ) :
Subject : Future accession treaties for new Member States
It is possible that the Irish electorate will vote against the Treaty of Nice for a second time , which would also render the new breakdown of votes on the Council and seats in Parliament under that Treaty null and void .
Would it not then be possible for the Union to act as it did at the time of the accession of Finland , Sweden and Austria , i.e. negotiate and reach agreement with each of the applicant countries separately on seats in Parliament and votes in the Council in the treaty of accession ?
The Treaty of Nice would not then be needed as a basis for the accession of new Member States .
Is this not an appropriate procedure to use for the enlargement of the Union should the Irish people vote against the Treaty of Nice once again ?
I would like to remind the honourable Member that the European Council in Seville expressed satisfaction that the Irish Government had firmly decided to get the Treaty of Nice approved , something which - as is well known - is a prerequisite for enlargement to take place within the time limits laid down .
On behalf of the Council , I would like to recall that , at the meeting in Seville , Ireland 's Prime Minister stated that his government intended holding a referendum this autumn , so that Ireland can ratify the Treaty of Nice .
The Prime Minister presented a national declaration from Ireland , confirming that the provisions of the EU Treaty relating to foreign and security policy do not affect the country 's traditional policy regarding military neutrality , and will not do so after ratification of the Treaty of Nice , as can be seen from Annex 3 to the Presidency 's conclusions .
The European Council adopted a declaration , in which note was taken of the national declaration by Ireland .
This declaration can be found in Annex 4 to the same conclusions .
The European Council expressed satisfaction that the Irish Government had firmly decided to get the Treaty of Nice approved , something which - as is well known - is a prerequisite for enlargement to be implemented within the time limits laid down .
I fully appreciate that the Irish Government and the Irish Prime Minister would like this to happen , but the Irish Government cannot decide how the Irish people will vote .
The issue must therefore be regarded as remaining open until the referendum has been held .
Consequently , another ' No ' vote from the Irish people cannot be ruled out .
My question relates to a situation that is wholly feasible and quite practical .
This is not an abstract question , but a practical , political one .
Given such a situation , could we not solve the problems in a very simple , practical way , by allowing Ireland to join the institutions in the same way as Finland , Sweden and Austria did , i.e. by negotiation ?
That way , there would be no problem with the Treaty of Nice .
Would not that be a practical , pragmatic solution that might also appeal to Mr Haarder ?
I cannot say any more than I have already said , because this is the way things stand .
Of course it might turn out to be a ' no ' - we all know that - but in that case we would have a totally new and unpredictable situation of which it would be impossible to predict the conclusion .
It is a very uncertain situation , and one which puts enlargement at risk in any case . I would not wish there to be any controversy over the matter , however ; I only wanted to state the facts concerning the Council and the Irish vote .
Several Members have asked to speak .
Pursuant to the Rules of Procedure , I am going to give the floor to the two who were chronologically first to ask .
Mr Crowley has the floor for a supplementary question .
I thank the President-in-Office of the Council for his response .
I should like to ask him to confirm - what I believe him to have said , through interpretation - that ratification of the Treaty of Nice by all Member States is necessary for enlargement to proceed .
It is a simple ' yes ' or ' no ' answer .
Yes , as I have said twice before , this is a precondition for enlargement to take place within the scheduled timescale .
This is what it says in the Seville conclusions , and I take my stand on these .
My question follows that one .
You say it is a precondition within the time set .
Is that the 2004 time-limit , meaning that it will still be possible to have enlargement beyond 2004 without the Nice Treaty , perhaps under the system suggested by Mr Sjöstedt in this question ?
I have said what was agreed in Seville , and I take my stand on that .
I have nothing to add : everyone is aware that deadlines were set in Helsinki and that these have been affirmed time after time .
What was said in Seville was that the Treaty of Nice is a precondition for enlargement to take place within the scheduled timescale .
Non-ratification of the Treaty of Nice would present us with an extremely uncertain and unpredictable situation .
Question No 11 by Gary Titley ( H-0544 / 02 ) :
Subject : Better regulation
This month , the Commission delivered its communication on better regulation .
A central aim of this communication is to ensure that an impact assessment of all Commission proposals is carried out .
What practical measures are being taken by the Council to ensure that they carry out impact assessments on Council amendments to Commission proposals ?
The European Council in Seville welcomed a number of communications from the Commission on how lawmaking might be improved .
I am thinking in particular of the action plan for finding ways of simplifying and improving the quality of the regulatory environment .
It invited the three institutions concerned , that is , Parliament , the Council and the Commission , to arrange for this to happen on the basis of the work of the High Level Technical Group and to adopt an interinstitutional agreement before the end of 2002 in order to improve the quality of Community legislation and the conditions , including time frames , for its transposition into national law .
The High Level Technical Group for Interinstitutional Cooperation met on 15 July 2002 .
In anticipation of this meeting , the Presidency had put forward a proposed timetable for drawing up and adopting the commercial interinstitutional agreement , starting with the specific actions relating to the three institutions as proposed in the Commission 's action plan .
At the meeting on 15 July 2002 , it was decided firstly to reach common agreement on the chief elements of a future interinstitutional agreement .
The institutions would then , on the basis of this , discuss the practical content of the specific actions of the agreement .
At the same time , it was emphasised that the principle of specific actions in an agreement should be viewed in the context of the work being undertaken in the Convention .
Practical measures with a view to an impact assessment of amendments to the Commission 's proposal can be expected to be an element for inclusion in further discussions on an interinstitutional agreement .
In this context , I can tell you that the next meeting of the High Level Technical Group is expected to take place next week , on 10 September .
It is a delight to have Mr Haarder with us again , in a different role .
But may I say with respect that now that he has become part of the government he acquired the government 's habit of not answering the question .
How exactly is the Council going to approach the issue of impact assessments ?
If the Commission carries out an impact assessment as part of its better regulation proposals , will the Council , when it amends the Commission 's proposals , carry out a further impact assessment of its own amendments ?
How will it do that and who will it get to do it ?
It is very important in terms of the interinstitutional agreement with Parliament to know exactly what the Council 's approach is to impact assessments .
I should like to have given a clear answer .
If I did not do so , it was because that very question is to be discussed in connection with the interinstitutional agreement ; it is a question which , among other things , will be discussed next week , on 10 September .
I cannot say what will happen , therefore , but I can say this : a reform is not undertaken without carrying out assessments , and without pursuing the aims of the reform .
Finding a way of assessing its possible impact is a natural subject for the interinstitutional agreement .
Following up Mr Titley 's point , could I ask whether the Council would look seriously at the question of critically considering methodologies of impact assessment ?
In the years when I had something to do with this in an academic capacity , it was notorious that it was extremely difficult within the sociology of law to find reliable ways of assessing the impact of legislation which was in force .
Predicting the impact of legislation which is going to come into force is yet more difficult .
Does the President-in-Office agree with me that it would be wise for the Council to look into issues of methodology before we embark on expensive projects of this kind ?
It is precisely that which is to be discussed .
I cannot say whether I am 100 % in agreement with what was said , but the speaker is in any case an intelligent man and he is probably right in what he says .
The question , therefore , is to what extent we shall proceed in this way .
It is that which is to be discussed on 10 September , and I ask that the House appreciate this .
Question No 12 by Manuel Medina Ortega ( H-0545 / 02 ) :
Subject : Measures to restrict illegal immigration into the Canaries
On the basis of the agreements adopted at the Seville summit , what measures does the Council propose to restrict the massive influx of illegal immigrants into the Canary Islands ?
In particular , what measures are proposed to curb this irregular form of immigration at the places of origin , in order to ensure the safety of the immigrants themselves ?
The conclusions from the Seville European Council outline the measures which are to be taken with a view to combating the problem of illegal immigration effectively at EU level ; and here we are talking about both prevention and restriction of immigration .
We need to strike a fair balance between this aim on the one hand and the aim of better integration of those immigrants who are lawfully present in our countries on the other , and of course we also need an asylum policy which complies with international conventions .
It should also be mentioned that , even before the Seville European Council , the Spanish Presidency had given a significant impetus to this matter , notably by adopting two normative instruments , which not only map out some of the necessary measures , but also set the framework for future efforts and the development thereof .
The instruments concerned are the action plan to combat illegal immigration and trafficking in human beings and the action plan for the management of EU external borders , which were both adopted by the Justice and Home Affairs Council .
In addition , this Council reached an agreement on 13 June of this year on conclusions about measures to be taken to prevent and combat illegal immigration and trafficking in human beings by sea .
The conclusions from Seville , which make specific reference to these action plans , attach importance to the following measures .
Firstly , speeding up the conclusion of readmission agreements currently being negotiated and approval of new briefs for the negotiation of readmission agreements with countries already identified by the Council : see conclusion No 30 .
Secondly , as regards expulsion and repatriation policies , adoption by the end of the year at the latest of the components of a repatriation programme based on the Green Paper submitted by the Commission in April 2002 .
This also falls under conclusion No 30 .
Thirdly , the gradual introduction of coordinated , integrated management of external borders , which should , among other aims , help bring greater control of migration flows .
A number of measures are mapped out which should make it possible to achieve this goal very shortly : see conclusions Nos 31 and 32 .
In a wider and more general perspective , the conclusions from Seville affirmed that immigration policy , as an essential element to be taken into consideration , should be integrated into the EU 's relations with third countries .
They pointed out that an integrated , comprehensive and balanced approach to tackle the root causes of illegal immigration must remain the EU 's constant long-term objective .
The conclusions highlight the importance of ensuring the cooperation of countries of origin and of transit in joint management and in border control and also in readmission , which is discussed in conclusion No 34 .
The conclusions confirmed that it is necessary to carry out a systematic assessment of relations with third countries which do not cooperate in combating illegal immigration in the relevant areas .
They point out in this regard that inadequate cooperation by a country could hamper the establishment of closer relations between that country and the EU .
In the light of the conclusions from Seville , the Danish Presidency has attached a high priority in its work schedule to the fight against illegal immigration , so that the European Council conclusions can be implemented swiftly .
I can inform you that I myself shall be the President-in-Office of the Council when it debates these issues .
Mr President , during the first sitting in July , when you were President-in-Office of the Council , I asked you a very similar question and you told me that the Council and the Danish Presidency would address the matter as quickly as possible .
Two or three days later , on 8 July , I asked this question , hoping specifically that during the summer something would have been done .
The problem we have in the European Union , Mr President , and this is neither your fault nor that of the Danish Government , is that our system does not work .
Between the date on which I asked the first question , the first week of July , and today , thousands of illegal immigrants have entered the Canary Islands , both by sea and by air , and the situation there is unsustainable , and we do not have any reception centres .
These islands have a smaller area than the islands of Denmark , and at the moment we do not have any means of solving the problem .
Mr President , I would say - and I repeat - that , through no fault of your own or of the Danish Presidency , the Council of the European Union is not following up the proposals that Mr Vitorino has been making for some time now , so that the European Union can in fact establish control .
We should at least know who is arriving and why , and what we can do for them .
These problems in the Canary Islands came to my attention frequently when I attended the Asia-Europe Meeting ( ASEM ) on migration in Lanzarote in the early summer .
I am therefore very aware of these problems , and I can assure Mr Medina Ortega that we are very active in this field .
I travelled to Athens to discuss problems - specific problems - with what is known as the Dublin II agreement , which determines which country should take responsibility for handling an asylum application .
I am probably going to Rome next weekend to discuss the same problems .
If we adopt the new system - guaranteeing that it is the responsibility of the first country to handle an asylum application - combined with the system of fingerprint exchange , there is some apprehension that certain countries will see particularly large numbers of asylum seekers returned to them and will therefore bear an exceptionally heavy burden .
Of course , this will have to be discussed .
I do not believe that the problem is very serious ; but we do have to consider how we can reassure the governments concerned . There are several ways of doing this , and it is those I am discussing with the relevant governments .
This merely by way of convincing Mr Medina Ortega that we are absolutely not passive in this matter ; we are extremely active .
We have started with the most difficult problems of all , with a view to getting those out of the way , in order that we can not merely realise the wish expressed in the Seville conclusions for the completion of the Dublin system , but also make the best possible progress with the common asylum rules . Although the Presidency has also declared these a high priority , we have not promised to be able to finish drawing them up during the Danish term .
We intend to make the best progress we possibly can with the work , and if possible complete it in November .
Question No 13 by Astrid Thors ( H-0547 / 02 ) :
Subject : Finalising of the agreement concerning the Multilateral Nuclear Environmental Program
According to the Commission ( DG External Relations ) a part of the bilateral work concerning the EU 's relations with Russia focused for much of 2001 on energy , environmental protection and nuclear safety .
This was meant to be done through the conclusion of the agreement on a Multilateral Nuclear Environmental Program , ( MNEPR ) , aimed at cleaning up radioactive waste in north-west Russia and through the Northern Dimension Environmental Partnership ( NDEP ) .
Similarly , in the press brief from the Commission ( issued on 27 May 2002 ) before the Ninth EU-Russia Summit held in Moscow in May 2002 , it was stated that the environment and nuclear safety were going to be discussed and that it would be important to ensure that the Russian federation finalise the MNEPR agreement as soon as possible .
In the Joint Statement issued after the EU-Russia Summit , however , no reference was made to the MNEPR .
A pledge conference on the NDEP is also to be held on 9 July .
What is the current situation concerning the MNEPR ?
What are the obstacles to the conclusion of an agreement on the MNEPR ?
What measures is the Council going to take in the near future in order to ensure that the Russian Federation finalises the agreement ?
The negotiations on the Multilateral Nuclear Environmental Programme in the Russian Federation ( MNEPR ) have been going on for more than three years .
The EU has emphasised at a number of summits that these negotiations should be brought to a swift conclusion .
It is true that the common will to conclude the negotiations was not formally expressed in the joint statement from the summit in Moscow on 29 May , but the question was discussed at the summit , and Russia expressed a desire for resolution of the outstanding issues , which are of course taxation and civil liability .
The EU has taken every opportunity to put pressure on Russia to break the deadlock , including at the meetings of the Cooperation Council .
The other partner countries , the USA and Norway , have also put her under intense pressure .
The EU attaches great importance to nuclear safety in North-West Russia and believes that this agreement could contribute to overcoming some of the obstacles to the implementation of projects which could further cooperation on safety in connection with the management of irradiated nuclear fuel and radioactive waste in the Russian Federation .
The inaugural pledging conference for the Support Fund of the Northern Dimension Environmental Partnership ( NDEP ) was concluded with a positive result on 9 July of this year in Brussels .
The initial contribution to the Support Fund was approximately EUR 110 million , of which EUR 62 million are earmarked for nuclear projects .
Participants in the conference emphasised that the conclusion of this MNEPR agreement is a necessary precondition for projects within the nuclear sphere entering into operation within the framework of the NDEP .
The NDEP is an important and practical step towards achieving the objectives , set by the G8 , of the Global Partnership against the Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction .
The nuclear-safety issue is of decisive importance for environmental protection on the continent of Europe .
This particularly concerns Russia , but also other North European countries .
The Danish Presidency therefore wishes to work towards bringing the negotiations on the MNEPR agreement to a conclusion by the end of this year .
I hope this answers Mrs Astrid Thors 's question .
I am satisfied with the reply , but unfortunately I must say that the Russian side seems to have a certain attitude of divide et impera towards the European authorities .
In the past , I have even seen a situation where the Council was given one answer and the Commission another , and they play on the fact that the presidency changes .
I could also quote yesterday 's answer from the Commission to a similar question : ' Unfortunately , over recent months the Russian side has neither confirmed its willingness to sign nor given any indication of the nature of the problems holding up their signature . '
I regret to say I have a feeling that the Russian side will continue to delay .
I would therefore appeal to the Danish Presidency to exert considerable pressure if necessary .
At the same summit where this agreement was not signed , Russia was still accepted as a market economy .
Is there no similar way to achieve what is now needed ?
I would like to thank Mr Haarder for the commitment he showed to the Northern dimension last week .

I do understand the fact that Mrs Astrid Thors is losing patience : we in the Presidency and the Council are as well , which is why we have taken every opportunity to exert pressure .
Without commenting on what was said about Russia 's strategy , I can at least guarantee that we shall not miss an opportunity to put pressure on Russia , as I have said .
I have just attended a Ministerial Conference in Greenland in which the Russians also participated .
The subject matter was the Northern Dimension , in which I know that Mrs Thors also has a great interest .
Many of these matters were also raised there , and I believe that it is important - and here I am sure that we are in agreement - that we establish cooperation with Russia in as many fields as possible , while seeing this as a way of increasing the opportunities for exerting pressure on her in those areas where we believe it important and necessary .
I am thinking of Kaliningrad , of the enlargement of NATO and the EU and of the environmental problems in the Murmansk area , which Mrs Thors knows more about than I do .
There is every reason for establishing relations with Russia in as many fields as we possibly can , and at the same time for taking advantage of these opportunities to put pressure on her where we believe it really is necessary .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , I would be interested to know whether these treaties were concluded at International Atomic Energy Agency level .
In Europe , we do have the problem that it is the Member States alone that decide on safety standards for nuclear power stations .
Parliament has come to an arrangement with the Commission , specifically with Commissioner de Palacio , that safety standards for atomic power stations are to be submitted before the new Member States join .
Your fellow Member of the Council emphasised to the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy that this would be one of your Presidency 's priorities .
So I would not only like to know what the current position is on the agreement with Russia , but also what we ourselves think about nuclear safety and about how nuclear power stations are to be made safe .
In my opinion , the agreements which I have been answering questions on here concern a different topic , and therefore this supplementary question does not bear any direct relation to the questions I have answered .
I do not mean that there is a set of rules in the archives , but I prefer not to improvise , as this is outside the scope of the question .
The supplementary questions should still be on the Russian Federation and the problem of nuclear energy in EU-Russia relations .
Question No 14 will not be taken as the subject to which it refers already appears in the agenda for this part-session .
Question No 15 by Brian Crowley ( H-0554 / 02 ) :
Subject : Tackling Drugs
The prevalence of illegal drugs , including crack-cocaine , continues to cause serious problems for society in terms of addiction , criminality , treatment and policing .
Will the Danish Presidency , in the light of subsidiarity , give assurances that the Council will make the fight against illegal drugs a top priority of the Danish Presidency , and will it report back to the House in December 2002 on the initiatives and actions it has undertaken in this regard ?
This is Question No 15 by Mr Fitzsimons .
No , sorry , just a moment .
The question was from Mr Crowley .
Like its Spanish predecessor , the Danish Presidency attaches great importance to combating drugs .
The cornerstone of the Presidency 's drugs programme is the mid-term review of the EU action plan to combat drugs for 2000-2004 .
The Commission will draw up an evaluation report to be submitted to the European Council at the meeting in Copenhagen in December .
The Danish Presidency intends to monitor closely the preparation of the Commission 's report to ensure that the relevant working parties in the Council contribute to the greatest possible extent so that the report is comprehensive and informative .
The Danish Presidency has adopted a balanced approach to the drugs problem and will therefore endeavour to pay as much attention to prevention and drug-supply reduction as to international cooperation .
It has presented initiatives on the treatment of criminal drug abusers whilst they are in jail , and on synthetic drugs : the generic classification .
In addition , the Presidency intends to step up efforts to address current , and any future , problems regarding the distribution of illicit drugs on the Internet .
At international level , meetings will be held with the candidate countries , the USA , Russia and the Association of South-East Asian Nations ( ASEAN ) ; and , as far as Latin America is concerned , meetings will be held in preparation for the event to be held during the Greek Presidency .
In this way , the Presidency intends to hold meetings with most of the countries which , from the point of view of the EU , are the principal countries of origin and of transit for illicit drugs .
The issue of cocaine will be discussed at meetings with the USA and with parties in Latin America .
In December , the Presidency will as far as possible inform the European Parliament of the results achieved during the Danish Presidency .
Mr President , again I would like to thank the President-in-Office for his response .
The reason for asking this question is that over the last eight months several huge seizures of illegal drugs and narcotics have been made across the European Union .
In Ireland over the last eight months something in the region of 24 million euros ' worth of illegal substances was seized by police and customs officers , in Britain 82 million euros ' worth and across the rest of the European Union 297 million euros ' worth .
The European Union now has the distinction of being the main user of synthetic drugs such as ecstasy and amphetamines .
The reason I put a specific request for you to come forward with conclusions or results at the end of the presidency in December is that I was hoping that - linking back to what Mr Hyland was talking about earlier - it would be possible during your time in the presidency to undertake a joint initiative between young people and the presidency to ask young people about the dangers facing them and try and alleviate some of the social problems and issues people face that drive them into the drug culture .

I should like to thank Mr Crowley for his firm commitment to this matter and thank him for his good advice and suggestions .
I can only say that we shall do what we can because , and I repeat , we consider this a particularly important area .
Mr President , what I would like to know is whether preventive programmes are being considered or whether the Council has given some thought to incentives for alternatives , so that young people who have already come into contact with drugs can come off them .
We could talk long and hard about this subject , that is , how alternatives - alternative substances in some cases - can be used to help these young people out of their abuse pattern at the earliest opportunity .
This is a matter which , I believe , concerns the national parliaments in all of our Member States , and it also concerns the Danish Presidency .
I cannot say that the question will become a central one , as it is first and foremost the responsibility of national , and often even local , authorities to guarantee these therapies , but I can say that I agree that this is a core problem . In my national parliament , at least , it is the subject of a debate involving heightened emotions and opinions which cut across parties because the plight of these young people is so distressing .
At the same time , there is a difficulty with giving them substances to help them out , as this can also cause them to become dependent in some other way .
In short , we could talk at length about this , but this is not the place .
Question No 16 has been withdrawn .
As the author is not present , Question No 17 lapses .
The Council is monitoring very closely humanitarian conditions and the human rights situation in Equatorial Guinea , in particular the case of the imprisoned opposition leaders and the conditions under which they are held .
We all recall that the EU , directly after the sentence was passed , made a declaration calling upon the relevant authorities to take the necessary measures to have the sentences reviewed and ensure that the fundamental rights of the accused were respected .
The EU has on a number of occasions expressed deep concern at the deterioration in the human rights situation , and , following the death of Juan Ondó Nguema , the Council debated reports concerning the causes .
At that time , neither the government 's nor the opposition 's explanation could be confirmed .
According to the opposition , his death was due to torture and ill-treatment , whereas the government gave the cause of death as a serious lung disease , from which he was allegedly suffering prior to the trial .
Against this background , the Council does not intend to take emergency measures at this stage , but will continue its investigations into the circumstances leading to Nguema 's death .
The EU will employ appropriate political and diplomatic means in order to put pressure on the authorities in Equatorial Guinea to bring about an improvement in the human rights situation in general and to promote democratic reforms in that unfortunate country .
Mr Haarder , we were referring in our question to the death in prison of Juan Ondó Nguema , but , sadly , we must now add that on 31 August another political prisoner died in the Black Beach prison , Juan Asumu Sima .
This 80-year-old man had to attend trial , sometimes assisted , and at others seated , due to the brutal torture to which he had been subjected .
The political prisoners in Black Beach may end up becoming names on a long list of the deceased which will continually prick the conscience of international and , of course , European Union public opinion .
Mr Haarder , the Council can think what it likes , but , of course , believing the government of Equatorial Guinea instead of the opposition is too much to believe .
I ask you , is the Council thinking of making an official visit to the political prisoners in Black Beach and , moreover , taking measures to suspend the Cotonou agreement with Equatorial Guinea if they are not freed immediately ?
The Council will of course use all available means to find the truth .
I myself have been present here in Parliament to debate resolutions on that unfortunate country , and I can assure the House that the Council has every intention of finding the truth .
My words should not be taken to mean that I attach more weight to the government 's than the opposition 's assertions ; I am just pointing out that it is one party 's word against another 's , and what we have to do is establish the truth - documented truth , mind you - so that we can substantiate any charge against the government and increase the pressure on the regime .
I fully agree with my former colleague and thank him for the tragic , and regrettable , news that another death has taken place .
This is of course yet another argument for maintaining the pressure and availing ourselves of all the means to obtain information and exert pressure .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , on 3 July , we asked the Council for immediate action to address the highly worrying situation of a large group of opponents of Mr Obiang 's regime in Equatorial Guinea .
At that time we asked for an appeal to be made , for pressure to be exerted .
Two days later , on 5 July , to be precise , one of those convicted in the judgment that incarcerated dozens of opponents in Black Beach , Juan Ondó Nguema , died as a result of the maltreatment he suffered , and due to water and sleep deprivation during the last days of his life .
Mr President , I know that the world is often cruel and that , of course , neither Europe nor the Council can solve all of its problems or shoulder all of its tragedies .
This , however , was a very specific , localised problem .
A few days ago , another opponent died , and we ask again , insistently , Mr President , that the Council please do something immediately to solve this problem and remove the threat hanging over a few , very specific people .
I do not know how my former colleague had thought the Council could remove this threat .
It has done its best with the means at its disposal .
I have said this , and the Council will continue to do so .
I can say no more .
Thank you , Mr President .
As the time allocated to Question Time is at an end , Questions Nos 20 to 34 will be answered in writing
The next item is the report ( A5-0226 / 2002 ) by Mrs Stenzel , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the annual report on the European Agency for Reconstruction ( 2001 / 2255 ( INI ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , and those ladies and gentlemen who are still present , the report on the 2001 annual report on the European Agency for Reconstruction was adopted unanimously by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy on 11 June 2002 .
The vote in plenary was , however , deliberately adjourned to the autumn , in order to give the Commission the opportunity to comply with a demand constantly reiterated by the Foreign Policy Committee by presenting a strategy for overall policy in the Balkans and the Agency for Reconstruction 's role in it and clarifying how , in future , functions are to be shared out between , on the one hand , the Agency and , on the other , the delegations on the ground .
The Commission has not submitted a report on this , nor has it kept to the November 2001 agreement in which it undertook to present the report on the medium-term strategy for the administration of EU aid in the context of the stabilisation and association process before the end of March 2002 .
The European Commission 's report on strategies for assistance in the Western Balkans is a very thorough depiction of the situation , and Commissioner Patten was also available on 19 June to give us additional information .
No strategy in this sense was articulated , however , something that Mr Swoboda summed up with words to the effect that , if there were no such strategy , that itself spoke volumes .
The demand that the Commission submit a report to the Council , not as late as June 2004 , just before the European Agency for Reconstruction 's mandate expires , but by June 2003 at the latest , and involve Parliament in this , is therefore all the more important .
Only thus can we avoid destabilising the Agency and ensure that it can work efficiently .
This becomes a matter of even more pressing concern in view of the EU 's financial commitments in the Balkans .
I was myself able , when visiting Pristina , to satisfy myself as to the Agency 's efficiency , which , incidentally , the Court of Auditors has also confirmed .
It is extremely regrettable and gives cause for concern that the export of electricity by the local electricity company KEK resulted in substantial irregularities , with export earnings amounting to USD 4.2 million landing up in an illicit account in Gibraltar .
The Agency has itself , however , introduced measures to prevent future criminal manoeuvres of this kind within KEK and help it to clear them up .
The Agency for Reconstruction also itself called in OLAF in relation to the contract of a questionable external advisor .
What is important in this connection is that an internal auditor is to be appointed as soon as possible .
The provision of electricity in Kosovo still leaves much to be desired .
That a new agreement between UNMIK and Serbia created the political conditions for making it easier to supply Kosovo with adequate electricity is something to be welcomed .
As rapporteur , I am aware that the Agency works in Kosovo under difficult political conditions .
Its political status has still not been clarified , and there are continuing ethnic tensions between the Serb minority and the Albanian majority .
Making the positive influence of the European Union and of the Agency visible is thus all the more important .
Any strategy for this region must have as its objective the facilitation of a sustainable policy and the progressive reduction of financial grants from the EU , principally through efficient charging for all public services .
The extension of the Agency 's mandate to Macedonia aroused controversy , as the political situation prevailing in Macedonia at the outset , whilst extremely fragile , was quite different to that in Kosovo and , above all , because the consultation mechanism between the Commission and Parliament , by which of course funds have to be approved , was not always ideal .
The report therefore proposes political guidelines for the Agency , and future work can centre around these .
The decision-making mechanisms in the Commission 's individual offices should also be as clear and transparent as possible .
Turning specifically to the Agency 's commitments in Macedonia , the situation has improved , and it has been possible to complete 900 houses .
Progress has also been made in clearing mines .
It is also particularly important that the Agency should enjoy a problem-free working relationship with the local delegation in Macedonia , where elections are due to be held on 15 September .
The situation there is extremely tense , and it is not certain whether these elections will be held under proper conditions , if , that is , they are held at all .
Today in plenary , we have been debating the European Union 's responsibility for Afghanistan , and have assured Commissioner Patten of our support .
What is true of Afghanistan applies far more to the Balkans , for which the European Union has a direct responsibility .
In this sense , the report on the Agency for Reconstruction should make a contribution to sustainable crisis management .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to make a few comments on this matter from the standpoint of the Committee on Budgets .
Since the beginning of the crisis in the Balkans , we - especially the Budget Committee - have insisted that all the substantial EU funds invested in reconstruction must be used in such a way that our principles of good governance are respected .
This means , inter alia , that we have demanded assurances in terms of efficient administration , decentralisation , swift payments , avoidance of bottlenecks and scrutiny of funds .
When the European Agency for Reconstruction was created in early 2000 , it was actually in response to a request from Parliament .
Furthermore , we did away with the original , unwieldy committee procedure .
We obtained a much simpler model that we believe has been extremely important and thanks to which , inter alia , decisions on practical projects can generally be taken at local level .
I must also say that cooperation between the Thessaloniki office and the operations offices in Pristina , Belgrade , etc . , has been more effective than many of us had believed at the outset .
We would perhaps still like to have a little more information from the Commission regarding how many people are left in Brussels and how many are working in Thessaloniki and in the other localities .
Have we really managed to avoid duplication of effort , which was one of our aims ?
In any case , what we can say is that an extremely high percentage of the available funds have been allocated and paid out .
The Court of Auditors also commented on the high levels of efficiency , which is very good .
At the same time , guidelines are , of course , needed for the future , particularly since we now realise that we have been so efficient that we might have too little money left at the end of this seven-year term of the CARDS programme .
Even now , the Commission has been forced to propose a radical reduction in aid to Kosovo , for example , and this present us with a big challenge .
Can we delegate to the local and national authorities ?
How shall we proceed in the future ?
Strategic reflection is now needed for the future , if we are to continue to have the same levels of efficiency .
That is the message from the Committee on Budgets .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mrs Stenzel , this is a very fine and comprehensive report .
The fact that we , as my group has demanded , are actually debating it this evening is almost enough to give one a bad conscience .
I wish to apologise to all those for whom that is their reason for being here .
I do think , though , that it is right to review what we have achieved in the Balkans , especially in the area where the Agency is active , and consider what we have not yet achieved .
As previous speakers have done , we must hang on to the fundamental truth that the Agency has performed well and that we can take much satisfaction in that .
At the same time , though , it must be said that there are a number of aspects in which the European Union 's policy has to be continued with and perhaps even stepped up .
If we are to use the Agency to disburse funds - Mrs Stenzel thinks the amount should decrease , and she is right - we have to be aware that the economic situation continues to be very , very bleak .
Money will not compensate for all of that ; we must rather concentrate on building up structures that make it possible for there to be perceptible - but , admittedly slow - economic development and growth .
Such structures are , unfortunately , not yet in place .
As far as the political situation is concerned , we still also have great deficiencies to deal with ; one might almost say we have to deal with the lack of a maturation process , both in relations between Serbia and Montenegro and in the conditions within them .
There is still , alas , insufficient willingness in Kosovo to accept that this European Union of ours has committed itself to a multi-ethnic Kosovo inhabited mainly by the Albanian population , but in which the Serbs must also be able to live in freedom and peace and go about their normal work and economic activity .
That has not even started to happen in Kosovo !
In Macedonia , to which some of us are travelling in a few days to observe the elections , there are still recurrent incidents , and some killings .
There , too , the process of political maturation has not yet progressed as far as it needs to .
I am glad that Commissioner Vitorino is present to hear the third point I would like to make , which is that the central Balkan region continues to be a country of transit for a lot of objectionable cross-border activities .
We are of course aware that certain illegal organisations do not object to ethnic cooperation and have no problem with the overcoming of borders .
Now , I do not want to run this region down , as activities such as trafficking in drugs and human beings often have EU countries as their destinations , whilst their sources are often elsewhere .
I do believe , though , that it is with our own population in mind that we have to shoulder full responsibility for a Balkan policy that makes it possible to put the brakes on these dealings as quickly and effectively as possible .
Some of us have ourselves visited the Bucharest centre that is actively dedicated specifically to combating these criminal activities , and I want to ask Commissioner Vitorino , as a matter of urgency , to collaborate to the utmost with Commissioner Patten in seeing to it that a stop is put to these criminal activities , which are giving the region a bad reputation .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Stenzel for her very effective and useful report .
I cannot claim to be a close observer or to have very detailed knowledge of the operations of the agency and therefore I find her report very valuable .
As someone who for the last three years has been on the delegation to south-east Europe and more recently a vice-chair , I feel it is essential that we keep up and develop the financial assistance to allow the Balkan countries to aspire to the eventual goal , which must be membership of the European Union .
I was one of those who was not convinced by the original decision to site the headquarters of the agency in Thessaloniki .
It was the rather traditional story of doling out prizes to Member States .
I may have slightly changed my view because Greece is playing a very valuable role in leading and in coordinating regional cooperation .
Yet I think we need to reconsider whether this is the most effective way for an agency that has several different bases to operate .
The agency is doing a good and essential job .
It will be important over time to rationalise and if possible to expand our assistance to the Balkans .
This assistance must evolve from reconstruction to development , just as it evolved from emergency aid to reconstruction .
The network of agencies that are perhaps in danger of tripping over themselves in south-east Europe is a challenge we have to resolve .
It is a very complex scene - a kind of alphabet soup .
It is very difficult , even for someone in my position , to understand who does what and I am not sure what the impact is on the local citizens .
Mrs Stenzel makes several valuable points , among which is the need for agreements with other donors on ' sharing ' out who is responsible for what sector to avoid overlaps .
She particularly mentions that the agency should take the lead on energy in Kosovo , with which I would agree .
She also emphasises the need for a strategy on the future of the agency 's relations with EU delegations .
I wonder from my experience in Skopje whether we have not gone too far in bypassing the competence of the local Commission delegation .
I felt there was a danger of the agency taking a slightly imperialist tone towards the local delegation .
In view of the upcoming elections on 15 September , I am still not sure that we have reconstructed enough houses there .
Mr President , Mr Stenzel 's excellent report , on which we are essentially all in agreement , attempts to present in a positive light a balance sheet which can clearly only be problematic .
It should come as no surprise that there are differences of opinion regarding a European agency which manages financial aid for south-east Europe , and so the calls for promotion of adequate investigation of any suspicion of mismanagement and / or corruption , in particular those related to investments in the energy sector , are understandable .
Hence the need to improve transparency in the financial transfers and practices of all areas of the organisation 's activity .
It is no coincidence either that a call has been made for an internal auditor to be appointed and that the importance of the European Court of Auditors , of a financial auditor and , lastly , of the role of the European Anti-Fraud Office has been stressed .
All this points to the fact that things are going rather as we had feared but that that was rather to be expected : we cannot work miracles in the region , it is almost impossible for good governance at all times , on all occasions , to be guaranteed , but we must , of course , make every endeavour to reduce the possibilities of illegally providing or receiving funds .
As you can see , there is no international cooperation strategy , and this is quite a serious matter .
Our organisation has not contributed a strategy either , but it is difficult to establish a strategy when we do not know where our borders will lie in the short- or long-term future .
All this must be borne in mind .
On the other hand , however , the competence of the European Agency for Reconstruction has been extended geographically , and I wonder whether this is the right way to proceed , given that the problems presented by each individual situation differ quite widely .
The Commission had promised Parliament that it would produce a report , although this is not yet available .
This too is confirmation of the difficulties and is a further indication of the problems encountered by the reconstruction bodies in the Balkans .
It was , of course , an easier matter to provide initial aid , but things become more complex when it is a question of defining reconstruction and deciding where and how to strengthen the institutions .
The figures on the aid managed by the agency would appear , however , to be more or less in order as regards the relationship between projects , financing , payment times and results , and this is good news .
The reconstruction of the Balkans is too delicate and sensitive a matter to be neglected even temporarily , and so I feel that we should devote more attention to it .
Mr President , firstly I would like to thank Mrs Stenzel on behalf of the Commission for her report on the European Agency for Reconstruction .
It is a thorough and thought-provoking report which raises important questions .
My colleague , Mr Patten , discussed it with some of you at the meeting in Strasbourg on 2 July and circulated an information note in June which I hope covered many of the concerns of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy .
Mr Patten has promised to present a report outlining the future implementation of assistance before the end of 2003 .
This will form the basis of the recommendations which the Commission is required to submit by 30 June 2004 under the European Agency for Reconstruction regulation .
Today I will outline some preliminary thoughts , but first allow me a few comments on some specific points in the report .
I am pleased that the report so clearly acknowledges the efficiency and high delivery capacity of the European Agency for Reconstruction .
The agency is indeed a success story .
It is doing an extraordinary job in channelling Community assistance to the former Republic of Yugoslavia and former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
In this context , I would also like to highlight the success of the deconcentration to Commission delegations .
This has , for example , been a major factor in the successful implementation of the European Community assistance in Bosnia and Herzegovina .
The Commission endorses many of the observations in the report .
We strongly agree , for example , with Parliament 's suggestion that we need to focus increasingly on institution and capacity building .
That is certainly our approach .
A large percentage of the overall assistance is allocated to institution building and it is increasing all the time .
The country strategy papers and the multiannual indicative programmes allow for some flexibility and do not need to be revised for these transitions .
Mr Swoboda mentioned the issue of illegal immigration and the Balkan routes and we have made it very clear that we need a regional approach to fight illegal immigration and organised crime in south-east Europe .
Under the Swedish presidency we organised the first meeting of the five countries in the region , because without regional cooperation we will not succeed .
Some Member States have developed a liaison officers ' network and we have been cooperating with border guards and police forces in the region and that has definitely improved the situation although it is still far from resolved .
The shift I have mentioned above applies to the countries with deconcentrated delegations , as well as those where the agency is operating .
There is no reason to think that the agency will handle institution-building programmes any less successfully than it has physical reconstruction .
The legal base for the agency is perfectly adequate and does not need to be amended .
Nor do we want to change its successful brand name , even if the focus is no longer principally reconstruction .
The report suggests that if the territorial competence of the agency were to be extended its regulations should be modified .
The decision to extend the agency 's mandate to the whole of the Former Republic of Yugoslavia and to the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia was taken because of exceptional circumstances .
We do not see a need to extend the agency 's territorial competence further .
In the report you emphasise the need for coordination .
We share this view .
It is an absolute necessity to ensure that our assistance brings the highest added value possible .
We are therefore pleased to note the systematic and extensive coordination already taking place between Commission services and between actors on the ground .
From previous debates , I know that you want to discuss the broader issue of the future of assistance to the western Balkans and its organisational aspects , including the competences of the European Community delegations and the agency .
Our preliminary thoughts are as follows .
There is no reason to assume that the coexistence of the agency and the Commission delegation in the same country leads to an overlap .
The political role and the status of all delegations in the region are identical , beyond assistance implementation .
They are focused on developing the political and institutional relationship with the European Union .
As each country moves further into the stabilisation and association process , we will have to evaluate whether support for the process of bringing the countries up to European standards needs to be completely integrated with the political work of the delegations .
This question will be at the heart of the decision on the future of the agency .
But we cannot give a clear answer at this point .
Above all , we do not believe it will be to the region 's benefit to dismantle recently established arrangements which are working well .
Administrative and institutional tidiness must not impede our primary objective of achieving real change on the ground .
However , we clearly need to keep our options open and be ready to change how we deliver aid , when there are clear benefits in doing so .
The Commission will ensure that these decisions are taken on the basis of what is most effective in achieving the four objectives : more focus on quality , speedier implementation according to the highest standards of management , visibility , and above all the impact of our programmes on the ground .
Parliament 's views will be invaluable in developing the arrangements that best suit the needs of the region and the strategic ambition for its closer integration into the European Union .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0241 / 2002 ) by Mr Coelho , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the third Commission report on citizenship of the Union ( COM ( 2001 ) 506 - C5-0656 / 2001 - 2001 / 2279 ( COS ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are now discussing European citizenship on the basis of the report which I had the honour of drafting and which was given almost unanimous approval in our Parliament 's Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs .
I must begin by emphasising what is essential and what we do not want .
What is essential is to promote awareness of a common heritage , based on a range of fundamental common traditions and values and , at the same time , of the recognition of a number of rights .
What we do not want is a concept of European citizenship that is seen as the artificial creation of a supranational identity that seeks to replace feelings of nationality .
Indeed , as we understand it , European citizenship is something to be superimposed and added to national citizenship , complementing and broadening it .
There is no way of acquiring this other than having nationality one of the Member States .
Although our Community has taken an essentially economic route , it is now much more than an economic community .
It is home to more than 375 million people , who are not only consumers in a vast single market , but are also citizens of the European Union , who have the right to move freely within it , to settle in any part of its territory , for personal or professional reasons , and who hope to be able to live without fear of persecution , discrimination or violence , which accentuates the need to step up cooperation between police forces , customs services and judicial systems .
Recognition of this European citizenship has been a slow process , however , which faces too many obstacles , even today .
There are eight areas in which I am submitting proposals for the full application of the concept of European citizenship in its political , administrative , judicial , social and economic dimensions .
First : it is crucial that we implement a strategy of promoting European citizenship , at both the institutional and legislative levels , and in terms of education and information .
Second : the lack of information .
European citizens must be better informed of their rights and the scope of these rights , with regard in particular to the right to petition the European Parliament and to complain to the Ombudsman .
It is deplorable that most of the petitions to the European Parliament and the complaints sent to the Ombudsman are deemed unacceptable , which confirms the lack of knowledge of the petitioners about the competences of the Union .
It is crucial to improve , through all available means , the European Union 's information and communication policy , which must be targeted and appropriate to the population for whom it is designed .
The Union 's document base must be made accessible to the public in all the official languages and free of charge and the development of interactive portals must be promoted .
Third : the steady decline in the rate of participation of the Union 's citizens in European elections , which undermines the legitimacy of our Parliament .
We must adopt the measures needed to further raise voter awareness of the importance of these elections . With regard to setting a date for the next European elections , this must not coincide with national traditions or statutory holidays , so as to optimise the chances of voter participation .
It does not make sense , for example , that in Portugal the day of the Europeans elections frequently coincides with a national holiday , thereby seriously damaging the electoral participation of the citizens of my country .
Fourth : diplomatic and consular protection .
It is important that those Member States that have not yet done so incorporate into their legal systems the measures needed to ensure diplomatic and consular protection for EU citizens whose state of origin has no representation .
Fifth : protection of the citizens .
The Member States must adopt all the measures needed to ensure that fundamental rights are respected , the protection of the citizens against terrorism and organised crime , support and compensation for victims , and to ensure the effective and equitable access of European citizens to justice .
Particular emphasis is given to the implementation of the directives on combating discrimination , to the fight against racism and xenophobia and to equality between men and women .
Sixth : the continued existence of obstacles to the exercise of freedom of movement and residence by European citizens .
In order to overcome these obstacles , Member States must adopt without delay the proposal for a directive of 23 May 2001 , which , by revising the existing texts , introduces essential simplifications and in particular establishes the right of permanent residence after four years of uninterrupted residence .
Furthermore , the Member States must remedy the many legislative discrepancies which continue to exist and which represent an obstacle to the full expression of European citizenship in the areas of the status of individuals , justice and conditions of movement and residence for migrant workers .
Seventh : barriers to the free movement of students and teachers .
With regard to barriers that still remain , the action plan for mobility must be adopted as a matter of urgency , so as to facilitate and enhance the mobility of students , volunteers , teachers and trainers .
Furthermore , the Member States and the competent authorities must use educational programmes to encourage a better knowledge of Europe , particularly in the form of history and language teaching .
Finally , I should like to ask the Convention on the Future of the European Union to agree on the binding legal status to be given to the Charter of Fundamental Rights , to communitarise the third pillar , and to endeavour to ensure that texts in which EU policies are laid down are more accessible to the general public as a whole .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Coelho , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities regrets the fact that the Commission did not include the dimension of equal opportunities in its Third Report on Citizenship of the Union and fails in particular to develop gender-sensitive and gender-specific guidelines and indicators and use sex-specific data at all levels .
On the other hand , the Committee welcomes some of the actions that have been adopted but which must be implemented .
First , the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Based on the principles of human dignity and equality of women and men , the Charter will serve as a framework defending the fundamental rights of women and men in the Union .
Also the Daphne Programme , created to defend the citizens ' rights of children , adolescents and women , must be further developed as an instrument to strengthen European citizenship .
The action plan for mobility and the Commission proposal to adopt a directive combining the various legislative instruments on the freedom of movement and residence of the citizens of the Union in a single text is of particular importance to women and the problems they face in the framework of European integration .
We therefore ask the Commission , in its next report , to provide an adequate analysis based on comparable statistics , which enables a gender impact assessment to be made in areas linked to the electoral process , such as the percentage of women voters , of women who stand as candidates and , of course , of women who are elected .
Lastly , let us remember that strengthening citizenship of the Union will only be achieved through total equality between men and women in all sectors of economic and political life .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in my opinion , it is never out of place or superfluous to mention European citizenship , not least because we very frequently expect the citizens to be Europeans and then fail to treat them as such .
Indeed , the citizens are starting to feel European , and this is happening as they begin to enter into dialogue with the European institutions .
However , there is more to citizenship than that : in a way , it confirms the citizens ' place in this European dimension , which they must feel both contributors to and responsible for at this time of great impetus and dynamism .
We feel that the level of participation in the European elections is low and declining steadily , but we wonder what we are offering the citizens of the Member States as part of this European package .
We are not offering them the mutual right to study in different Member States , we are not providing facilities to resolve language difficulties , we are not providing a labour code , we are not - as Mr Coelho , who has produced an excellent report , pointed out - providing free movement , we are not recognising qualifications and , therefore , we are not recognising a right to work , and we are not recognising the right to health .
I am saying this on behalf of the citizens , for I receive the petitions sent by the citizens to the European Parliament 's Committee on Petitions , in which they describe these major areas of intolerance within the Member States of the Union .
I would next like to point out a major contradiction : we have achieved Schengen , which is a milestone which could benefit the whole world , particularly the countries which are still troubled by wars over territory and border conflicts , but we are preserving the right for the Member States to expel European Union citizens from one Member State to another .
How is it conceivable that the right of expulsion still exists when it runs counter to Schengen ?
We can expel citizens outside the Schengen area , not within the same territory .
Well then , I feel that we should all make every endeavour to start building Europe at the level of the citizens , starting precisely with the recognition of status which the Charter of Fundamental Rights placed at the centre of the European project and which must be reproduced in the Treaties .
If we do not succeed in doing this , however many conventions we produce we will never manage to build Europe , especially when one country - I am referring to Ireland but there may be many others , including my own - has refused to recognise , to sign and to ratify the Nice Treaty and when three Member States have refused to share our experience with the single currency .
The road is long : we must all strive to place the citizens at the centre of the Europe we are building .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , for me , citizenship of the EU is something like a building block towards enhanced integration , but also of course towards our citizens having a greater sense of their European identity .
Looking at the basis for it , though , we find just six paragraphs referring to citizenship of the EU , and , on reading these , we find relatively few rights attached to it , which range from participation in local elections or in those for this Parliament to diplomatic representation or the right of petition .
That , though , can be nothing more than a beginning if we really want to create EU citizenship .
The task we have to set ourselves in future is a political one , that of making EU citizenship , as it now is , meaningful and breathing life into it .
We are also called on to give thought to how we can actually extend the rights enjoyed by EU citizens .
This report turns the spotlight on our present deficits and also makes very definite proposals where changes are necessary .
I very warmly congratulate the rapporteur on the attitude he has taken to this refined analysis and on the very constructive proposals he has made .
There is a need for measures to demolish , and quickly , the barriers which exist at present and still hamper the freedom of movement and of residence of people who are called EU citizens , which do not guarantee all EU citizens access to the law and to justice to the extent that they desire , and which , above all , hamper the mobility of students in schools and higher education , of apprentices , and also of teachers and the workforce .
What use to us is the best Leonardo programme for the training of professionals , if such things as social benefits are not recognised or if there are yet other barriers standing in the way of real mobility , or if qualifications from university or vocational training in other states are not accorded the recognition that has long been overdue ?
We have to think about informing people about what their rights as citizens of the EU actually are and about how they can best make use of them .
We have to call for the necessary work to be done in schools and in information offices - the latter including those run by the Commission and by Parliament .
Much , then , lies ahead of us .
We still have to do intensive work in order that those endowed with citizenship of the EU can feel that they really are its citizens .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur on his work .
This is a clear and balanced report , which explains the existing shortcomings , recognises the progress that has been made and indicates the direction that must be taken to remedy these shortcomings , in the aim of constructing a real and effective European citizenship .
The concept of European citizenship has been one of the main legacies of the Maastricht Treaty and has contributed to increasingly engage the citizens of the Member States with the common project of European integration .
Now that more than a decade has passed , the balance sheet is clearly positive .
Freedom of movement , the right to vote and to stand in local and European elections , the right of petition and the right to diplomatic and consular protection are today already irreversible steps forward with practical effects from which Europe 's citizens derive real benefit .
Nevertheless , the development of a genuine European citizenship requires more , both with regard to those rights already enshrined in the Treaties , but whose full implementation today still faces too many obstacles , and with regard to the integration of the future institutional model of the Union , which is undoubtedly the great challenge currently facing our community of peoples and countries .
Furthermore , full European citizenship cannot ignore the social and economic rights of our fellow citizens , at the risk of the citizens seeing the European project as a step backwards from the social contract expressed through national constitutions .
In relation to the freedom of movement and residence of Community citizens , I should like , Mr President , to congratulate the Commission on the reform that has been introduced in this field , formalised in the Directive of 23 May 2001 .
In the aim of guaranteeing the citizens of the European Union conditions of movement and residence similar to those of Member State citizens in their own country , this Commission initiative has made the conditions of movement and residence more flexible , has simplified the legislation in force in this field and has established an innovative rule according to which after four years , residence in European Union territory can be extended with no formalities required .
The European Union cannot distance itself from the situation of those who , although not Member State nationals , have their lives established on European territory , thereby making a major contribution to the cultural , social and economic wealth of the Union .
It is , therefore , with considerable satisfaction that we welcome the Commission proposal for a directive of 5 July 2001 , on the status of third-country nationals who are long-term residents .
We urge the Council rapidly to adopt this proposal and thereby end the existing discrimination and to ensure that these persons can , in the field of employment , education and social security , enjoy rights close to those held by citizens of the Union .
In the field of the right to vote and to stand for election , the report rigorously describes the present framework , which is characterised fundamentally by the poor participation of Community citizens in European and local elections in their States of residence .
The lack of information and the short periods laid down by States Members in which citizens can be placed on electoral registers undoubtedly contribute to explaining this relative lack of success .
Nevertheless , this phenomenon should be seen in the context of the more global trend of a steady decline in voter participation which , as far as we are concerned , could be effectively countered by clarifying the European Union 's institutional framework and by drafting a genuine constitutional text which enables the citizens to identify as closely as possible with the decision-making process at European level .
Mr President , I congratulate Mr Coelho on a very strong report , which is concrete and specific .
He makes it clear that European citizenship not only supplements and complements national citizenship but also that the concept should adapt to include the rights of long-term resident foreign nationals .
I would just take issue with him on one point .
In 2004 , elections to the Greater London Authority are due to take place one month before the European elections .
I hope agreement will be reached to postpone them for one month so that they take place on the same day , which will help raise turnout and make a legitimate connection , in the sense of a Europe of the regions .
Mr Coelho adopts a fully justified tone of impatience .
The rights of people must not continue to lag behind the rights of goods .
In several areas I fully support him : openness , transparency , freedom of information .
In the EU we are still depressingly opaque and inaccessible .
Information documents must become more available .
Secondly , of course our citizens want protection against crime and terrorism , but there is a very poor level of democratic scrutiny in the area of police and judicial cooperation .
We must improve this situation .
Also , measures to combat crime and terrorism must have due regard to respect for human rights , including the right to a fair trial .
The rapporteur stresses elimination of discrimination , on which I fully support him , but I would also add that respect for cultural traditions must not be at the expense of fundamental human rights .
Lastly , life is too much of a hassle for people when they try to exercise their European rights , whether it be residence permits , family reunions , social security or access to justice .
I have a constituent - and I have brought this to the attention of the Commissioner - against whom proceedings were brought in the civil courts in the UK and whose case was thrown out by the English High Court .
Proceedings were then brought against her on the basis of exactly the same facts by the criminal courts in Spain and she suffered years of worry and expense , until the case was finally thrown out just a month or so ago .
Why is there not mutual recognition of the same facts between a civil and a criminal case ?
My conclusion is that we need to reinforce our monitoring of the implementation of citizenship and human rights standards .
We must take the opportunity of transforming a process which is currently being applied to the candidate countries into a genuine European Union peer review process , so that the standards of citizenship and human rights applied in each of our Member States is the concern of all of us on a cross-national basis .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is a pleasure for me to speak this evening on a theme that is close to my heart : that of European citizenship .
As stated in the Treaty , European citizenship supplements national citizenship , but is not a substitute for it .
European citizenship should also be an added extra for everyone living in the European Union .
In December 2000 , the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights finally placed the citizen at the heart of European integration , eight years after the Treaty of Maastricht .
It was high time indeed because , at European level as well as at national and local level , it is unthinkable to conduct politics in any way other than by placing citizens at the heart of all considerations , all social measures and all social projects .
Despite being in a good position to know that , in practice , things work slightly differently , this must not prevent us from fighting to change things , quite the opposite .
The rapporteur listed the areas that are meant to feature in European citizenship .
There is therefore no need for me to repeat them .
I am , however , deeply mindful of a whole series of social rights which were quoted by other speakers .
The report gives an assessment of how these rights are being implemented .
This assessment is not overly enthusiastic because , although it reports on progress made , it also highlights the fact that a great deal is still to be done in various areas .
We mentioned voting at the European elections , in which less than 50 % of voters took part .
We must , therefore , put in place measures that will encourage citizens to take part in these elections and , above all , we must give renewed consideration to the link between the elected representatives and the electorate .
We must , once again , inspire citizens with the desire to vote and the desire to become involved in community life .
The citizen must be an actor and not just an observer .
The recent elections in the various EU Member States also reinforce this belief .
What can we also say about mobility for education purposes ?
I have been telling the authorities for years about the lack of recognition of qualifications .
European citizens are calling for swift action to be taken in this area .
What can we say about the mobility of researchers ?
I have been appointed rapporteur on the Sixth Framework Programme for Research and Development and I know that this is a real obstacle course .
I would like to end , Mr President , by thanking the rapporteur for his thoughts and with the hope that , if we all pull together , we will be able to take steps to strengthen our approach and to go further in placing the citizen at the heart of our European project .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I could not begin without paying tribute to the magnificent work done by Carlos Coelho and thanking him once again for the openness and the willingness with which he accepted two proposals from our group in the specialist Committee , enabling them to be adopted in compromise versions which were agreed on .
Mr Coelho 's report is the necessary and appropriate complement to the third Commission report , giving it a crucial political meaning that is well expressed in the motion for a resolution , on which we shall be voting tomorrow .
The report and the motion for a resolution address the matter adequately , dividing it into various strands with regard to the political , administrative , and judicial dimension , and lastly , into the strand of promoting European citizenship , which contains proposals for various practical actions .
I do not wish to add anything to this , either in terms of the report 's analysis , or of the motion .
We do have something to add , however , to the discussion , particularly when the Convention is up and running and the future of Europe and institutional reform are being so widely debated .
It is true that we must work on promoting European citizenship and full understanding of this by our compatriots , our fellow citizens .
The fact , however , that , ten years after Maastricht , with so many direct elections to the European Parliament having already been held and so many actions having been undertaken to promote and disseminate the European framework , on which enormous quantities of money are spent every year , after all this , the State of European citizenship is as portrayed by the Commission report and justifies some of the rapporteur 's complaints , forces us to keep our feet on the ground and to build the future with our eyes on the horizon - not as far into the horizon as the visionaries would like , but as far as the reality of the situation requires .
The real state of European citizenship - as demonstrated , for example , in the symptomatic low levels of electoral participation - shows , as the motion for a resolution points out and emphasises in line with the Treaty , that ' European citizenship shall not replace national citizenship , but complements and expands it ' .
In other words , and we must always bear this in mind , European citizenship is , for the overwhelming majority of our fellow citizens , a complementary citizenship , because it is the central place spontaneously occupied by the most intense sense of belonging and of identity with national citizenship .
The reasons for this inescapable fact are many and profound .
And so the future of Europe will only be achieved properly if this factor is borne in mind .
Provided that we do this , we shall be constructing something - with the solidarity of the nations and the genuine democracy of the citizens .
We shall be constructing something with a future , because it will have roots .
When we distance ourselves from this goal , however , because we want to continue sleeping easy , we shall be opening the way to nightmares and to creating points of conflict , tension and disillusionment that will undermine the European project .
Because we shall be giving in , ultimately , to the pressures of a new type of collectivism - multinational collectivism - and thereby distancing ourselves from democracy , affronting genuine citizenship and replacing that Europe of all citizens , of which we all dream , with bureaucratic jiggery-pokery .
European integration can be achieved by respecting the feelings of the citizens , and will be more secure as a result .
It must never be done by overriding these feelings and must be done preferably together with the citizens .
The Convention must also not forget this .
Mr President , Commissioner , despite the major steps taken in recent years to achieve genuine European citizenship , a great deal still needs to be done to guarantee equal , fundamental rights to all the citizens .
That is the essence of the report before us , an excellent , high-quality , comprehensive report - and I would like to congratulate Mr Coelho - which is , at the same time , a kind of stock-take and revitalisation of the major project seeking to guarantee all the citizens equal opportunities , free movement , residence throughout the Community territory and free access to employment , justice and all rights , making innovative developments benefiting the citizens of third countries too .
These basic principles are complemented by the undertaking to provide all the citizens with a real job , a real house , adequate healthcare and prospects of social and other growth in addition to economic growth .
Moreover , the recognition of fundamental rights must go hand in hand with the consolidation of measures to combat xenophobia , religious discrimination and discrimination on grounds of sex , race or social condition .
A particularly interesting section is that exploring transnational methodologies for achieving practical police and judicial cooperation .
As regards these areas of cooperation , innovative proposals are also included relating to the involvement of the different groups of long-term legal immigrants .
Particularly topical - as many Members have pointed out - is the concern expressed in a section of the report at the low level of interest hitherto displayed by the European citizens in respect of the European Parliament elections .
If we encourage the development of genuine citizenship , this should be the decisive factor which will also lead to greater political awareness among the people at the time of European elections and to the many other forms of direct participation which are becoming increasingly available to all the European citizens .
It is important to make the citizens aware that European citizenship - a term which is often bandied about in this Chamber - does not replace national citizenship , which remains undiminished , retaining all its associations of cultural , historical and social roots which connect different races of peoples which , however , are united in a common destiny , the destiny of the European Union .
We cannot , therefore , accept the amendments tabled by the GUE / NGL Group , which impose a certainly excessive and dangerous acceleration on the process of integration of citizens from all the third countries , who are resident in Community territory without distinction .
This is certainly a desirable development which should be contemplated in the future - that active and passive voting rights and long-term residence permits should be granted to third-country citizens - but the time is not yet ripe for it to be fully implemented , at least for it to be implemented across the board and to include all nationalities .
A number of disparities are still present and , not least , where some third countries are concerned , there is no desire for reciprocity of this kind .
In any case , it is important that we succeed in establishing a fundamental concept : these issues fall strictly within the sphere of Community competence .
Just recently , we read in the press that some Member States appear to be claiming regulation in this field as part of their own national competence .
This would be a serious mistake : there cannot be any disparity in the ways major issues such as asylum , integration , the recognition of civil rights - including the right to vote , most importantly - and the right to citizenship are treated within the Union .
Mr President , I think the last speaker , Mr Santini , made an error which a lot of people make , confusing nationality and citizenship .
Even the notion of citizenship is distinct from being a citizen .
It is my view that citizenship derives in the first instance from a sense of responsibility which comes from within a moral framework - I am not talking specifically about a religious framework , but a moral framework of how one sees the world and one 's place in the world .
I regard myself as a citizen of the world .
I do not have a piece of paper which tells me so , but there are various conventions and laws and international rights which exist and which protect me as a citizen of the world .
It seems to me that there is a lot of work to be done in terms of developing the notion of European citizenship and it is a mistake to reduce it to the notion of political citizenship , although that is an important aspect of it .
Turnout in elections is important , but people 's identity as citizens is not confined to their political identity .
In fact many people , as we can see from the low turnouts , no longer define themselves in political terms and therefore disengage from the political process .
Many are far more interested in their identity as , for instance , fans of a football club or a particular pop star .
There are a lot of good ideas in this report .
One of the most interesting is the simple idea of a national holiday on Europe Day .
This would create a connection between Europe and the people of Europe .
It would bring home very strongly the idea that there is a benefit to being a European and being part of the European process .
As an exercise , I logged onto one of the more popular websites a few minutes before I came down here and I found 1.8 million references to citizenship .
At the top of the list were the United States , Canada and then the UK .
On the first thirty pages , I was not able to find a single site for the European Union .
It seems to me that is a mistake .
One of the things that the sites constantly emphasise is education - the education of young people .
I would ask people to bear in mind that citizenship is not defined by the passport you hold .
Mr President , how can we speak about citizenship in the European Union without mentioning the plight of tens of thousands of men and women who have even been refused the right to simply have papers , papers that would permit them to stay in the Union without being pursued by the police and exploited by unscrupulous employers ?
Many men and women have become paperless due to administrative acts , even when they have made a life for themselves in one of the countries of the European Union , often for more than five years , and they have worked there and often been much more useful to the community than a good many rich parasites .
In the name of the Members from Lutte ouvrière , I am anxious to affirm my solidarity with those lacking papers who are , in particular in France currently , protesting en masse for the regularisation of their situation .
The status of all persons without papers must be immediately regularised in order to allow these people to live with dignity , and every political , legal and civil right that the citizens of the European Union enjoy must be accorded to every immigrant worker of the European Union , whatever their country of origin .
Mr President , I find that this report on European citizenship is somewhat schizophrenic .
On the one hand , it is concerned about the steadily declining turnout for European elections , which reflects the citizens ' lack of interest and may , if it continues , and I quote , ' delegitimise the elections to the European Parliament ' .
It also states , similarly , that a European citizenship cannot be created solely from above and that a minimum level of citizen participation is required .
All this is perfectly true .
On the other hand , however , if we look for the cause of this lack of interest , we find them in the proposals of the Coelho report itself .
For example , the Opinion of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs annexed to the report asks yet again for transnational lists for European elections to be established , which would be the best way to increase the citizens ' sense of distance from the Union .
The report itself contains the traditional request to make the Charter of Fundamental Rights legally binding , which would have the distinctive feature of removing the definition of a good number of citizens ' rights from national democracies .
In relation to this , I would point out that the Charter neatly sidesteps national citizenships and does not even mention the fundamental right of citizens to express themselves democratically within their own nation .
The Coelho report also calls , in paragraph 3 , for immigrants from third countries to be granted rights which are as near as possible to those enjoyed by EU citizens .
In other words , European citizenship would be granted in practice , if not in principle , to immigrants who are not nationals of a Member State .
Could this manner of proposal make our citizens love Europe ?
I do not need a public answer from you now , ladies and gentlemen , but I would ask you to think it over .
To briefly summarise , all these proposals and a good many others that I could refer to tend to reduce or limit the rights of nations .
Even now , however , the institutions of the Union do not seem to understand the basic fact that citizens are deeply attached to their nations and by attacking or by downgrading their nations they are hurting citizens and turning them away from Europe .
In this way , even if our citizens are convinced , as we are , of the importance and need for European cooperation , it is the Union 's own attitude that turns them off Europe .
The Union must have a radical change of attitude if it wants to regain contact with its citizens .
The Convention that is meeting to prepare the IGC 2004 will afford us the opportunity in the months to come .
The proposals that result from it must give out a clear signal that Europe must be built on its nations and that it will respect their laws .
In particular , it must be clear , not only that the European citizenship does not replace national citizenships , but also that it remains subordinate to them .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Friedrich , citizenship must be seen as a contract between the state and the individual , in which the parties recognise mutual rights and obligations .
EU citizenship is a logical extension of the various long established de facto rights and obligations of various kinds between the EU and Member State citizens .
A natural step towards EU citizenship would , of course , be a binding charter clearly stating and clarifying the fundamental rights and obligations .
The charter should be seen as an important part of the principles of EU citizenship and would be at the very heart of citizenship .
The need for EU citizenship has become fully obvious in the light of the necessary restrictions on individual rights that followed the 11 September catastrophe .
The need for a developed EU citizenship thus becomes clear , a citizenship that provides a better definition of the basic contract between the individual and the EU and balances rights and restrictions in the same political decision-making system .
With every day that passes it becomes increasingly difficult to understand why some social democratic governments oppose merging the Communities and the Union , yet this is absolutely necessary in order to clarify the fundamental obligations and rights .
Without that simplification , any EU citizenship will be difficult to grasp and more or less impossible to communicate to EU citizens .
It should be remembered that the outcome of ongoing national elections could have both a positive and a negative impact on citizens ' rights .
EU citizenship could provide an important tool for explaining to European citizens what EU membership means .
However , this requires a clearer , simpler Treaty .
As the European Parliament representative on the Interinstitutional Committee on Access to Documents , I have reached an agreement with the Council representative , Mr Haarder , on information focusing directly on the citizen .
The idea is to show citizens how and where they can obtain the information that will enable them to take part in European democracy , by giving a simple summary of citizens ' rights in European daily newspapers .
The funds for this are there but it is taking far too long to mobilise the political will .
This could be a simple way of creating an understanding of citizenship .
Consequently , it would be unacceptable if this proposal were delayed just now when it is so important for European democracy .
The Commission , which is responsible for organising the next interinstitutional meeting , should therefore promptly - very promptly - organise such a meeting to ensure that Europe 's democratic progress is not delayed .
Finally , I should like to thank Mr Coelho for his very constructive contribution to the democratic development of Europe , in which EU citizenship plays such a central role .
Ever since the Edinburgh summit in 1992 , the architects of the EU have been cultivating the view that European citizenship is not a substitute for national citizenship , but , on the contrary , that it supplements and broadens national citizenship by creating ' EU rights ' .
That is a distortion of the truth .
In the same breath as citizens ' rights are defined as ' European rights ' , taking precedence over rights based on national legislation , in precisely the same breath , national citizenship is undermined .
European citizenship is purely and simply integration through the back door .
This political pickpocketing is at once antidemocratic and repressive .
What is being proposed is the absorption of vital parts of countries ' legal systems , including criminal law and the police , into European citizenship .
The belief seems to be that these genuine values - democracy and the rule of law - can be acquired for the DKK 2 000 million which the Commission has just allocated to strengthen the legitimacy of the European institutions .
' There is something rotten ' - not in Denmark , but in the European Union .
It is obvious that third-country nationals should have the same rights as Member States ' nationals , but we do not need this measure to make the fact clear .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am delighted to have the opportunity today to discuss the issue of citizenship of the Union with you , precisely at a time when we are celebrating the tenth anniversary of its creation .
I believe that the objectives , which in 1992 ensured that European citizenship was included in the Treaty of the Union , have not lost any of their relevance .
Citizenship of the Union is , of course , a source of legitimacy for the process of European integration and strives to increase the participation of the citizens in the construction of a Community-centred Europe .
Furthermore , citizenship is a crucial factor in the establishment , amongst the citizens , of the concept of belonging to the European Union and of having a genuine common European identity .
This identity is constructed , however , on respect for diversity , because national diversity is an integral part of the specific European identity .
Therefore , it neither replaces nor conflicts with national identity , but rather complements it .
I shall take this opportunity to express my thanks for the report that has been presented today on the Third Commission Report on Citizenship of the Union and I should like , in particular , to congratulate the rapporteur , Carlos Coelho , not only on the quality of his report , but also on the way in which he structured the issue and on the clarity of the political objectives that he has attached to it .
I fully agree that the concept of European citizenship must be implemented in all its dimensions , be they political , administrative , judicial , social or economic .
We have reached a position in which citizens ' rights are , in the Member States of the Union , broadly respected , but in which there are still some legal discrepancies and practical obstacles to the full expression of European citizenship .
We must further strive to resolve these discrepancies and obstacles , which prevent the citizens from enjoying their rights as European citizens .
One of the aspects highlighted in the report is the lack of information , one result of which is the low level of awareness of European citizenship .
What is required is for European Union policy in the field of information and communication to be strengthened by all available means .
This observation made by the rapporteur is shared by the Commission , whose report repeatedly highlights the need to better inform the citizens on the rights to which they are entitled .
I believe it is common knowledge that the Commission adopted , last July , a new approach to information and communication policy and I believe that this approach is necessary to counter the lack of knowledge and the apathy of European citizens about the debate on Europe 's future .
Nevertheless , the European institutions clearly cannot , on their own , communicate with the 370 million people who make up the Union , or , if you wish , with the around 500 million following enlargement .
The Member States must share responsibility for the provision of information , for dialogue with the citizens and for their recognition because European integration concerns them above all .
And , as I understand it , there are now signs that the Member States have the political will to work together , thereby proving that there is no incompatibility between the feeling of national belonging and the feeling of participation in the European project .
It could , therefore , be considered that the ' Europe Direct ' service , created by the Commission , is a success .
Since 1998 this service has provided information on a whole range of matters concerning the European Union , thereby contributing to people knowing their rights and opportunities as citizens of the Union and knowing how to take advantage of them .
Small steps are often , in practice , the most important ones .
Such as , for example , the creation of the universal green number for ' Europe Direct ' , which enables citizens anywhere in the fifteen Member States to access an operator who speaks their national language and who can answer any question they wish to ask about the European Union .
With regard to information , I should further like to add that the Commission will shortly be studying how to raise citizens ' awareness of citizenship of the Union and of connected rights through a specific Eurobarometer survey .
The survey will be launched with the title ' Ten Years of European Citizenship ' and the results will be used as the basis for future information and communication measures in the field of citizenship .
The Commission wanted to include a framework for the structure of fundamental rights in its third report , specifically the proclamation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights in December 2000 .
This caused - I admit - some delay in meeting the initial deadline for submitting the third report , but I think that the importance of the Charter fully justified this .
Carlos Coelho 's report states that the Charter places European citizenship at the heart of the Union 's activities .
I fully agree .
I also agree with the report 's call for the Convention on the future of Europe to define the binding legal status that the Charter of Fundamental Rights should be given .
I believe that the most important debate to take place in the Convention , capable of producing real results to bring the citizens and the European institutions closer together , is not so much the debate on the institutions , but will perhaps be the debate on the Charter of Fundamental Rights , on its inclusion in the Treaties and on its legally binding nature .
The citizens might remain distant when institutional questions are discussed , such as power-sharing between the bodies of the Union and legislative procedures , but are decidedly interested when it comes to knowing what rights they have and how the Union can meet their expectations .
I also hope that the Council is able to approve the Commission proposal on reorganising the right to freedom of movement .
This is the correct test to show that a freedom that is at the very heart of European citizenship has the same status of effectiveness and of political dignity as the freedom of movement of goods , capital or services .
I note , ladies and gentlemen , the suggestion that the Members of the future Convention should decide on the statute of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Given that I am one of the representatives of the Commission in the Convention , together with my colleague Michel Barnier , I shall not fail to express my support for the Charter having the strong statute that you wish to see .
The next item is the debate on the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0255 / 2002 ) by Mrs Korhola , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive providing for public participation in respect of the drawing up of certain plans and programmes relating to the environment and amending with regard to public participation and access to justice Council Directives 85 / 337 / EEC and 96 / 61 / EC ( 5475 / 2 / 2002 - C5-0227 / 2002 - 2000 / 0331 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , this directive is a second pillar in the legislative process , designed to amend EU legislation to take account of the Aarhus Convention .
The first pillar concerned the transparency of environmental information , and it is currently going through the conciliation procedure .
We are still awaiting a Commission proposal on the third pillar .
Concerning both the first and second pillar , it must be said that the Council has shown a very positive attitude , and over several presidential terms I have found that there is genuine commitment and good will on its part .
With regard to this directive also , the Council has already approved many elements of Parliament 's first reading and now Parliament is to adopt many elements of the common position .
Nevertheless , problems do remain and it would appear that this directive will also only take on its final shape in conciliation .
In the general approach alone there are already differences .
The Commission proposal and the Council 's common position are based on the ' quick fix ' principle , while Parliament has wanted a broader horizontal approach .
It is nevertheless clear that it is not Parliament 's aim to defend its amendments to the letter but rather ensure that there remain no grey areas in EU legislation , where public participation would be justified , but not possible .
The importance of the report before us cannot be overemphasised .
Unusually , it directly affects all citizens in the EU Member States and candidate countries .
The public will now have the invaluable right to participate in decision-making on the environment .
This is also an important tool for the environment , and one which may improve the quality of decision-making on the environment considerably .
For these reasons , this is a tool that must be closely guarded .
It would be in nobody 's interest - and least of all in the interests of the environment - if this tool were to be used for defending selfish interests , for politicking by opposition groups or to cause wilful mischief .
As rapporteur I have been conscious of the fact that the tool now being created may be abused .
Furthermore , the authorities in Member States must be aware of the risks involved in national implementation .
Moreover , that alone is not enough .
The environmental organisations must also know they have an immense responsibility not to allow pettiness to inflate the importance of the rights granted to our citizens and the special status accorded the organisations themselves .
There is also the problem of Mr and Mrs Nimby or the ' Not in my backyard ' syndrome .
But I myself have tried to avoid this by stressing the importance , insofar as it has been in your rapporteur 's power to do so , of arguing the case and the high quality of participation .
Opposition alone and the self-centred defence of one 's own territory cannot be sufficient .
The tool now being created for this is too important and the resources used for its creation too invaluable .
For all these reasons I wish to defend the rights of our citizens to participate in decision-making on the environment and I am , moreover , prepared to repel any opportunity to abuse this tool .
I also want to remind everyone of my solution , which was rejected by Parliament at first reading , which Member States might yet consider when they implement the directive nationally .
In it I hold that the public as a whole have the right to express an opinion but the right to access to justice only applies to that section of the public affected by a decision taken .
My solution is unusual in that it would have simultaneously benefited both those citizens who were genuinely keen to participate and the authorities , and the parties responsible for the relevant projects .
Firstly the work of the authorities would be easier as they would not need to specify beforehand the parties concerned and , at the same time , the likelihood of omission when the parties were being heard would be removed .
Secondly , the ready cause for complaint of those who want to apply the brakes would go : the party was not heard .
Above all , however , it would mean the quality of participation would be highlighted and the importance attached to hearing Mr and Mrs Nimby would decline .
A precondition of the ratification of the Aarhus Convention in the EU is that the working practices and procedures of the EU 's institutions should be revised as necessary .
In addition it is especially important for the Commission to submit a proposal on the third pillar regarding review and access to justice as speedily as possible , as this is surely the most problematic of them all .
Unfortunately , the Commission has not been able , despite its promises , to put forward a clear timetable and course of action in respect of the measures that need to be taken for ratification .
Mr President , Commissioner , this report has come back to Parliament for second reading . It has already been the subject of frank and , at times , lively debate between those who call for the citizens to be fully entitled to be involved in certain structural policies at the decision-making stage and those who feel that the political , technical and administrative institutions set up to perform the task of decision-making should have a greater degree of competence and autonomy .
In its response to first reading , the Council scaled down the rapporteur 's proposals somewhat , appearing to consider them to be too advanced and too open to a form of democratic participation that could slow down the process of drawing up texts or which , as the rapporteur herself said just now , could open the door to exaggerated , authoritarian or distorted interpretations .
In short , the Council intends to confer on the citizens ' organisations a consultative role - an important role but not a decision-making role - giving the legislators elected to take decisions on the basis of the input of civil society sole responsibility for doing so but without rendering it impossible for exceptions to be made .
The rapporteur proposes various forms of legal review where the positions of the citizens and the decisions of the relevant authority do not tally , particularly where the subject involves major issues such as security , the environment and public health .
As regards the need to ensure that the Member States have the possibility of exemption from the directive in the event of an emergency , there is a specific amendment providing this loophole with due regard for subsidiarity and for specific environmental conditions or crises .
As far as public participation is concerned , the rapporteur has resurrected a number of amendments already rejected by the Council , clearly hoping that the role of the citizens and their lawfully established organisations in the drawing up of environmental decisions will be reconsidered .
Many amendments were accepted by the Council , and some of them propose again particularly important , not to say essential principles .
Here are some of them .
Most importantly , there is the principle that the public must be furnished with the necessary information through electronic media providing access to the institutions ' documents .
Secondly , the public must receive , inter alia , information about the right to participate in decision-making in the forms and quantities permitted - we touched on this just now . Thirdly , the public must be entitled to express both minor and far-reaching comments and adopt positions without prejudice to any options .
A further obligation is placed upon the competent authorities , and that is to make reasonable efforts - as the document states - to reply to the public individually or collectively , and an obligation is placed upon the Member States too , to adopt practical , tangible measures on the review procedures and to make available to the public all the necessary information on how to obtain access to both administrative and judicial review procedures .
This is to make it possible for the citizens to defend any grounds they may have for dissent throughout the judgment process and uphold an opinion which is different from that of the competent authority .
This line of reasoning may , of course , be interpreted in different ways in different countries , depending on the level of democracy permitting public participation and , above all , protecting the organisations through which the public exercises this right of participation .
Two things appear to be particularly important : firstly , the provision of access to cooperation and to the drawing up of legislative documents , and secondly , the provision of access to legal review throughout the judgment process in the event of differences .
In this way , we are following faithfully the basic philosophy of Voltaire , who said , ' I may disagree with what you say , but I will defend to the death your right to say it ' .
Even if Europe is not improving our knowledge of law , it is , at least , teaching us some philosophy .
Mr President , on Monday a series of petitions - as many as 200 - for July and August was noted in the Minutes of the first hour of the sitting .
According to the statistics of the Ombudsman and the Committee on Petitions , 40 % of these petitions concern failure to comply with Community Law on the environment .
Mr President , if these measures for public participation in drawing up certain plans and programmes concerning the environment were really put into practice , if we really complied with the Directive on the public right to information , I am sure that a significant number of these petitions , which are noted each week in the Minutes of the sitting , would probably not reach here , because what we are seeing in the Committee on Petitions , where all these petitions arrive , is that not only is the public not allowed to participate in these environmental programmes , but it is sometimes denied the information that the Directive on the right to information should guarantee it .
Mr President , I think that if we manage to have the amendments from this second reading adopted , and this third pillar of the legal aspects the rapporteur talked about is discussed in Parliament and ends well , we shall manage to reduce this list of petitions on the environment at each sitting .
Mr President , I was listening to the debate here just now on European Union citizenship , and at least the latter part of the discussion , which I had the opportunity to follow , showed that we often understand the concept of citizenship as something rather abstract in this way , something handed down from on high , perhaps , which we must do no more than inform the people of .
At least I was not aware of anyone mentioning the fact that the right to participate in decision-making is an absolutely essential aspect of citizenship .
In this respect the report under discussion , which Eija-Riitta Korhola has skilfully taken through from the Committee stage to plenary session , is absolutely indispensable , as the fact that the European Union has begun to implement the Aarhus Convention shows that it is understood in the Union that , at least in environmental matters , we can make a start and give our citizens the right to participate .
Mrs González Álvarez also raised a very important matter . She said that the public would have far fewer complaints about non-compliance with Community legislation if they had the right to participate in decision-making relating to it right from the early stages , and this is precisely what this report is about .
It is absolutely essential that this right to participate should be applied widely to the parties concerned .
In this regard it is important that Amendment No 10 actually goes through .
I have no doubt that it will , but it does state that non-governmental organisations shall also be deemed to meet the definition of what constitutes a party concerned .
I took note of the fact that , unfortunately , the final document produced by the United States of America and the group of developing countries at the Johannesburg summit on sustainable development that has just ended made no mention of Principle 10 of the Rio Conference , which specifically concerns the right of the public to participate in decision-making on the environment .
It is even more important that the European Union should swiftly bring the Aarhus Convention into force .
Now we will discuss the second part of the Convention which deals with the right to participate in decision-making .
The rapporteur said that the right to participation can be abused .
Unfortunately , however , much too much is made of this subject of abuse .
In fact when the public actually start to exercise the rights they have , those who could not care less about their opinions all too readily claim those rights are being abused .
I believe that when people are granted the right to participate they will also exercise that right responsibly and will eventually enjoy even fuller rights as citizens and that it will not occur to them to upset or terrorise the decision-making process .
That is perhaps more an unfounded concern on the part of the decision-maker .
Mr President , after having supported public access to environmental information in May 2000 , today we back public participation in environmental programmes .
The objective remains the same , that is to say to make decisions more transparent and to allow the citizens concerned to bring a civil action .
But let us avoid hindering public lawsuits with the burden of costly inquiries .
In our opinion , the limits of the directive must be based on Amendment No 3 , that is to say , ' effective public participation in the taking of decisions enables the public to express , and the decision-maker to take account of , opinions and concerns which may be relevant to those decisions , thereby increasing the accountability and transparency of the decision-making process and contributing to public support for the decisions taken . '
In the same manner , Member States must , in accordance with their national legislation , be able to exclude these provisions from programmes affecting national defence .
Furthermore , certain amendments approved by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy are not acceptable as they stand .
Providing the public with information relating to decision-making is , in my opinion , a matter for citizens ' associations .
Achieving widespread public participation in the entirety of Community legislation seems utopian .
If this is the case we will soon witness a marked increase in litigation .
This type of procedure should be reserved for certain directives , such as Seveso or Natura 2000 .
In this particular case , owners affected by zoning have not even been consulted .
The concept of the public has also not been defined , this wide and all-embracing concept ranging from a physical person to an association , as well as the more specific concept of the public concerned .
In my opinion , only the public concerned should be included .
Yet , the directive recognises non-governmental organisations working for the protection of the environment as having an interest in this context , which considerably increases the scope of our measures to the detriment of public prerogatives .
Mr President , my colleague , Mrs Wallström , is attending the World Summit on Sustainable Development .
Therefore it is an honour for me to participate in this debate on her behalf .
The first meeting of the parties to the Aarhus Convention on access to information , public participation and access to justice in environmental matters will take place at the end of October .
The Community will not yet be in a position to participate as a party to that convention .
We can , however , show that we take our commitments seriously and make good progress in adopting the implementing legislation .
This common position deals with the second pillar of the convention , public participation in environmental decision-making .
In addition , other recent Community legislation already incorporates the principles of the Aarhus Convention concerning public participation and the common position on access to environmental information is under consideration .
The Commission will present the remaining proposals , notably on access to justice and the application of the convention to Community institutions , by the end of the year .
The present common position , with one exception , provides a good basis to enable this directive on public participation to be adopted fairly soon .
The Commission is happy that the rapporteur and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy as a whole share this positive view and also support the Commission 's position on the outstanding issue .
On the main amendments tabled for the vote tomorrow , the Commission 's position is as follows .
First of all , public participation in the updating of permits under the IPPC directive .
I will start with the exception where the Commission is not happy with the common position .
Under the Aarhus Convention , public participation is as a rule required , not only for the issue but also for the updating of permits for the activities covered .
This was provided for in the Commission 's proposal concerning permits under the IPPC Directive , where such updating is a key revision .
The common position largely restricted this requirement and its wording leaves a wide discretion to the Member States and the competent authorities in charge of updating permits .
This will lead to widely divergent practice and legal uncertainty and will potentially mean that public participation is possible only in a few cases when permits are being updated , rather than being the rule .
Amendment No 15 requires public participation for the most relevant cases of permit updates , which are those covered by Article 13 of the IPPC directive .
While the Commission proposal included permit updates as such , the amendment is in line with Article 6 ( 10 ) of the Aarhus Convention , which allows for the rules on public participation to apply updates where appropriate .
The Commission considers public participation in permit updates covered by Article 13 appropriate .
The wording of the common position fails to identify where public participation is deemed to be appropriate , leaving it entirely to the discretion of the Member States .
The Commission therefore fully supports Amendment No 15 .
Regarding the extension of the public participation provisions to cover other Community legislation plans and programmes which may have a significant effect on the environment , Amendment No 18 proposes extending considerably the scope of Article 2 to cover other Community legislation , plans and programmes , which may have a significant effect on the environment or health .
The Commission cannot accept this amendment , nor can it accept related Amendments Nos 1 , 2 and 6 to the recitals , for the following reasons .
To the extent that the wording refers to public participation in the preparation of Community legislation , the present directive is not the correct legal instrument .
In addition , public participation in the preparation of legislation is referred to as soft law under the Aarhus Convention .
In regard to plans and programmes , the amendment would considerably deviate from the original approach to cover clearly identified plans and programmes in the environmental field .
It would not provide sufficient legal certainty as to which plans and programmes are covered and would duplicate measures in different pieces of legislation .
In respect of plans and programmes in other sectors likely to have significant environmental effects , Directive 2001 / 42 / EC on strategic environmental assessment already incorporates measures of particular relevance .
This directive provides for an environmental assessment of relevant plans and programmes in the integration sectors .
As part of the assessment , public participation will take place in line with the Aarhus Convention .
I turn now to access to justice .
The Commission cannot accept Amendment No 10 providing for access to justice in relation to plans and programmes covered by the directive , or Amendment No 5 on the related recital .
Article 9 ( 2 ) of the Aarhus Convention explicitly requires access to justice in relation to projects that may have a significant effect on the environment .
This is dealt with under the common position .
In relation to plans and programmes , access to justice is not explicitly required .
It would also be inconsistent to apply it to certain plans and programmes when it is not provided for in the case of those covered by the directive on strategic environmental assessment .
However , the Commission is preparing a legislative proposal on access to justice to fully implement the third pillar of the Aarhus Convention .
In the framework of that proposal , the content of Amendment No 10 could more appropriately be addressed in a horizontal way .
On the amendments concerning information about the outcome of public participation and practical information concerning administrative and judicial review , the Commission would like to point out that the provisions on public participation have to be practicable to allow smooth implementation in the different administrative systems of the Member States .
Amendments Nos 7 , 13 , 14 and 16 require the competent authority to make reasonable efforts to reply to the public and to ensure that information provided about decisions taken includes practical direction concerning the procedure for seeking review .
The common position already incorporates the obligation to inform the public about the final decision and the underlying reasons and considerations and provides for appropriate information to be made available on the review procedures .
Requiring more would constitute a disproportionate administrative burden and hamper effective public participation .
The Commission therefore cannot accept those amendments .
To summarise our position on the amendments : the Commission can accept Amendments Nos 15 and 19 .
Amendments Nos 3 , 4 , 11 and 12 can be accepted in principle .
The Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 5 to 10 , 13 , 14 , nor Amendments Nos 16 to 18 .
To conclude , I would like to emphasise that it is in our common interest , which is the interest of the European citizens , to have this directive enter in force swiftly so that public participation can be fully integrated into administrative practice .
Thank you very much , Mr Vitorino .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 10.55 p.m. )
Recent serious problems concerning food safety in the EU
The next item is the Commission statement on the recent serious problems concerning food safety in the European Union .
Mr President , I welcome this opportunity to report on the recent contamination of the feed and food chain with medroxy-progesterone acetate , or MPA as it is commonly known .
I must stress that the Commission takes this incident very seriously indeed .
It is simply unacceptable that hormones should find their way into the food and feed chains .
So , having found ourselves in this regrettable situation , what action did we take ?
First , my services called an emergency meeting of the Standing Committee on the Food Chain and Animal Health on 10 July , with further meetings following on 16 and 24 July . These were in addition to the continuous contacts between the Commission services and their counterparts in the Member States .
These efforts were very successful in reducing the risk to public health to a minimum .
However , this success was achieved at a very high cost .
Very substantial quantities of food and feed had to be traced and destroyed . The impact has been particularly severe in the Netherlands .
Investigations into the factors which allowed the contamination to take place are , of course , ongoing .
However , two factors in particular already stand out : firstly , the application of Community legislation on the movement and disposal of pharmaceutical waste , and secondly , the carelessness of certain feed producers in their selection of raw material suppliers .
Investigations into the onward distribution of the contaminated glucose syrup revealed that it had been delivered to feed mills and traders and , to a limited extent , to the food industry .
The contaminated feed was produced mostly for pigs , but also , to a much lesser extent , for cattle , poultry , zoo animals and pets .
This contaminated feed could be separated into two groups : a lesser quantity of highly contaminated feed distributed to 57 farms in the Netherlands and larger quantities with a low level of contamination .
In response to the situation , the Standing Committee agreed the following measures . All animals fed with highly contaminated feed would be kept under strict official control .
Member States would test individual animals fed with the highly contaminated feed and only release them for consumption if results confirmed that MPA could not be detected .
The authorities in the Netherlands chose to destroy pigs fed with the highly contaminated feed , thus removing them entirely from the food chain .
All samples from animals fed with the low contamination feed tested negative for the presence of MPA and the restriction was therefore lifted .
Several hundred samples of glucose syrup , molasses and feed have been analysed and , as a result , thousands of tonnes of contaminated raw materials and feeding stuffs have been recalled , seized and destroyed .
The next meeting of the Standing Committee is planned for 11 September .
At this meeting , the measures taken by the Member States in relation to the MPA contamination will be reviewed .
However , we can already conclude that the measures were successful in limiting the potential risk to the public .
They were also very successful in averting any unilateral restrictions by Member States or third countries on trade , particularly from the Netherlands .
Clearly we have to learn the lessons from the contamination and avoid any repetition .
At the Agriculture Council of 15 July 2002 , I repeated my call for the Member States ' competent authorities for food and feed to exercise stricter control to ensure a high level of consumer health protection .
Feed and food operators need to be more aware of their responsibilities in this area .
We all consider the food law a major step forward for the protection of human health .
In that context , the responsibilities of feed and food operators are clearly established .
Feed operators must ensure that the raw materials they buy are safe .
In the very near future the Commission will be proposing a major reform of the Community 's system of official controls , in order to create a harmonised , coordinated and more effective system of controls on food and feed .
In addition , the Food and Veterinary Office is urgently investigating the operation and control of the animal feed sector .
Its aim will be to pinpoint how recent contamination incidents have been allowed to occur and to identify the action that needs to be taken to prevent similar incidents arising in the future .
Furthermore , in order to complete the legal framework for the entire feed sector , the Commission will present a new proposal on feed hygiene at the earliest opportunity .
We intend to put forward general hygiene rules for the production , distribution and feeding of animals and also to enlarge the scope of the registration system for feed operations .
Under the current arrangements , only establishments dealing with certain feed additives are registered .
Clearly this is not sufficient to ensure traceability of all feed materials .
In this context , a positive list of feed materials is being looked at with a view to increasing consumer protection , as Parliament itself has requested .
I am pleased to say that the feasibility study you requested is nearly complete .
You will receive the report with our analysis before the end of this year .
At the same time , the question arises as to whether Community legislation in relation to the waste sector is sufficiently stringent and properly implemented .
I would remind you that had existing waste legislation been correctly applied in the case of MPA , it would have prevented such an incident .
I alerted my colleague , Mrs Wallström , as soon as it became apparent that the problem involved pharmaceutical waste .
Discussions have taken place with waste experts from the Member States and are continuing .
One lesson we can learn from this incident is the need for closer coordination and cooperation between the authorities responsible for the waste sector and those responsible for feed and food safety .
The authorities of the Member States involved in this affair have been asked to provide all relevant information to enable the case to be assessed from an environmental point of view .
On the basis of that assessment , the Commission will take any further action deemed necessary .
Finally , it goes without saying that incidents such as this only serve to undermine our efforts to restore consumer confidence in our food supply .
We need to redouble our efforts , in terms not just of legislation but also better enforcement and control , to make such incidents a thing of the past .
Mr President , food safety has been high on our parliamentary menu for the past three years .
We have had scares and scandals in Europe on olive oil , contaminated wine , mineral water , listeria , salmonella , E. coli , BSE , dioxins , sludge and slurry .
They all concerned our constituents and exercised our legislative minds .
Now , once again , there is a problem with hormones .
We discussed and debated the Food Safety White Paper and went on to pass legislation on food and feed and on the establishment of the European Food Safety Authority .
Now , our media have been full of new food scandals .
50 000 Dutch pigs condemned to be slaughtered because they were contaminated by illegal feedstuffs - illegal because of contamination by MPA hormones in feed additives .
The cost to the Netherlands alone is immense , tens of millions of euros .
The problem probably came , as we heard , from waste water from an American-owned pharmaceutical company in Ireland , sent by an Irish waste disposal firm to a Belgian reprocessing plant that is now bankrupt .
That firm supplied glucose syrup or treacle to Dutch feed manufacturers .
All 4 000 pigs were then exported from the Netherlands to Belgium .
The banned hormone has been found in pigfeed in Germany .
300 German farms were banned from selling milk or animals .
But pork was sold , was processed and has been eaten by humans and of course MPA in humans can cause infertility .
Some of the syrup , too , ended up with soft drink manufacturers .
Some of the feed ended up in Denmark , Spain , France and possibly Luxembourg and Britain .
One of the messages the Commissioner has highlighted is that we need coordination , not only between governments but between the directorates of the Commission .
I welcome what he said about talking to Mrs Wallström .
Commissioner , what is the point of our passing laws if they are not enforced ?
Where were the checks and the monitoring ?
What , incidentally , are the Commission 's new proposals on controls ?
Was this negligence or was it a criminal attempt to increase the weight of pigs by illegal means ?
How often is a blind eye turned to wrongdoing ?
A banned carcinogenic herbicide was found in grain fed to organic chickens in Germany in June .
Yet exports of organic chicken or eggs from Germany were not banned .
I have faith in our new food safety measures .
I have faith in our new authority and I wish it could be set up faster .
But it will only be effective if we have proper enforcement throughout the European Union .
( Applause from the right )
Mr President , over the past few years - since 1996 , I would say - I have told this House at least five times that animal feed should not be a dustbin for cheaply disposing of all kinds of rubbish .
It is surprising to find that such a simple statement never ceases to be topical and is never a source of boredom , given that it remains so topical .
Why should that be ?
Because of our agricultural policy , of course .
Since we try to produce everything as cheaply as possible , it makes sense to produce cattle feed as cheaply as possible too .
I once said that the manufacturers and we ourselves should try to picture sitting down in front of a plate of animal feed with a knife and fork on either side - just imagine what that would look like !
Mr Bowis just pointed out that this is not just a matter of carelessness here but of criminal intent .
He is quite right .
To describe storing animal feed in a former chemical works as carelessness is to put it mildly .
I do not know what makes people do things like that or allow them to happen .
What are we to think when a waste disposal company produces glucose syrup as a parallel activity ?
Should we not perhaps be somewhat sceptical when we come across an Irish company wanting to dispose of its waste - to which there can be no objections as such - and we see that it wants to do this in Belgium and that the waste reprocessing company also produces glucose syrup ?
The waste that it is processing comes from washing the coating on contraceptive pills , which of course contains sugar .
No one actually noticed this and we all found it quite normal , but when it actually came to light in the course of the monitoring process it caused enormous excitement .
If we do not start to change the system in some way , we will carry on having this debate here at least three times a year .
So what can we change about the system ?
I am grateful to Commissioner Byrne for pinpointing some ideas .
Yes , we need tough legislation on feed hygiene .
Yes , we need to separate the production of animal and plant-based feeds .
Yes , we need stricter approval procedures for feed producers , with a registration system for factories producing animal feeds .
And yes , every manufacturer of feedingstuffs must employ a biochemist at his plant full-time and not just source one from somewhere else .
These are all commonplace ideas that we could all suggest , of course .
What is the situation with legislation on waste ?
Yes , there is indeed proper waste legislation .
Are there proper controls in the Member States ?
Apparently neither the country of origin nor the receiving country carries out controls .
Will the Commission go to the European Court of Justice more quickly ?
Will countries which are obviously ignoring their control obligations under the existing legislation be prosecuted more quickly and suffer appropriate penalties ?
What is the position as regards controls in the Member States ?
Since the BSE crisis , we have established that the real Bermuda Triangle within the European Union is the system of controls in the Member States .
We should be obliging all Member States to , at last , make the process more transparent and to tell us how many people are carrying out controls on what , when , where and with what result . That can just be one page , nice and transparent , available to anyone , and on the Internet if you like .
Is that too much to ask ?
No , it is not too much to ask !
We have been saying for years - since 1996 - that we want a positive list of substances and additives in animal feed .
Commissioner Byrne told us that the feasibility study is almost complete , so we should be able to start soon .
I am grateful for that .
However , if we do not all accept that up to now we have been consistently turning a blind eye so that animal feed can be produced cheaply and so that meat can be produced cheaply , then we will still be encouraging firms to dump all kinds of waste , anything that can no longer be recycled in any other way , in animal feed .
That is why we need to have quality requirements for animal feeds .
We need to have other controls on animal protein .
And in our role as consumers , we ourselves also need to consider what we are consuming and how , and what we are willing to pay for products .
Mr President , food safety will , without a doubt , be high on the agenda in the coming years .
If we consider the recent scandals , the big question is whether the Commission would have been able to prevent them .
The Food and Veterinary Office in Dublin has been in existence for a number of years .
What kind of inspections does it carry out precisely ?
How often are they carried out ?
Is there room for improvement ?
Would the Commission be able to comment on this ?
The imports of food , of meat from other countries , have already been mentioned .
Does the Food and Veterinary Office in Dublin have sufficient staff to inspect them ?
I should also like to raise the issue of the Food Safety Authority .
Once this is fully up and running , it will need to analyse all the production processes and see whether they can be improved .
This Authority will also need to issue recommendations to the Food and Veterinary Office in Dublin about the way in which the inspection procedures can be improved still further .
In fact , cooperation with the Member States will also be required .
However , the most important thing is for the Office to perform its task of implementing existing legislation well .
In the light of increasing liberalisation , we will obviously be facing ever growing imports and , in my view , ever greater risks as a result .
Another issue is production in Europe itself .
The idea that the entire production chain is to be monitored is increasingly taking root in different countries .
This is referred to as ' integrated production ' .
Why does the Commission not prescribe any standards in this respect ?
What exactly is integrated production in a European context ?
How can we monitor every link in the production chain ?
There is legislation in Europe governing organic production in which this is laid down .
In a slightly different area , there is legislation in Europe which defines precisely what regional products are .
Why , therefore , do we not have legislation which identifies what integrated production is by means of a quality mark ?
Then we would be able to trace everything promptly .
Moreover , the European consumer would be able to express a preference for European products from European farmers .
Mr President , there is no doubt that there are a great many weaknesses in our food controls , and food safety is an unacceptably low priority .
The revision of the directive on food may help to significantly change this situation .
This is particularly necessary given the growing worldwide trend towards producing food by artificial means .
There are at present no universal controls on the value-added chain , and awareness of state food controls needs to be increased .
There will certainly be an improvement in this state of affairs if we can succeed in involving the agricultural industry , the animal feed industry and those engaged in the monitoring of food .
That will not be a simple task as those in positions of responsibility throughout the chain have a very negative attitude .
State controls are necessary , but we need to create better incentives for promoting voluntary self-regulation and self-regulation under civil law .
State controls can then focus on the high-risk companies and farms that will always exist .
It is not acceptable , when products have been placed on the market contrary to health regulations , for this to be declared the result of a production accident and the products withdrawn under covert or open buy-back schemes so that they will simply be forgotten .
As we know from past experience , it tends to be very difficult to clarify the facts of such cases rapidly and rigorously .
Compulsory reporting of what are labelled as serious health risks is clearly not enough .
In Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania 320 farms were temporarily closed because of suspected contamination with Nitrofen , but the discovery of this scandal and the attendant publicity were remarkable not so much because of the number of cases as because of the nature of the crisis .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have already observed that moments of crisis are , more often than not , moments from which policy-makers should draw lessons .
They are also moments when we learn a great deal about society .
Mrs Roth-Behrendt and Mr Bowis pointed out that , apparently , there are people in the food industry who act irresponsibly and are careless , and for whom only the gross profits , pure financial gain and greed count .
What lessons can I and my group draw from the nitrofen case in Germany and the Whyeth Pharmaceutical / Bioland case in Ireland and Belgium ?
First of all , we need to prevent products entering the human and animal food chain which originate from recycled waste , and inspection must also be stepped up , including in respect of the waste flow of the chemical and pharmaceutical industries .
In my own country - and I assume that this is the case in most - we need to work towards better cooperation between the services that monitor the food chain and the services that manage the waste flows .
I am pleased , Commissioner , that you have come to the same conclusion .
Secondly , there is a European Rapid Alert System that also applies to animal feed , and that , I believe , is functioning well at the moment .
Should we not insist that our national and regional counterparts adopt a kind of rapid alert system internally within the Member States too , and certainly in federal Member States such as Germany and Belgium where the powers are spread across different authorities ?
Thirdly , we must introduce a system of perfect traceability of raw materials that end up in the food chain .
Fourthly , and this is something which my group has advocated , we ban by law all practices that do not yield any extra nutritional value or any extra advantage to the consumer , or that are superfluous from a technical point of view .
Fifthly , it is clear that the number of inspections needs to be increased .
They must also be diversified , for we can only find something if we look for it .
This was made abundantly clear in Germany 's nitrofen case when the organic sector decided to carry out voluntary checks .
Sixthly , I would push for producer liability to play its full part .
The whole debate on environmental liability must be speeded up and we must bring it to a more rapid conclusion .
Finally , Commissioner , I would once again urge the Commission to draw up of a positive list of products allowed in cattle feed .
You have announced that this is to be the subject of a feasibility study .
I would expressly ask you what progress is being made on this matter .
Finally , there are quite a few comic characters in the food industry , and only a well-organised authority with strict inspections can rid the industry of these characters once and for all .
Mr President , there are many examples of this Parliament and the institutions responding with urgency to matters of public concern and none more so than in the area of food safety and consumer protection .
In this regard I compliment the Commissioner on his response to the most recent scare and share fully his views with regard to what has happened .
While the number of incidents proportionate to the volume of quality food produced is minimal , the negative impact on consumers is considerable .
Restoring confidence in the food chain has been a slow , tedious and indeed expensive process .
Thankfully the measures put in place are proving their effectiveness and there is now an acute awareness on the part of all involved , from producers to processors , from the retail to the catering trade , that any breach of the regulations is unacceptable and will be severely dealt with .
It is important to put on the record that , while EU consumers always had access to quality food , the effectiveness of new controls and greater transparency in the food chain provide the additional safeguards necessary to allay fears resulting from isolated incidents and indeed the unforgivable incident which this House is addressing this morning .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that you cannot control safety - you have to create it .
Listening to today 's debate on food safety , I fear that we have not come very far in recent years .
Producers and consumers have the same objective , we are all in the same boat , so it is not just consumers that are affected but the producers themselves as well .
As I see it , consumers are quite right to be alarmed by the serious problems we have had recently , the string of scandals that have already been mentioned - BSE , dioxin , Nitrofen - it is a very long list .
Ultimately , however , the weakest link in the chain is always the farmer , the producer , who has taken a battering because of the price situation .
That is why the agricultural sector has a particularly great interest in achieving high quality in the upstream market .
I am at present rapporteur on the issue of additives in animal feed .
Commissioner , I am certainly in agreement with you in calling for very stringent measures to be applied to a wide variety of additives .
We are talking here about antibiotics and cocciodiostatic drugs .
I have just been discussing this with some of your colleagues .
As a practical person , I firmly believe that we got things adequately sorted out on paper a long time ago but , in practice , when it comes to implementation and control , I regret to say that we will still have a lot of black sheep to deal with in future .
We will only make progress here if the control system involves tougher sanctions .
As I see it , those who are too slack deserve to be pilloried and should have their quota withdrawn and their production units shut down .
Only if you point the way on this with our support can pressure be exerted to restore a reasonable situation in the European Union , one in which producers and consumers can process or consume food in the knowledge that it is safe and we can maintain the high quality of food that we have in the future as well .
I would like to fully support Mrs Roth-Behrendt 's proposals , but we have spent over 20 years talking about people 's willingness to spend more money on food ; it is just that the distribution process has totally changed .
We need to be honest about the fact that many people simply cannot afford it .
They want it all .
They want not just to eat and drink , they also want to go on holiday , to travel , and so on and so forth .
That is why we have food that is virtually free .
Mr President , I am sure that the Commissioner attends these events with a heavy heart , because he is responsible not just for the food chain and the feed chain but also the worst chain of all , the contamination chain .
One of the problems we face in this House is that we often orate about how everything should be perfect without always ourselves being willing to seek the means to go with the ends : the means to allow us to have an effective FVO , which at the moment is overstretched and understaffed ; the means to have a proper process of scrutiny whereby every Member State , great or small , whether its population is a few hundred thousand or many millions , takes equal precautions and provides equal information .
That has not happened in some of the cases here and I appreciate the difficulties that the Commissioner faces as a result .
In regard to the scandal about the presence of nitrofen in grains for organic chickens , we know from information provided between May and July that not all of the Member States were informed with express speed about what had happened .
Our information is that in regard to contaminated pork - to pigs that had been fed with these appalling materials - four Member States had purchased and no doubt their citizens had consumed some of the contaminated pork before the process of control was effectively operating .
The controls are now better and , as a result of the Standing Committee on the Food Chain and Animal Health being set up in February and the evidence it collates , we can now say that we have a rapid-alert system that ought to work .
That is the Commissioner 's responsibility , so we commend him on it .
The question is whether the Member States are providing sufficient information .
Can they be trusted to bring their own rogue operators under control ?
I do not know .
I should like to hear from the Commissioner whether he believes the resources are there .
Mr Bowis said earlier that all the institutions have been dilatory and slow in setting up EFSA .
It is going to come into operation later than we had hoped .
Is that one of the reasons why we are having to wait longer to get these positive lists of feed materials and the general hygiene rules which follow from the reforms we so enthusiastically greeted last year ?
I hope that the Commissioner can tell us that proper investigations are proceeding in all the Member States as to why organisations like Bioland could perpetrate the scandals they did .
Mr President , Commissioner Byrne , animal feeds are , after all , food , and we need the positive list .
You have been quoted in the German press as saying that there are thousands of substances that need to be tested .
I hope that was a misquote , because if there really are thousands of substances added to animal feeds , that would be a scandal in itself .
The number of additives needs to be limited and that should be implemented on a restrictive basis .
After all , if the industry then comes along and says that it has forgotten a substance and makes the test available straight away , that substance can be added on .
Of course , the positive list does not mean that we have nothing to worry about .
The fact that there are people willing to dispose of toxic materials by putting them in animal feeds because that is cheaper demonstrates a criminal intent which should be punished accordingly .
That also convinces me - and I think we in this House are all agreed on this - that a simple ban is not enough .
We need to consider what substances we are banning and what happens to them next .
Mrs Roth-Behrendt has already pointed out that legislation on waste should be closely linked with controls , just as it should be linked with what we are discussing here , so that there is not any overlap .
We have repeatedly seen cases of substances that really should be destroyed finding their way into animal feeds .
However , we should not throw the baby out with the bath water - please note , Mr President !
We have already seen what can happen in the case of food waste .
We also need to establish reasonable recycling arrangements where it is appropriate to do so .
Yesterday , I visited a cat and dog food factory .
When you see the meticulous controls applied there you realise that it is not a question of controls but rather of the sanctions that can be applied by consumers wielding their purchasing power against industry .
Mr President , I wish to concur with what has been said by many of the previous speakers .
I should also like to thank the Commissioner for what he has said .
I do notice , however , that , although he is introducing a large number of measures , he fails to mention the best piece of news , namely that it was the farmers who discovered that something was wrong with their pigs , because their sows were not breeding properly .
It is down to the farmers .
This means , then , that there is a very important lesson we should draw from this , and that we should be aware that the inspection system , however effectively it has been set up , has failed thus far .
With all these fine measures that are now being proposed , I have one overriding question , and I believe that Mrs Roth-Behrendt has already mentioned it as well .
How does waste legislation relate to what we do with our cattle feed ?
Who monitors this ?
Commissioner , if you say that , according to Commissioner Wallström , if waste legislation had been enforced , we would not be facing any problems now , then I think you should ask the Irish authorities why they did not verify that these hormones landed up in a waste processor in an improper manner .
Why did they subsequently not check at the border that these hormones were being exported to a company which should raise question marks , at any rate in Belgium ?
This means , therefore , that in this respect , the Irish and the Belgians have dropped major clangers .
Mr President , why - and I am also speaking on behalf of my own country - did we fail to check these companies when we know that , in addition to manure , they also produce their own feed and that they are already shrouded in great suspicion ?
What about product liability legislation ?
I hope that those who lost out will be receiving compensation from the governments responsible .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , high-quality food is produced nowadays and it has to meet a wide range of requirements .
An enormous variety of food is on offer , including food from widely varying countries outside the European Union .
Our guiding principle should continue to be that our food should be safe and of a high quality , in order to ensure that consumers are protected .
Food is the most basic prerequisite for people 's health and quality of life .
Nevertheless , past scandals have unsettled and frightened consumers enormously .
For example , I find it irresponsible that dishonest pharmaceutical companies should dispose of hormone products through animal feed and food , turning consumers into walking rubbish bins .
I find it absolutely horrifying that metroxyprogesteronacetate is present in sugar syrup and soft drinks !
I would like to ask , Commissioner , what legal steps have now been taken to prevent this recurring in the future .
I welcome the new European Food Safety Authority as an early warning system for Europe and as an efficient crisis management system coordinated between the Commission and the Member States .
I am , however , concerned that the EU 's controls should work properly .
The network should be extended to provide better information and the reporting obligation for companies should be brought in as quickly as possible so that goods and products are withdrawn from the market if they are harmful .
What has the Commission done in the meantime to implement this , and to ensure greater transparency and traceability ?
We need to protect consumers , and that applies to imports as well .
That is why I believe it is a matter of urgent necessity to introduce control systems for food as quickly as possible in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe too , including those cases where food is already produced in accordance with European standards .
However , to allow consumers to decide for themselves what they want , we need to ensure that we have practical and clear labelling both for conventionally produced food and for genetically modified food .
I firmly believe that we need to set the course for this as soon as possible .
Mr President , for the public , health and healthy food are the top priority .
But how am I as a consumer to know if a particular food is healthy ?
Just looking certainly is not enough .
An apple with wormholes in it can be far healthier than a shiny , beautifully round apple .
The agricultural sector - and this does not just apply to Austria - professes to observe the principles of food safety , traceability and hygiene .
For me , this debate is an opportunity to champion the cause of small farms , because it is always in the big , industrialised concerns , which really have very little in common with farms , that scandals occur .
Nevertheless , small farms are still at the mercy of animal feed producers and vets who can prescribe all sorts of hormones and other drugs .
One thing is certain : the controls have not worked .
You can , of course , turn things round however you want and say , yes , we just need even stricter rules .
But if we are not even enforcing the existing rules , how are we going to cope with even stricter ones ?
It will not help at all .
Whatever legislation we enact will remain a paper tiger if we do not enforce it .
As I see it , controlling the enforcers should be a job for the Commission .
You cannot just turn your back on this problem .
Cheap food may be good for winning the next election , but it is not good for public health , and I think the public knows that too .
I would like to stress once more that strict rules and regulations and comprehensive documentation of controls are certainly important for big companies .
But it would be pointless to harass small family farms with this .
To be quite specific , very small food-processing companies need more information and motivation and less bureaucracy and documentation .
There is no denying that not only is preventing food crises extremely important for the future of farmers , it is also highly important for the future of public health in the European Union .
I believe , Commissioner , that we have not yet found the right way of achieving this .
Mr President , a number of speakers have referred to the problem of waste and waste policy .
We will have an opportunity to discuss this issue later this month in Parliament when we adopt the animal by-products regulation .
This hugely important piece of legislation will ensure that one key sector in particular , animal by-products , is better regulated .
The positive list was referred to by a number of people . I shall say something about that .
The Commission will shortly present the study which has been undertaken on the positive list . This will be presented to Parliament and our views on the feasibility of such a list will be made available for discussion here in Parliament at that time .
But we should bear in mind that a positive list would not include MPA .
It would not , therefore , have prevented the recent contamination .
MPA should not be on the list ; it will never be approved and therefore the positive list is not the full answer .
However , I recognise that a number of people in this House are anxious for progress to be made on this issue and this will be discussed in Parliament before the end of the year .
A number of people also mentioned the Food Safety Authority .
The work is ongoing there and , as we all know , the board has been established .
Further steps have been taken on the appointment of the executive director .
The board will hold its first meeting very soon on 18 September .
In relation to further progress on the Food Safety Authority , if Parliament would make the appropriations requested by the Commission available to us , this would facilitate our work .
I know that there are reasons why Parliament feels it wants to hold back this money as leverage for something else , but that may or may not be legitimate .
It does nothing to facilitate the establishment of the Food Safety Authority and ensure that it is up and running and carrying out its work .
I would appeal to Parliament to reconsider its position on these appropriations .
Some other points were raised by individual Members and I hope I can pick them all up but if I do not , please forgive me .
Mr Bowis made reference to growth promoters .
We can safely conclude that the contamination we are talking about this morning was not due to illegal use to increase the weight of pigs .
Such use , that is the use of hormones as growth promoters , is illegal .
As I have already said , the Commission will be presenting a major proposal on controls shortly .
This is aimed primarily at improving the implementation of our existing legislation .
I intend in particular to increase the penalties and the cost of non-compliance .
I think we all agree that we must make it painful and costly for Member States and producers if they fail to implement Community legislation .
Mrs Roth-Behrendt made a number of relevant points .
She is 100 % right : feed must not serve as the dustbin for waste producers .
Several of the recent major food-safety crises have originated from waste management : dioxin , the recent nitrofen crisis in Germany , sludge and now MPA and BSE .
They are all associated with the feed issue .
As I have already said , we must improve contacts between the Member States on the treatment and disposal of waste - a controversial issue in a number of Member States but , nonetheless , one that has to be addressed with courage and effectiveness .
Mr Mulder referred to the Food and Veterinary Office . It is doing a very good job in ensuring compliance with Community law .
Its reports continue to highlight the serious shortcomings in the implementation of legislation .
It could do with more resources , but that is an issue for the budgetary authority .
I am unhappy with the follow-up to the FAO 's recommendations in a number of areas .
This is why the Commission is coming forward with a new proposal to improve controls .
As I have said repeatedly , we must make it painful and costly not to respect Community law .
Mr Mulder mentioned a quality mark . This may be valuable but it has its limitations .
Like legislation , quality marks are only effective if the qualifying conditions are respected .
In the Netherlands , for instance , feed producers undertook to use only safe ingredients as part of their quality assurance scheme .
Clearly , they failed to respect this requirement .
So quality marks may be useful but they have their limitations .
Mr Whitehead referred to the rapid alert system at Community level and this has worked very effectively in relation to the recent food-safety crises .
In a number of cases - not just this one but also the nitrofen case - the system worked very effectively .
The problems have occurred at the national level .
As Mr Whitehead suggests , in the recent nitrofen crisis in Germany there were clear failings in the notification of national authorities .
Very often that occurs because of the federal structure that exists in a number of our Member States .
Mr Staes also made the point that those Member States that have a federal structure really need to look at their systems of rapid alert to ensure that they match what we have at Community level .
For instance , the Commission immediately notified Member States when it learned of this particular contamination .
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten then referred to a number of points that I would like to take up .
Commissioner Wallström and I have written to the Irish authorities requesting a full and comprehensive reply to the question marks as to their compliance with the relevant Community legislation .
This legislation requires formal notification of the movement of pharmaceutical waste , which does not appear to have happened in this instance .
In the light of the reply I expect to have from the Irish authorities later this month we will then be in a position to return to this issue .
When that reply comes in it will be examined closely and any further action that needs to be taken will be addressed at that time .
Thank you Commissioner Byrne .
The debate is closed .
The next item is the report ( A5-0224 / 2002 ) by Mrs Van Brempt , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on the Commission communication on Making a European Area of Lifelong Learning a Reality [ COM ( 2001 ) 678 - C5-0165 / 2002 - 2002 / 2073 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today we are discussing a report on an area for lifelong learning .
This report forms part of a process started a few years ago which has already received some attention at the Stockholm and Lisbon European Councils , for example .
However , it was primarily the Feira European Council that concluded that lifelong learning would be crucial to the development of our European society in terms of social cohesion , employment opportunities and suchlike .
It also called on the Member States , the Commission and Parliament to develop strategies and a policy .
It is in this framework that we now view the Commission communication and , particularly , the memorandum that was published prior to this .
I should now like to take some time to consider the areas of attention which Parliament highlights in its report .
Allow me to start with the principles on which the concept of lifelong learning should be based .
This is a matter of great importance and often discussed , but the question is : are we using the same guiding principles ?
We have already underlined a number of these principles in Parliament 's first report .
I shall outline them here very quickly .
The first is democratisation and the principle of equality - of crucial importance , in my view .
If we fail to provide better and equal access to education and training via lifelong learning , then we have failed in our objective .
Everyone knows that there is a yawning chasm between the highly qualified and the poorly qualified .
If we cannot reduce this chasm and do not succeed in doing this via lifelong learning , then we have failed .
A second crucial principle is , in fact , the right to individual personality development .
This does not only encompass lifelong learning , it also recognises the wider social value of lifelong learning .
This is about the right to work on one 's own personality development without necessarily focusing on the jobs .
In addition , we need to strike the right balance between , on the one hand , a right that we have to create for our citizens , a right that we , as a government , must be able to make reality on the basis of our own resources , and , on the other hand , the individual 's duties and responsibility .
A second vital aspect which still needs a great deal of attention - and I am addressing the Commission , in particular , here - is formal and informal learning .
Formal learning is very important in the Union , because we need to ensure that our citizens ' qualifications are also recognised in Member States other than their own and that the citizens know that their qualifications are equivalent elsewhere .
This is why the Commission has proposed the European curriculum vitae , to be replaced in due course by the portfolio system .
I welcome these , but they strike me as somewhat vague and the link with informal learning is distinctly missing .
Informal learning is precisely what this is all about .
We must ensure that we can validate , certify and also verify informal competences , or the competences acquired elsewhere , for this is , once again , the key difference between those who have a qualification and who can build on it , and those who do not have a qualification , those who have already dropped out .
We could incorporate the latter by recognising informal learning .
In this area , the Commission still has a great deal of work to do , Commissioner , for we are , in fact , nowhere at the moment .
Along with my fellow MEPs , I trust that you , together with the Member States , will develop the instruments required for this purpose .
I have already mentioned individual personality development and the fact that not only is lifelong learning is important , it is important to recognise its wider social value too .
In my first report , and now in the second report as well , I have introduced the concept of the individual learning account .
We would very explicitly ask the Commission to look into this and consider , working together with the European Investment Bank , whether we could not free up resources to invest in what is so valuable to us , namely our human capital .
I would like to finish off with a few critical remarks .
I notice that we in the Union are capable of formulating clear objectives , or even of enforcing them .
The Maastricht standard , the employment strategies and the benchmarks all prove this point .
In the field of scientific research , we have the courage to introduce a benchmark , but we are clearly lacking the political courage to do this for education and lifelong learning .
This is , in fact , causing me concern , for I do believe that it is vital that we should do this .
On a final note , I should like to say that we must find a new way of describing ' lifelong learning ' as a matter of urgency , for it sounds like a sentence .
If we have to say to our school leavers : you have done well , you have your qualifications now and you can now learn for the rest of your lives , then this will hardly motivate them .
We can write the finest speeches and adopt the finest policies , but if our people and our students refuse to cooperate , then I fear , Commissioner , that these words will not be translated into action .
And this is exactly what we need to avoid .
I therefore suggest we might need to involve a communications agency that can produce a different name for lifelong learning .
There are so many experts here that there is no need for recourse to an external office .
I am sure one of us will be able to come up with the right solution .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like , first of all , to thank the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , and particularly its rapporteur , for its commitment and also for the constructive criticism that has been made .
This report confirms , if confirmation were needed , the importance that Parliament attaches to our action in the field of lifelong learning .
I am also pleased to note that Parliament supports the broad principles that the Commission has emphasised in its communication , in particular with regard to the broad objectives that lifelong learning seeks to achieve and the need for every citizen , and I stress , every citizen , to have access to education and to lifelong learning .
We know that , today , we are far from achieving the target : only 8 % of European adults have access to lifelong learning and almost two out of ten young people leave the educational system without any qualifications .
This is an unsustainable situation common to all our Member States .
On this matter , I am relieved to note that most of the ministers are addressing this problem , which is already a scandal , before the new school year starts .
What is needed , therefore , to resolve these two problems - education and lifelong learning - is the mobilisation of all the actors involved and of the financial resources needed .
Mr President , Parliament addresses a number of points in its report .
I should like to highlight three of them : basic skills , investment and the European area of education and lifelong learning .
With regard to basic skills , our objective is clear : every European citizen must have these skills in order to be able to learn , work and live in the knowledge-based society .
I say ' live ' because personal development and the capacity to play a role in our society , in our democracies are also important .
I am thinking , in particular , of the most disadvantaged , who also have to learn to read , write and count .
We know , however , that illiteracy is still a major problem and that the main obstacle to social integration , as Mrs Hermange 's report also emphasised , is this lack of basic knowledge .
I shall also add to this basic knowledge the ' digital divide ' between those who have access to the new technologies and those who do not .
Lastly , I should like , if I may , to return to one of my favourite themes : the failure to acquire foreign language skills and the lack of personal and social skills .
The Member States and the Commission are currently working on the issue of basic skills by implementing the work programme on objectives for education and training systems .
Together , we have identified the basic skills needed and there will be an exchange of best practices in order to see , together , what works , what does not work , what can done by certain people and what must be worked on by everyone .
The conclusions of this work will be included in the interim report which the Education Council and the Commission present at the European Council in spring 2004 .
Mr Chairman of the Committee on Culture , as promised , your committee will be involved in this .
My second point is funding .
This is a delicate matter , as you know , for which the Member States are largely responsible .
If we want to create a genuine system of lifelong learning , if we want to translate our political ambitions into practical actions , we , not only the Member States but also the social partners , will clearly have to spend more .
It is indeed true , Mrs Van Brempt , that where lifelong learning is concerned , we are leaving the framework of formal education and entering that of informal education , and , as a result , are working with partners which are not traditionally academic .
We must , therefore , start by defining national strategies .
In this field , the Member States have made some progress , especially those which lagged the furthest behind .
What needs to be done now is to improve the coherence of the strategies - a coherence which is , most of the time , I am bound to say , lacking - and to translate these strategies into practical actions .
This is where we must develop the partnerships that you underline in your report .
Because lifelong learning is a shared responsibility , national strategies must be the result of agreements at all levels , including at the local level , and between all operators , in particular the social partners .
Unfortunately , attempts to achieve this are very inconsistent and not nearly forceful enough .
My third point concerns the European area .
Although responsibility for implementing these policies falls primarily to the Member States , the Community itself has a role to play in creating a European area of education and lifelong learning .
An area in which citizens , whoever they are and whatever country they come from , can transfer their skills and their qualifications from one country to another , for the purpose of studying , training , working , getting involved or just living .
We now know , and we have already discussed this on several occasions , that a number of obstacles to the creation of such an area exist , mainly with regard to the recognition of qualifications .
A great deal of progress has been made in this field , however , and rest assured , ladies and gentlemen , that the Commission is working on this , to ensure that we achieve the recognition of qualifications and that , especially in the field of vocational training , we are able to open up new perspectives and use new common working methods .
A political initiative has been taken to strengthen cooperation between Member States in the field of vocational training .
This is generally known as the Bruges process , because it is in the beautiful city of Bruges that national ministers and the Commission decided to adopt this approach .
Various projects are currently underway , such as that established by the former French Minister , Mr Mélenchon , which is a model of its kind .
New initiatives are , therefore , being taken , progress is being made , and I must say that , despite all the difficulties that exist , governments are moving in the direction described because they have understood the absolute need for such measures .
At the next Education Council , which is due to take place in November , a resolution must be adopted .
This will also be debated by the governments of the 30 countries that will be meeting at the end of the year .
We will , therefore , be extending the issue of education and lifelong learning to encompass our future partners in the European Union .
As far as my own involvement is concerned , I shall say this : my staff are in the process of implementing the communication .
A European website on the various options for learning will be up and running before the end of the year .
In forthcoming weeks we shall be launching other actions such as the creation of European learning region networks and the establishment of a database on best practices .
These will all be very practical measures because we have studied the problems and we understand them .
We know what we need to do , so let us make a start !
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think that we are all agreed that lifelong learning is an important political tool and I would like to thank Mrs Van Brempt for not pulling her punches .
Despite all our agreements , despite the fact that we all recognise that training and lifelong learning must be linked to the world of work if they are to yield any returns , we have a problem and there is a vacuum .
Training and lifelong learning are based on education , which has huge problems of its own , and training cannot replace a poor education .
We have huge inequalities between the Member States in the field of education , as the report acknowledges , and consequently we also have huge vacuums and huge problems in lifelong training .
One typical example is that we have yet to reach an agreement on what constitute basic skills in education .
Whenever ? ECD statistics are published on the different countries , there is an outcry and there are some countries which find the criteria used hard to accept .
Likewise , education systems need to be changed and improved .
But what are we , the European Union , doing about it ?
We try to coordinate but do little else .
That , I think , is a huge political shortcoming .
What are the Member States doing about their lifelong learning strategy ?
At least one in two Member States has no specific strategy and a strategy is vital if we are to have economic development , if we are to improve industry and mobility and if we are to improve unemployment programmes .
I think that one very important factor would be if the Member States were to set a budget .
Similarly , lifelong learning should be able to reach the underprivileged , the unskilled , people who left school early , the unemployed and , of course , immigrants .
Madam President , we are busy drawing up long wish lists .
We talk about the forthcoming knowledge society and about lifelong learning , and there are no limits to what we all want .
However , this is only a kind of policy of piracy , since the reality of education policy in the Member States is completely different .
Priorities have to be set and expenditure on education has to be weighed up against other forms of expenditure .
Education budgets are being cut at the moment .
It is not , therefore , very helpful if we sit here discussing our long lists .
Instead of drawing up long lists , we should prioritise .
We should prioritise the most important items of expenditure .
I agree with those who say that , if this is the case , we should prioritise the needs of the undereducated , for education exaggerates differences unless some sort of compensation is built in .
I would point out , in particular , two aspects that I believe are important and that are perhaps not adequately stressed in the long lists .
First of all , there is a great need for proper vocational retraining .
It is not enough to have a little training here , a bit of additional training there and an extra course there .
Training is needed if people are to be able to shift from jobs that are no longer required - agricultural workers , lumberjacks or fishermen , for example - to jobs in an expanding service sector .
A transition such as this cannot be achieved after a six-week course . Instead , long training programmes are required .
Such programmes are quite expensive , however , and it is consequently difficult to obtain political support for them , yet this is vital since we in Europe are facing major problems of structural change that will require radical job changes .
Secondly , I should like to emphasise training organisations or training on the job .
This is , of course , mentioned in the Commission 's justification , but it should be accorded greater attention .
Since we know that it will be difficult to get funding for in-school training , it is extremely important that we try to create the kinds of organisations and jobs that provide scope for continuous training , education and learning as part of the labour process .
It is difficult to send people on courses , but it is perhaps easier , cheaper and better to make sure that people can learn on the job .
We can take the new IT sector as an example .
All the small IT firms that sprang up in the 1990s could afford to let people experiment and learn in the workplace , and the IT sector was very successful .
That is something we can learn from .
Madam President , Commissioner , there can be no doubt that , with the new order created by globalisation and the leaps and bounds being made in science and technology , the constant renewal of knowledge through lifelong learning is vital if we are to make the best possible use of human resources .
This being so , we urgently need a European policy to give momentum to this sector and , from this point of view , I congratulate you on your initiatives , Commissioner , and I congratulate our rapporteur on her excellent report .
As the draftsperson of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , I should like to point out that the only way of achieving a European policy on lifelong learning is to take serious account of the new order created by the mass , dynamic entry of women on to the job market .
Women are currently the most dynamic force behind development because , as you know , two-thirds of the new jobs which it is estimated will be created over the next ten years will be filled by women .
We therefore need to take serious account of the gender dimension when we take policy decisions and apply measures which will abolish direct and indirect discrimination against women , given that such discrimination always comes at the expense of the viable development and competitiveness of the economy .
An active lifelong learning policy needs to be designed with women 's needs in mind , which means involving women , improving their skills , widening their professional choices , removing glass ceilings , ensuring there is a balance between men and women in the sciences and new technologies and abolishing gender-based divisions of the job market .
You spoke , Commissioner , of the digital divide .
This digital divide applies mainly to women .
We also need to give special attention to the most vulnerable groups of women , such as immigrants , women in rural areas and elderly women .
Last but not least , the gender mainstreaming policy and the need to reconcile family life and work must become part of the overall policy to promote lifelong learning .
Mr President , I believe that lifelong learning has very often been defined as a priority objective .
However , I feel that the effort being made by Europe is not really being reflected in the results .
It is very difficult to establish these principles , to establish a system of quality evaluation , and to develop the right types of teaching so that lifelong learning can genuinely become a common basis throughout people 's lives .
In this regard , I believe that the measures we should adopt should include an increase in monitoring and inspection and the clarification of quality indicators , and they should be of differing types , and , above all , it seems to me extremely important to ensure that training be established throughout the territory .
This type of training is usually available in the big cities .
Rural areas and the most distant extremes of the regions , on the other hand , are not usually so well served .
I believe that , from now on , we must implement a policy of proximity , of accessibility , and that really is sustainable development : bringing education closer to people and making it more flexible .
Furthermore , there are huge numbers of complaints from companies that they cannot find qualified staff , and we have a very high level of unemployment given the economic situation supporting it too .
In this respect , I believe that we must implement these expansion policies throughout the territory and prevent education causing people to be uprooted from their regions , as many women are because they have to move away to be educated .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , since the Lisbon Summit , education and training have become a more and more important part of EU strategy .
Commissioner Reding has appropriately described the situation regarding education and training as undergoing a quiet revolution .
This description is also true in a negative sense .
The European Parliament and its Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport have barely played any part in setting targets for education and training .
Furthermore , the open coordination method that has been adopted in the education sector has caused the main focus of the debate to move away from the forum of democratically elected bodies to one made up of civil servants .
Now that Kathleen Van Brempt has produced her excellent report , we have a good opportunity to talk about lifelong learning here in plenary .
An economy built on people 's knowledge and skills will be more successful the more widely human resources are used .
Ensuring that all our citizens keep up with developments as best they can is not only an ethically sustainable policy but also one that is wise and practical .
Lifelong learning is becoming increasingly important with regard to citizens ' participation , boosting employment and regeneration of the workforce .
It would help employment and increase motivation if there were a clearer link between lifelong learning and qualifications based on the needs of industry .
Nevertheless , I want to stress the importance of the point made in the Committee on Culture 's report that lifelong learning is not merely a social necessity .
It must also be a social right for everyone , irrespective of their age , sex or social background .
Equality of education is , for many reasons , very difficult to bring about .
However , it is precisely education that is the path to equality .
For that reason I wish to emphasise the need for setting special targets so that the provision of lifelong learning can be made to include people who failed to finish their secondary education , are untrained , have special needs and learning difficulties , or who are socially underprivileged .
We should remember that a quality secondary education creates a basis for lifelong learning .
It is not very realistic , for example , to consider demanding IT skills if a person 's literacy and numeracy skills are inadequate .
Although it is the responsibility of Member States to organise education , we need practical European targets and measures .
The Commission communication is a step in the right direction .
We also have to try to achieve consensus on what the basic skills mentioned at Lisbon - knowledge of information and communication technologies , foreign languages , science , entrepreneurship and social skills - actually consist of .
It is easier to achieve aims if we know what we are aiming at .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , 1996 was the European Year of Lifelong Learning .
In 2002 , there are still more than a million people in the Netherlands who are functionally illiterate , and I think that the situation is not much better in other Member States .
It is therefore for a good reason that the European Union - my congratulations to Mrs Reding , incidentally - is giving this topic so much attention .
It might be an idea , after the Johannesburg Summit , to organise a world summit in Brussels on functional illiteracy .
Following the memorandum , and having defined the strategy and priorities , we are now about to make the European area for lifelong learning a reality .
This receives my warm support .
My group has always endorsed the rapporteur 's previous reports and , I should like to thank her now for her sound report .
I still have two minor observations to make .
Permanent education is a sweeping term and can range from teaching correct manners to very technical further training courses , from infant education to university courses .
Anyone can become involved - all governments , all public establishments .
Nevertheless , I should like to drive home the message that we should not lose sight of the quality of education .
We may need to set up a quality evaluation programme for this purpose , as is done in regular education .
I therefore endorse the request to exchange information , experiences and best practices at European level and to set up and maintain a European database .
This will obviously require the support of the European Commission as a matter of vital necessity .
Moreover , in this way , it is possible to reach mutual recognition with regard to credits , certificates and qualifications obtained , which is crucial to mobility .
I should also like to draw the attention to the importance of the citizens ' own responsibility for their education .
It is up to them to decide whether they want to work on it and thus enhance their chances within the labour market .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , having spoken yesterday evening on European citizenship , I am pleased to be able to speak this morning , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the matter of the European area of education and learning .
The link is clear , and was , furthermore , emphasised by the Feira European Council , where it was stated that ' education and lifelong learning are an essential policy for the development of citizenship ' .
Ladies and gentlemen , as everyone has said , education and learning must be accessible to everyone so that everyone has the same opportunities to find their place in society .
As we know , however , we are a long way from achieving this objective .
Inequalities become clear as soon as children enter the educational system , and are responsible for many academic failures , before breeding social exclusion in later life .
This is a downward spiral and hence the vital importance of adopting a coordinated strategy at European level which provides access for every European citizen to a decent and sufficient minimum standard of education and of learning .
The Commission communication attempts to respond to this ambitious project .
Several proposals are , furthermore , of the greatest interest , even if they would benefit from being clarified and complemented by the provisions contained in Mrs Van Brempt 's report , on which we are about to vote .
We welcome the fact that the Commission is advocating the right of every citizen , including those who have left school early , to acquire basic skills via free compensatory learning in later life .
We also support the idea that the Commission should , working closely with the Member States , put in place a European framework to define the basic skills that all pupils have to have acquired .
With regard to training , I support the request for the Commission to implement clear strategies with adequate funding for the chapter concerning lifelong learning .
Finally , in order to create a European area of education , equal opportunities in the field of education and training must be guaranteed for everyone , in particular for women , through close cooperation between all the social actors concerned .
Furthermore , the integration programmes designed for immigrants should exist even for pre-school pupils .
I shall finish by very warmly congratulating Mrs Van Brempt on her work and her report and by pointing out that education and lifelong learning are not only a social necessity but a major social right too .
Mr President , we have come to depend in the 21st century on what we call a knowledge based economy and the information society .
However , not everyone has access to this knowledge base .
The proposals on lifelong learning are an emerging response to this deficit , but only an emerging one .
It is not simply a matter of training for particular job skills , although people with a low educational base face a higher risk of unemployment and such inequalities of education need to be particularly targeted in the case of both women and men .
Training cannot replace a poor education and there is considerable risk that those with a strong education base will benefit further from lifelong learning and those without it will become even further marginalised .
This should be of particular concern .
The proposals are encouraging , but it is far from clear how they will be implemented and funded .
Here , the rapporteur has done an excellent job in firming up rather vague proposals .
This is not the fault of the Commissioner , whose commitment is not in doubt , but is due to the difficulties in coordinating education across the Member States when there is no clear European responsibility .
Mr President , I hope to be 60 next year , an age at which I used to think that one could quietly wait for retirement , but nothing could be further from the truth .
In fact , I am constantly having to learn about new things in order to be able to continue to do my job .
What is more , I am also having to remain abreast of the latest developments in order to be able to communicate by e-mail with my children and grandchildren .
I still learn something new every day using my computer .
Lifelong learning is therefore not a policy model ; it is a fact .
I subscribe to the need for lifelong learning .
Accordingly , I consider it necessary for the government to adopt a proactive stance in order to enable the public to acquire new knowledge continuously .
The current policy in many Member States leaves something to be desired in this respect .
The measures are aimed at employers , local councils and benefit agencies , but not at motivating the individual citizen .
The best approach is one whereby the government pays for the education that a person receives before entering the labour market .
Thereafter , employees should be responsible for their own development .
In this context , the government and employers need to ensure that the right preconditions and financial support are in place .
Within Europe , we will then be able to establish these preconditions together in order to guarantee the public - even those reaching retirement age - ongoing participation in the labour process .
Madam President , I should like , first of all , to thank the Commission for having proposed a clearly defined strategy in the field of lifelong learning , as well as the rapporteur , Mrs Van Brempt .
We had great expectations for this communication because we all knew that the Member States had made almost no progress in the field since the Lisbon Council .
If we genuinely wish to create a Europe of knowledge by encouraging equal opportunities , it is crucial to offer every citizen of the Union equal access to education and to lifelong learning .
With a view to the translation of this strategy into practical action , I shall focus on a number of points .
First of all , we must make efforts in the area of the recognition and transferability of learning and qualifications by making use of already existing networks or by creating new ones .
Secondly , access to lifelong learning must be provided for all employees and for jobseekers .
It therefore falls to the Commission to promote all Member State initiatives in this area and , wherever possible , to propose specific programmes designed , for example , for jobseekers or for young people without qualifications .
Thirdly , it is crucial to agree on a target for annual expenditure in the field of education and lifelong learning and to provide fiscal or other incentives to encourage investment by employers and individual citizens .
Finally , I wish to focus on the European dimension of education and training , which requires mastery of a second language .
All the institutions and the Member States must pursue their efforts in this field so that there is a proper follow-up to the European Year of Languages .
The European area of education and lifelong learning is a huge workshop and we must establish it without delay to enable all of our fellow citizens to benefit more from this right to learn .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , creating an area of lifelong learning means taking active steps to guarantee equality of opportunity for all population groups .
The European Union cannot realistically achieve that alone , considering that 1 % of the total budget is invested in culture and education .
Something would need to change there too .
What is more , there is often a narrow-minded anxiety in the Member States , in Germany 's Länder for example , as regards cultural sovereignty . They feel that their cultural sovereignty is being threatened when the EU makes pronouncements about education policy .
The results of the Pisa Study should have opened people 's eyes .
Finland has achieved excellent results in practising lifelong learning , beating Germany with its achievement principle in the first phase of education , which often blocks people 's path to further education .
So we can learn from each other .
We should draw up training plans for new developments relating to the electronic revolution , in industry as well .
We should extend education centres .
The rapporteur has proposed individual learning accounts .
The key issues here are exchanges of information and experience .
We need to have recognised , guaranteed systems for mutual recognition of final examinations .
That needs to be developed .
We need to gear what is on offer towards specific groups , for example mothers returning to work , for single parents who need childcare arrangements , for migrant workers , and for people in rural areas .
The Commission and the Member States should focus on this in a coordinated way , and particularly careful attention needs to be paid to the gender mainstreaming approach for lifelong learning .
We also need to take advantage of all possible instruments , such as loans from the EIB , in order to extend our educational systems so as to create a modern and efficient educational system .
We need to involve the informal sector and accelerate the political process of adult education , we need a new learning culture to secure sustainable development of the most precious resource at our disposal - people and their minds .
Madam President , I too would like to congratulate the rapporteur on this excellent report .
I do , however , have a few comments to make .
We are certainly following the approach called for at Feira , but I have heard some speakers , including a colleague from my group , mention illiteracy .
I would like to draw the attention of the House to this specific point : there is a disturbing degree of returning illiteracy affecting a large part of our European population as regards new technologies and new languages .
The Commissioner mentioned ' living ' in the knowledge-based society .
Of course , living means interacting , but living also and above all means communicating , for , nowadays , it is those who communicate who count in society .
In order to communicate , a person needs both knowledge and the ability to communicate , which means being in possession of the tools of communication - languages .
This is the area where we have to make progress . This is what we must concentrate on .
One consideration is training and another is teaching .
If we want high-quality teaching , we must take steps to establish a common basic curriculum and review all the European education systems .
As regards training , then , the individual States must strengthen these national agreements on training , working together with local communities , businesses , firms and all those who invest in the training of the young and not so young .
I certainly support lifelong training , but I feel that if specific preparation , specific training in learning skills is not provided at the appropriate age , namely during school years , we will have even less chance of success with adults who are no longer open to learning .
There therefore needs to be a whole strategy for strengthening primary and secondary education , and we can introduce lifelong learning measures after that .
I would like to end with the comment that our countries spend less than 5 % of GDP on teaching and training .
It may well be that the Commission needs to take action and prepare the ground for a political and cultural debate at European level , because the knowledge-based Europe , the Europe of culture , the Europe of values , can only become reality if we invest more and differently in training ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , if you think that education is too expensive , ' try ignorance ! ' as Abraham Lincoln said , and this is why I welcome the report by Mrs Van Brempt and the truth and relevance of the ideas she has just put forward .
As she has illustrated so well , in our societies , equal opportunities , personal development and the ability to take charge throughout one 's life are dependent upon better access to education and training .
This report has the merit of reminding us of the essential issues in lifelong learning .
It gives a precise definition of the vulnerable social groups that must have access to this process , namely the illiterate , immigrants , the handicapped , the unemployed and women finishing maternity leave .
I wish now to pay tribute to the fine work done by the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities .
Furthermore , this report reflects our societies , which are undergoing enormous changes and in which everyone can change career several times in their lifetime .
If this report is rapidly implemented , it will be an opportunity for all men and women who think that progress in society is definitively blocked for them .
Certain shortcomings must , nevertheless , be mentioned .
Mrs Karamanou has highlighted the disparities between men and women in access to training , but there are genuine shortcomings where the illiterate , immigrants , the handicapped and the long-term unemployed are concerned .
The most crucial issue for me , ladies and gentlemen , is funding , because , although the Commission has currently earmarked more than EUR 500 million and will set aside an equivalent sum in 2006 , and although the European Investment Bank intends to increase the budget earmarked for this area , the Member States , on the other hand , seem not to want to make any great effort on this matter .
Furthermore , it would be inappropriate , on such an important matter , to indulge in penny-pinching or , for example , to restructure already existing programmes , such as Leonardo and Socrates .
Finally Commissioner , I am categorically opposed , as I hope you are , to the idea that the price for even a tiny part of this education should be met by those who are precisely in greatest need of it .
Let us bear in mind the phrase by Victor Hugo : ' Every school that is opened closes one more prison ' .
Ladies and gentlemen , let us bear in mind that it is the most vulnerable people who must be concerned by lifelong learning .
This gives enormous hope to them all , men and women , and perhaps a last chance too .
Madam President , Commissioner , I would first like to comment on Mrs Van Brempt 's proposal as rapporteur to replace the phrase ' lifelong learning ' .
It really does sound like a prison sentence and I would like to suggest an alternative straight away : ' learning for life ' .
It implies the same thing , but it does not sound negative , or like a prison sentence .
Perhaps we could use that in future .
The report we have before us highlights many possibilities and this debate has also demonstrated how much we can and should do .
I would also like to touch again on a few points that are not clear to me , and , in particular , the question of recognising formal qualifications .
The Commission talks in one place about a voluntary minimum quality standard and in another place about a modular system that needs to be worked out by 2003 and which would allow people to combine different educational and vocational training establishments .
The term ' voluntary ' gives rise to a degree of uncertainty here : we need to clearly express what we want and what would result in mutual recognition .
We have already talked a great deal here about equality of opportunities , and about lifelong learning or learning for life .
The fact that according to a Eurostat survey 16 % of university graduates take advantage of further vocational training compared with only 2 % of people with the lowest educational qualifications tells us that access to education should not create inequalities but reduce them .
We in this House need to help to overcome these barriers .
Social exclusion and marginalisation need to be reduced by means of a new European project such as lifelong learning .
The Lisbon Council set the target of making the EU the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economic area in the world .
However , if we are to achieve this objective , everyone needs to be involved right from the start .
Access to education and training should no longer be dependent on people 's level of education , gender and nationality and on infrastructural issues .
Madam President , I know that we are pressed for time and that I should state my position on all the very practical proposals made by the honourable Members .
I cannot do this , but we have taken note of everything you have said and these are very practical and very useful proposals .
I shall simply give a brief explanation of the actions that are planned for the next few months .
In November , the Commission will present a communication on indicators and benchmarks , which will serve to measure the progress made in the priority areas .
And so you will have this communication , which will enable a real evaluation to be made of the practical measures that are adopted .
Furthermore , with regard to basic skills , seven working groups are in the process , in collaboration with the Member States , of reaching agreement on the common criteria necessary to apply the benchmarks correctly and to evaluate the measures that have been adopted .
This task is almost over now and things will therefore , move ahead rapidly .
Furthermore , in the field of vocational training , the situation will develop very quickly .
Clearly , to achieve progress in the field , the social partners will need to be directly involved .
I wish to add that the social partners and the Member States have given a commitment to establish common principles in the field of non-formal training , a task that we are striving to see through .
I should also like to state that I am as shocked as anyone at the frightening number of people in our societies who can neither read nor write .
I have understood your message : you would like us jointly to undertake a major action to combat illiteracy .
Together with my staff , I shall study this proposal and perhaps the Commission and Parliament could then adopt a joint initiative on this matter .
Thank you , Commissioner Reding .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0183 / 2002 ) by Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on Universities and higher education in the European learning area [ 2001 / 2174 ( INI ) ] .
Madam President , I would like to thank the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport for having accepted this proposal to carry out a study on universities and higher education in the European area of knowledge .
I must say that many ideas from my fellow Members of Parliament are taken up here , and I have listened extensively to the views of the European Students ' Association and the European Universities ' Association , as well as many other sectors and that , furthermore , a hearing has taken place .
However , before discussing the main issue , I would like to say that there are no amendments and that simply , in order to aid the reading of the text , I would ask the secretary for the plenary session to introduce two subtitles : ' European Area of Higher Education ' , before item 1 and ' Bologna Process ' , before item 5 .
Why is it necessary to produce this report ?
There is a certain contradiction in Europe .
For more than 1 500 years the universities have been an axis upon which European culture has been built .
Furthermore , they have been the places where dialogue has been created , where scientific thought has been developed and where young people have been educated .
But , nevertheless , curiously , we are seeing a process of distancing - which many call ' endogamy ' - of universities from the system and the European Union , and the Commission itself and European policies are not taking sufficient account of the role the universities could play as consultants , institutions and conveyors in relation to the Community acquis .
As well as being highly professional and independent , these institutions are established throughout the Union 's territory and should be key references for civil society , as places for dialogue and debate and as support for the MEDA programmes and the programmes of the candidate countries , as well as centres for training in many respects , even more than they are at the moment .
We are not therefore just addressing the Committee on Culture , which we know has created specific programmes on the universities , but the whole of the European Commission .
We are therefore discussing the first European document on this issue .
By this I mean that , on the one hand , we invite the universities to come closer to Europe , to observe Europe and take an interest in European issues and , on the other , we invite the Commission to extend its relationship with them in all respects .
What are we asking for in the report ?
It is necessary to reinforce the creation of a European area of education and , to this end , the universities must be protagonists .
Furthermore , we need them to take on the scientific and conceptual challenge facing Europe and its regions and nations .
The universities must also be guardians and must be committed to quality and be the main protagonists and conveyors of the culture of hard work and open and transparent evaluation .
Evaluation , transparency and quality should be the responsible reaction of these bodies which are generally funded with public money and in which society trusts to educate our future generations .
We support the Bologna process , starting with the universities themselves and with the Council , with all that it implies : mobility , recognition of qualifications , the creation of networks , etc . ; but it is understood that , in order to achieve this convergence , both the recognition of qualifications and the increase in mobility amongst teachers , students and researchers , it is necessary to make admissions procedures more flexible and make the Bologna process itself more open , as well as the architecture of qualifications .
In that way people will feel more comfortable and more at ease and it will be easier to take account of the diversity of problems posed by the different types of qualifications and research , as well as the varying characteristics of practical training .
The production of a Green Paper is also requested , because it is surprising how little we know about the situation of the universities .
The indicators - the few available - in many cases show very negative figures ; the universities are going through a great crisis : they have made a great effort to bring education closer to everybody , and they have often lost out in terms of competitiveness .
They must be helped .
We must recognise the research profession , promote research and create incentives so that students , when young , are initiated into these aspects ; it is necessary to reward merit , mobility and results , and it is essential that the universities increase their role as centres for life-long learning .
They must be centres for the spreading of technology and innovations , as well for the updating of knowledge .
It is also suggested that the presence of universities in the media be increased as well as the promotion of distance-learning universities - they have asked us for this - and at the same time that a ' centre for universities ' be created , as a centre for the universities to meet so that their relations are not maintained via the Internet and at a cool distance , but that there may be a place in Europe for debate on universities .
Madam President , I have taken note of the proposals of the rapporteur , Mrs Van Brempt , and of the Committee on Culture with very great interest .
It is true that if we want to create this Europe of knowledge that we have been anxiously hoping for since Lisbon , we must integrate universities in a very real way .
This is the reason why my colleague responsible for research , Mr Busquin , and I are preparing a communication on the role of the universities in the Europe of knowledge , a role which cuts across research , education and innovation .
With this communication , the Commission will take account of the ideas expressed in the present report , such as , for example , those concerning , doctoral studies .
These studies must , in fact , be consolidated and ' europeanised ' .
I share the rapporteur 's point of view on this matter .
We shall discuss the Bologna process , next year in September , at the major conference in Berlin .
Until then , we shall have practical work to do .
In fact , on 17 July , the Commission adopted the Erasmus World project , which will authorise the creation of links between our universities , at masters ' degree level .
We will thereby create cross-border university families , which will offer Europeans masters degrees and will be open to students and lecturers from other continents .
This proposal has been submitted to Parliament and to the Council , under the codecision procedure .
We are thereby affirming our will to innovate and to strengthen our universities so that they once again become the centres of excellence that they have the potential to be and so that they contribute to making a reality the Europe of knowledge , which still exists in theory only .
Let us not forget that universities are themselves a collection of actors and institutions - schools , professional training , businesses , citizens - for whom the Commission 's policy is intended .
We are relying on Parliament 's support to achieve a Europe of knowledge which comprises all the various forces in intellectual society .
Adopting the resolution , taking account of this global perspective , will mark a step in this direction .
I thank you for the support that you have given to the action that we are in the process of undertaking .
Madam President , Commissioner , I would firstly like to congratulate the rapporteur , our colleague , Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines , because I believe she is the most suitable person to be rapporteur for this report on universities and higher education , and she has demonstrated her great experience in this field .
I would like to focus on sport .
In Europe it is very difficult to combine studies with sport and this means that our young people eventually have to choose between the two .
We parents naturally try to have an influence on this choice and we encourage them to chose studies instead of sport , since they seem to us to offer more security .
In other countries , such as the United States , sport and university studies are entirely compatible .
And not only are they compatible , but a North American student actually has access to many more universities and opportunities thanks to sport than they would without it .
The European Union must promote sport in universities , both inside and outside the university itself .
We must promote the participation of university teams in competitions between universities ( regional , national , international , etc . ) and perhaps - and why not ? - we could apply part of the Erasmus programme , which is having great success , to providing mobility for university sports teams , as enjoyed by other students .
We must not forget that young people who divide their time between studies and sport are not left with much energy and time to indulge in other activities which we would all consider less advisable .
Madam President , Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines ' excellent report is a milestone , for this is the first report tabled before Parliament to be so comprehensive and well-structured .
There has been talk , particularly in recent years , following Lisbon , of the need to develop a knowledge-based Europe , but this has in many respects thus far remained just a good intention .
Those like myself who have experienced the effects of the Erasmus and Socrates programmes in universities know , despite the frequently limited scale of the programmes caused by lack of funding , how much impact they have had both in terms of widening the horizons of students and lecturers and in terms of creating extensive European awareness among the citizens , starting with the families of those who have benefited from the programmes .
Our task is now to extend the Union 's attention and action to a large number of other aspects of higher education , most importantly encouraging the dissemination of the good practices of some countries in all the other countries of the Union , promoting the right of all the citizens to study irrespective of their financial situation , and this can be achieved by expanding public higher education , which is the only form of education which attracts investments that are not subject to the mindset of quick profits and which is therefore able to guarantee all the citizens access to higher education , which is necessary for the renewal of the ruling classes .
We must not disregard the fact that the supremacy of public universities in some countries of the Union is currently under threat from alarming privatisation trends , which are in danger of irreparably reducing the freedom of study and diminishing the quality of research and teaching , placing greater emphasis on income than on merit and ability .
The Gutiérrez-Cortines report takes this situation into account and contains a number of important proposals .
I would like , inter alia , to point out that it calls upon the Commission to set up a ' European University House ' providing the academic world - including students , lecturers and the various agencies operating in the sector - with an autonomous way of asserting their needs and making proposals .
This would be an interesting example of the application of the principle of subsidiarity to a sector of European culture which is crucial to all our work .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should first of all like to thank Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines warmly for the effort she has made to write this own-initiative report .
I could not agree more that knowledge is the key to competitiveness and economic and social development in Europe , but I certainly do not see eye to eye on all her conclusions .
Universities play a vital role when it comes to turning Europe into the most dynamic and competitive knowledge-based economy .
It is therefore very important for them to maintain mutual contact and exchange information and experiences .
The pre-condition is , however , that they should offer high-quality education in an attempt to create centres of excellence within the academic world .
I completely share Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines ' view that the mobility of students , lecturers and researchers could be much improved .
Administratively , many stumbling blocks could be removed .
However , I cannot see the good in the Commission and Member States having to promote the establishment of a European University Seat .
Accordingly , it is not clear to me what role a representation of the Member States and of Parliament would be playing in this .
Another point , the validity of which passes me by , is the setting up of a separate European cultural university .
Language and literature , philosophy and communication are already being taught at existing universities , while special academies cater for the arts .
The report points at the need for an intercultural dialogue with the world 's other regions .
This is all well and good , but it does suggest that the existing universities are completely introspective and maintain no contact with the rest of the world , and this is simply no longer the case .
I therefore fear , Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines , that my group , despite the fact that we agree on certain aspects of the report , will be abstaining from the vote , since it cannot reconcile itself with the two above-mentioned points .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , universities in Greece are fast losing their academic credentials .
Their basic functions are being privatised , they are increasingly controlled by business interests and they are forced to operate as enterprises subject to competition and the laws of the market in general .
As a result , the standard of education provided is falling across the board .
The European Union is the main driving force in this direction and the report is right behind it .
The Communist Party of Greece is radically opposed to the Bologna process , to private universities , to interventions via the Green Paper , to the so-called European area of higher education and , of course , to the creation of a seat of European universities , all of which eradicate independence and the free circulation of ideas .
We are fighting for state universities and state universities alone , subject to academic , not business control , which will meet grass-roots and social needs .
We support cooperation between universities with due respect for the academic order .
Ladies and gentlemen , universities are not grocery stores .
If we let them become so , we shall dash any hopes which young people have of acquiring a rounded education and any hope which society has of a better future .
Madam President , I very much welcome this initiative .
It was a very necessary initiative and I commend it .
Universities are the cornerstone of our societies , so encouraging universities , students and teachers to forge closer links and share experiences will play a crucial role in enriching our societies .
It will also increase European competitiveness , because universities play an important role now in the business sector .
Many higher education establishments are already suffering a funding crisis and European Union higher education legislation will not be brought closer without proper financial commitment .
I urge the Commission , the Council and Parliament to ensure this happens , because it is vital that this initiative is properly funded .
However , I would have liked to see more emphasis on the teaching of modern foreign languages , since linguistic barriers are one of the main impediments to mobility .
In my own country , the UK , the compulsory teaching of foreign languages is being cut back .
Providing an optional language is very important .
I commend this report to the House and fully support it .
Madam President , I would like to congratulate Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines on her particularly important report , for , as she herself has stressed , before us is the first document dedicated by the European Parliament to universities as recognised institutions .
I fully agree with Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines that the time has come for Europe not just to fund but to manage and promote a model of education without frontiers at European level , restoring research to its institutional home , the university .
I therefore feel I must stress the importance of consolidating the European higher education area , an assuredly important goal which , although involving the individual universities of the Member States , would affect neither their autonomy nor their cultural history while providing for what will , I am sure , be high-quality teaching .
Moreover , the movement of students , researchers and lecturers is an excellent way of bringing about exchanges of skills and of developing critical faculties , and has great social value , with a view to ensuring successful cultural integration in the future .
I deeply believe that the establishment of a network of higher education and the results of research will not only bring reciprocal evaluation of performance but will make any monitoring process more cost-effective too .
It is therefore becoming increasingly important for the European Union to implement a support policy through the programming of funds for university research , bearing in mind that the task of a university as an institution is not just to teach but , above all , to carry out research and experiments , thus enhancing the role of researchers who would otherwise seek more professionally rewarding activities elsewhere , specifically in the United States .
Looking back at the funding hitherto appropriated for research by the European Union , I note that a huge amount has been dedicated to small and medium-sized enterprises , which are certainly important in the overall economies of our countries , while the sector of university research has been neglected .
I am afraid I must point out , on the basis of this analysis , that much of the research funded was then subcontracted precisely to university researchers for its implementation .
I realise that many resources have certainly been made available to the European Union 's universities thus far - the Fifth Framework Programme , the Sixth Framework Programme , Erasmus etc. but we have a further task : to further convince those working on this document that it is time to restore to the institution of the universities their supreme role in research , acknowledging that they have performed this role for over 600 years and achieved excellent results , offering them for the benefit of the whole world without claiming property rights .
Madam President , there is no doubt about the importance of universities and education .
In fact , education itself is so important that Prime Minister Blair has said in the past that he only has three policies : education , education and education .
But the high profile of education in the political arena makes universities and other institutions especially vulnerable to external pressure .
Not for nothing do universities become one of the first targets of demagogues and dictators .
The free thinkers and the independent spirits are soon removed .
Democracies also have a problem here because our educational establishments rely predominantly on the state for their funding and he who pays the piper seeks to call the tune .
As a result we have seen increasing interference in our educational establishments .
This is also the case with the European Union .
As more and more money destined for academia comes through the European institutions , the European piper is indeed now calling the European tune .
As I travel around British universities speaking to students , I see a rash of ring of stars flags and EU literature .
But more worryingly , under the Jean Monnet programme I see the orthodoxies of the European Union now being taught in political science and in European history courses . Such is the grip of EU money that dissent from the perceived wisdom is treated almost as heresy .
Unless the correct version of political history is submitted in their course work and in their examinations students now find themselves penalised in their exam marking .
Thus I view this report with some degree of dismay and trepidation .
The European Union has its own key policies and they are integration , integration and yet more integration .
That of course is why the European Union is so interested in universities and further education .
I have no doubt that this particular report is well meant but the creation of a European learning area and the prospect of yet more taxpayers ' money being filtered through the EU into universities is a recipe for even more political interference .
The independence of our universities is far too important for them to be sacrificed on the altar of political integration .
Madam President , Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines ' report on universities and higher education in the European learning area is full of good intentions .
We must ensure , however , that we do not fall into the trap of the dogmatic principle that is so dear to pro-European supporters : wherever there is a European area , everything must , without fail , be merged and blended together .
As far as universities are concerned , a great deal has already been done , particularly under the Socrates and Erasmus programmes , to encourage the mobility of students and teachers , the creation of joint courses , the scheduling of intensive courses as well as helping to set up thematic networks .
Must we , however , go further down a centralising and bureaucratic route , which would introduce unique and rigid criteria in an area where the diversity of cultures , methods and concepts is the guarantee of a culture of quality , which is not tied to an ideology ?
Up to now , Europe has done what it has had to do in this area by providing everyone with effective tools under the programmes I mentioned earlier .
We must now develop original forms of cooperation , whilst respecting the freedoms and desires of each EU nation .
Business and engineering schools provide an example of the success of schools which , independently of any European legal framework , have successfully managed to integrate themselves into this new area by freely organising joint reorientation classes , exchanges , subjects and degrees .
Is it up to Europe to decide what belongs to the private domain ?
Is it up to Europe to concern itself with sporting activities in universities ?
Is it up to Europe to define what must constitute teaching of artistic studies ?
I do not think it is .
I recognise , however , that there are two positive points in this report . Firstly , the drafting of a Green Paper , as long as it does not become an instrument for standardizing our universities , and secondly , granting post-graduate study grants on the basis of merit rather than household income .
These two points are not enough , however , to convince us to vote in favour of this report .
Madam President , I would like to congratulate Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines and focus on one aspect of her speech , namely the need to define a system of qualifications which makes them easy to understand and compare .
I wish , in particular , to put forward once again the proposal , which I feel has a place in a debate such as this , that the legal validity of qualifications should be abolished .
In my opinion , this is a measure which could serve to ensure that the confusion in the debate between public and private sectors - the guarantee of high quality education - is avoided .
Indeed , as Professor Vattimo rightly said , there is a great deal of emphasis on providing a genuine guarantee of the educational experience .
Well then , until evidence is provided to the contrary , the legal status of the administrator cannot be the guarantee of that experience .
In the eighteenth century , the whole of Europe flocked to Prussia , not because Prussia had an efficient state capable of running universities but , above all , because there was a great teacher named Immanuel Kant .
In fact , the validity of the learning adventure is guaranteed by the broad-mindedness of the teachers , and that is precisely the point I am trying to make .
In all probability , abolishing the legal validity of educational qualifications is still one of the best ways of guaranteeing the full legitimacy of those establishments which know how to teach properly .
This is so true that , although Professor Vattimo the MEP may not be able to acknowledge it for ideological reasons , Professor Vattimo the university lecturer is quite aware that studying for a degree under ' the Prof ' is different from doing so under any other tutor , to the extent that the guarantee of the educational experience that he provides is not the fact that it is the state which runs the University of Turin but his love of the truth and his love of the adventure of learning .
Madam President , the report by Mrs Gutiérrez Cortines , who is much respected and who is a colleague of mine twice over , is timely and of a high quality .
She deserves the congratulations she has received and of course I would like to add my own .
It is timely because its description of the university situation and its interesting proposals put an end to what has been several years of slow progress in terms of European construction in the education field , during which we have seen little more than passivity and rhetoric .
On issues such as the unification of quality standards , the mutual and automatic recognition of qualifications , the convergence of degrees and programmes and the employment of graduates , the achievement of a European dimension , and the objectives set for 2010 in general , are almost as far away as they were on the day following the end of the Bologna process , more than three years ago now .
The most competitive knowledge-based economy in the world is still waiting for us to be able to create a European area of higher education .
Meanwhile , the universities ' response to European employment demands is inadequate and furthermore , in a context of globalisation , the European universities are still losing the battle against the American universities , both in terms of their leadership of the knowledge-based society and in terms of their external attractiveness to third-country teachers , researchers and students .
The fact that the European university sector , with its fifteen million students and 600 000 teachers , is the most dynamic sector in our society , and the fact that we are adopting reports such as these , are hopeful signs which lead us to believe that , despite nationalist resistance in the Council , the autocratic attitude of some of our universities and the apathy of the Commission and Parliament in this sector , we will finally achieve the stated objective of a European area of higher education which is worthy of the name .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as a former dean of a faculty of the University of Lyon , where almost thirty foreign languages are taught , I found , in the report by Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines , many positive elements as well as others which , unfortunately , I feel are rather more debatable .
To list some of the positive elements , efforts are being made to reduce administrative or other obstacles hampering exchange programmes for students and teachers , efforts are being made to encourage learning foreign languages , and not only English ; efforts are also being made to create joint networks and services for circulating information , and , lastly , efforts are being made to encourage placements and even sporting competitions .
These are all excellent initiatives .
I must , however , express some reservations about the self-confessed goal of this report through the creation of a European area of higher education .
The Commission 's assessment of all university systems , both public-sector and privately-run , could create a new bureaucratic , supranational European layer , disregarding the subsidiarity principle which is included - almost for the sake of appearances - in the first paragraph of the report .
The stated desire to introduce uniform criteria in the structure of qualifications , or even to harmonise all university curricula for students , will undoubtedly reduce the diversity of distinctive academic or scientific models , which can be regarded as a competitive factor and a mark of progress .
European civilisation has created diversity in all areas .
By first of all fully mastering a specific area of knowledge , a science , a technique , a particular experience and a national culture , we shall stay as faithful as possible to true European traditions .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by congratulating the committee on its own initiative report on universities in the European area and endorse the thoughts and issues raised by the rapporteur and the proposals which she has formulated .
Universities have always been incubators of European culture and have played an important role in developing our societies .
We must therefore realise that if the European Union is to achieve the new strategic development objectives set in Lisbon today , it needs more active and competitive universities to generate knowledge and innovation not as isolated institutions but as active partners in the social and economic fabric at national level , at regional level and at a cross-border level that mirrors the new configuration of Europe .
Another dimension we need to be aware of is the role of universities in promoting European unification , by cultivating a European conscience and promoting a European nationality .
Our universities can become the laboratories of unified Europe with their educational and teaching programmes and the cooperation and mobility of students and teachers which they can promote .
This is the direction you are working in , Commissioner , but the Member States also need to come on board .
There is a great deal of work to do here because we all know about the obstacles to the mutual recognition of diplomas , low mobility and the differences in academic approach to university courses in the various countries of Europe .
What we all have to understand is that convergence and promoting educational cohesion can be achieved with all due respect for diversity and , at the same time , by introducing systems which recognise and promote the added value of the special attributes of our universities .
This sort of policy will also bring about better conditions for the professional mobility which the European Union is striving to promote .
So I think drafting a Green Paper would be a good initiative and I for one shall be behind you in this endeavour , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
The next item is the vote .
Report ( A5-0241 / 2002 ) by Carlos Coelho , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the third Commission report on citizenship of the Union ( COM ( 2001 ) 506 - C5-0656 / 2001 - 2001 / 2279 ( COS ) )
( Parliament adopted the text )
Report ( A5-0224 / 2002 ) by Kathleen Van Brempt , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on the Commission communication on Making a European Area of Lifelong Learning a Reality ( COM ( 2001 ) 678 - C5-0165 / 2002 - 2002 / 2073 ( COS ) )
( Parliament adopted the text )
Report ( A5-0183 / 2002 ) by Cristina Gutiérrez-Cortines , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on universities and higher education in the European learning area ( 2001 / 2174 ( INI ) )
Before the vote :
It is simply a question of introducing certain titles which had been forgotten .
After the recitals , the title , ' European Area of Education ' must be introduced and , before paragraph 5 , ' the Bologna process ' .
Before we proceed to the next vote I should like to give a warm welcome to Mrs Fan , President of the Hong Kong Legislative Council , who is in the distinguished visitors ' gallery today .
As you know , we follow developments in the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region with great interest .
Mrs Fan is here for a number of important meetings .
We wish her a very enjoyable stay .
Yi lü ping an [ We wish you a safe journey home ]
Paragraph 29 of the Coelho resolution welcomes the judgment of the Court of First Instance of 3 May 2002 , which granted to Jégo-Quéré et Cie SA a direct right of appeal against a European regulation .
It is true that this company was not ' of direct and individual concern ' , but if the action had not been declared admissible , the company would not have had any other means of defending itself in law , and would thus have been ' denied access to the courts ' .

We also welcome this judgment , but merely regret that it had not been passed earlier , for example when we tabled an appeal , which was obviously justified on its merits , against changing the name of the single currency .
Unfortunately , the Commission , probably feeling under threat , immediately requested that the Jégo-Quéré ruling be overturned , and it also immediately obtained a ruling in line with its wishes during the judicial vacations ?
The European institutions have therefore succeeded in putting themselves in a position where they can constantly destabilise the Member States , whilst practically guarding their general regulations from individual appeals by citizens .
This is a perversion of the current system , which protects supranational enterprises but must be improved in the future .
. The British Conservatives believe that this is an ill-timed report which tries to move the discussion forward beyond what the representatives and the people themselves want .
We believe that it should come about as a result of one 's citizenship of a Member State , and not of Europe .
We are all , of course , ' Europeans ' but most people would not recognise an actual citizenship of Europe as being superior to the citizenship of their own country .
We want to make people more caring and interested in the communities in their own nation states rather than create an artificial right , as the rapporteur seems to be suggesting .
The British Conservatives are opposed to the principles of the report for the reasons outlined above .
. ( NL ) The promotion of citizenship of the EU , the core objective of this proposal , does not do a great deal for me .
In the former Soviet Union , attempts were made to turn the citizens of different federal republics , with different languages and cultures , into Soviet citizens .
This was never successful .
In Yugoslavia , attempts were made , alongside Serbs , Croats , Slovenes and Macedonians , to create new generations of real Yugoslavs who were meant to organise the country 's future .
These people are now second-class citizens .
The creation of EU citizens who are constantly on the move between Member States in search of the most privileged jobs , leads to conflicts with their environment and to misfortune for themselves .
A second goal of this proposal is to increase the level of participation during European elections .
People do not vote in order to meet a ritual obligation which they do not experience as useful .
They only want to vote if the body they need to choose has a decisive say and if there is an actual choice between conflicting alternatives .
Asking people to vote as an expression of sympathy with a united Europe does not work .
If we carry on like this , even fewer people will vote in the next round of elections .
I do , of course , support the reinforcement of civil rights , including those of immigrants , and better information about the Ombudsman .
Many fellow Members have the dreadful habit of twisting the meaning of words in order to meet the needs of the federalist cause .
We have had the European Charter of Fundamental Rights , which some wrongly considered to be the preamble to a hypothetical Constitution .
We have had governance , an unidentified political subject .
Now we have European citizenship , a concept that has no meaning at all .
Citizenship is a political , not a technocratic concept , based on a political and not bureaucratic reality , based on the roots that people put down , on belonging to a natural community .
Citizenship is a status that is only granted to those who , by virtue of their birth or their merits , share common values .
It also assumes the existence of a political area , the most advanced form of which is still the nation .
Yet , where is the European nation when it lacks what Renan called a desire to live together ?
Without language , culture and traditions shared by the peoples of the European Union , a European people is no more .
As Joseph de Maistre would have said , no one has ever met ' a European citizen ' .
Your artificial citizenship has no substance whatsoever .
The report therefore has no purpose .
The report contains a large number of good , important points .
Nevertheless , I voted against the report , since it would involve , inter alia , incorporating the third pillar into the Community framework .
I wholeheartedly supported the Commission 's proposal on European citizenship .
Of course , it is not easy to increase the political dimension of European citizenship by decree .
Clearly , it is essential that we strengthen measures on the ground to make citizens understand that we have provided them with considerable scope so that they can participate in the European area for citizens .
This is the price of achieving legitimacy for the European Union .
We must find channels of communication which will enable us to teach citizens about the challenges that they themselves must contend with in the future .
It is a matter of regret that , amongst the requirements that have come to the fore , the EU is not creating a specific history course which would describe the various uprisings , wars and revolutions which have taken place on the continent of Europe as being often difficult periods in achieving the vision that some have held for fifty years .
. ( EL ) The policy on lifelong training ( not learning ) is a policy to replace systematic education and fundamental learning with a superficial , market-driven transfer of skills and practices with its very own sell-by date , the basic aim of which is to meet the demands of big business for pliant , flexible workers , restructure employment relations and promote ' employability ' .
It is a way of exerting ideological and psychological pressure on the workers into blaming themselves for unemployment and accepting long-term unemployment and of destroying the link between education and job prospects .
At the same time , traditional schools are becoming a clearing house for lifelong learning by ' opening up their facilities ' to ' local communities and enterprises ' , that is , multinationals will have a say about school curricula ; this is already happening with pilot programmes being funded in Greece by the ? U.
We are radically opposed to this policy and we are fighting for the abolition of all forms of discrimination or obstacles to equal access for all young people to a free , standard , state education until the age of 18 , the sort of education which is vital for subsequent professional specialisation , an education that will help young people put their ideas in order , acquire scientific criteria against which to measure nature and society and become conscientious contributors to social progress .
That is why the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece voted against the Van Brempt report .
We endorse the proposal that the Commission should draft a Green Paper on higher education in order to launch what is known as the Bologna process .
We voted against the Van Brempt report on a European Area of Lifelong Learning because it is a good example of the unwarranted extension of European powers .
The report is based on Article 150 of the Treaty establishing the European Community , which provides for , in a vague and debatable manner , the implementation of a European vocational training policy ' while fully respecting the responsibility of the Member States ' .
Then the report attempts to extend this competency to the rest of education .
In particular , it proposes that the Commission should develop ( albeit ' acting in close collaboration with the Member States ' ) a ' European framework of basic skills ' to be acquired by all students before they leave compulsory school education .
In such circumstances , the attempts to extend powers are never-ending .
In addition , the European Parliament once again states that the current situation in the area of qualifications ' constitutes a serious obstacle to mobility between Member States and the emergence of a Europe-wide labour market ' ( recital F ) .
Yet , we had been led to understand that the European labour market was already functioning .
In reality , it is clear that , since the aim was that of full mobility in a totally unified labour market , it is the nations themselves which will soon become the obstacle .
Although we agree with some of the proposals put forward in the report , as well as with some of the good intentions expressed , we abstained overall .
The proposals are not in fact based on the aspirations of the young and the less young who , it is claimed , influence many of society 's needs .
Everything is designed in accordance with what the report discreetly calls the labour market and its flexibility .
Behind these noble sentiments , the aim is to provide industrial groups and capitalist businesses with a workforce that is trained according to their needs .
This has nothing to do with a policy that provides all citizens with lifelong learning based on their potential and their aspirations .
Creating a European area of lifelong learning has become a priority for the twenty-first century and we can only encourage the initiatives to achieve this .
This is a two-fold priority : it underpins the awareness of the need for lifelong learning for all and the incorporation of this training within the framework of the European area and no longer simply of just one Member State .
By placing the emphasis on mobility , the report highlights the importance of training people whilst taking into account various experiences and methods that are specific to each Member State .
It is both a way of achieving self-improvement and of enhancing one 's job prospects .
Lastly , although the report does not place sufficient emphasis on apprenticeships , this is nonetheless included in the awareness of the need to improve policies on professional training at European level and it reinforces my belief in the absolute need to put in place , in the coming years , a genuine ' Erasmus for apprentices ' scheme which will provide professional training through a network , which has been jointly developed and takes into account the vast experience of each nation .
Although this report contains some positive aspects in terms of its intentions , it also makes some misguided proposals , which arise from a largely economic view of the system .
For example , although its recommendation for a single course of initial study is to be welcomed , this course must be guaranteed not to be made excessively short on the pretext of meeting the needs for courses that will make students rapidly ' employable ' .
These courses would be cheaper but it would be students and families , once again , funding the system , with students paying once they have graduated .
The fact is that , with regard to what is known as the Bologna process , which contains this and other proposals , on the basis of the Bologna declaration of 1999 , which was reiterated and developed in Prague in 2001 , a distinction must be made , on the basis of the objectives underlying the entire process , between the official line and the practices that are taking place .
Despite the statements to the contrary , the set of measures that we have already seen , some of which are already underway , suggest an attempt to cut costs by the Member States in higher education , as is happening in Portugal .
We therefore wish to stress our opposition to attempts to commercialise knowledge , to reduce the role of public higher education , to make structural changes to the social function of higher education and to its organisational structures and to attempts by the ruling classes to hijack the contents and objectives of education for ideological reasons .
. I welcome the initiative of Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines to draft this report , bringing together many issues surrounding third-level education in the EU in a cohesive document with solid laudable proposals .
While education remains a national competence , it is important that the EU give whatever support possible to educators and students , particularly in areas where new and innovative courses and qualifications are needed .
In the area of rural development , there have been very significant initiatives in my own country , Ireland , to utilise EU funding such as through Leonardo to develop courses tailored to the needs of the rural economy .
The first course developed was a Diploma in Rural Development and Agri-Business .
Pioneering work in adult education was carried out by Professor Jim Phelan of UCD , Dr Michael Ward of UCC , Professor Michael Cuddy of UCG and Dr Ted Fleming of Maynooth .

They have now gone one step further and developed the first degree programme via the Internet which is a BSc in Rural Development .
This type of programme is an inspiration to what can be done for rural areas by fully exploiting new technologies .
The aim is life-long learning ; to produce a new type of specialist graduate equipped with superior rural development , advisory and management skills .
This report is the confirmation of the irresponsible attitude of a Parliament which is shamefully abusing its right of initiative .
This scandalous text is attempting , with rare hypocrisy , to place universities under the exclusive tutelage of Brussels .
Several recitals clearly show the hidden intentions of the report , namely : to turn universities into servile outposts of the Commission , transform professors into docile supporters of European technocracy , to give the Commission a right of scrutiny over the national university systems , to encourage the mass influx of professionals and experts that have been duly mandated by Brussels into our universities .
The report is the natural corollary of the Jean Monnet Chairs , which , in France , raised the legitimate anger of a number of teachers , who have now regrouped within the Jean Bodin Observatory in order to counter the federalist offensive .
It is the same perverse and obscurantist logic which is at work .
The report shows utter disregard for the fundamental principles which serve to contribute to the importance of universities !
Scientific neutrality is swept aside by this Europe-centric ideology , the propagation of which is the task of the Brussels agencies .
The independence of teachers is violated by the interference of supranational bodies in the way the universities work and are organised .
You are turning universities into a Trojan Horse for European federalism .
. ( NL ) The lack of the right of consultation has two causes .
One is an authoritarian state view in which citizens are seen only as obedient conscripts and taxpayers who must leave the actual decision-making to a specially selected elite who know how to do things much better than ordinary people .
The other reason is economic interest .
The protection against pollution , nuisance and dangers in their living environment that most people want often means that businesses are hindered in their pursuit of profits .
This also results in an authoritarian approach in which decisions are governed by economic interests instead of being taken by everyone collectively .
Over the last few decades these hindrances seem to have been broken through .
There are forms of citizen consultation everywhere , and the EU also prescribes this .
Unfortunately the results of this participation are still often twisted to mean the opposite .
I support Mrs Korhola in her quest to put an end to the exceptions that are still being made for military interests and civil disasters .
The military often still think that they are above civilian society and that they can impose their own ideas .
Measures to prevent disasters can often be very drastic , like flooding polders in the Netherlands when river water levels are high .
Such decisions must not be taken without consultation .
The right of citizens to information and to participation has , for a long time , come up against the so-called right to secrecy , behind which the state authorities have been hiding .
The progression of reforms to improve relations between the administration and users has made this practice an exception .
The divisions between ' departments ' are gradually diminishing in the area of the environment as well .
This development is , of course , welcome .
That is why I support the Commission 's proposal for a directive of 19 January 2001 seeking to transpose into Community law the second pillar of the Aarhus Convention of 25 June 1998 .
This proposal is innovative , but it is down to the Member States to give the public effective opportunities to take part in the decision-making process .
I would , however , like to express some reservations about the amendments of the Korhola report which go further than the Aarhus Convention and which confirm the opinion of the rapporteur himself .
The MPF delegation believes , of course , that transparency of information and public participation in the decision-making process must be encouraged and well defined .
This should not , however , create overly complicated procedures that would go against the objectives of the proposal .
If excessively restrictive provisions are introduced , there is a risk that the whole process of access to information and decision-making could be impeded .
The only thing we should do is transpose into Community law the provisions - which are wholly appropriate - of the Aarhus Convention in order to encourage the effective application of this convention .
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
Mr President , with respect to the floods , it could be said that , in times of trouble , you find out who your friends are .
This old saying might illustrate the attitude of the European Union towards those affected by the floods , which have devastated Member States and candidate countries .
By reacting swiftly , by dispatching representatives to the affected areas and by agreeing to make available financial aid , the Union has boosted its Community policy and its closeness to the people .
The Union has proved that it can show the solidarity expected of it and which we work to achieve .
Although we can welcome the commitment to set up an assistance fund for natural disasters in the Union , we must certainly bear in mind the causes of this unpredictable weather .
Scientists throughout the world are all telling us that global warming is irreversibly changing the way we live and greenhouse gas emissions are only serving to make these disasters worse .
On one side of the planet , we have to sell livestock due to a lack of water and fodder .
Elsewhere , entire regions have been devastated since July due to thunderstorms .
Incidentally , Mr President , let us reiterate that , in Nepal , 422 people have died and 173 people have been reported missing .
In Russia , 50 people have lost their lives and 100 have been reported missing .
In Mexico , torrential rain has cost 21 lives and 15 000 people have been affected .
In Asia , 250 people have died this year .
Millions of homes have been affected by the rising water levels .
Unfortunately , as we know , these geographical areas do not have the opportunity that we have here to provide victims with solidarity .
Although Members can welcome the fact that aid has been granted and emergency measures have been taken swiftly and effectively , it is not enough to call for the application of the Kyoto Protocol , we must do much more than that .
We must integrate the environment into all our projects , into all our policies so that we can create a glimmer of hope .
We must lead the way in trying to slow down climate change .
The Rio Summit brought little in the way of results , so it is up to us to lead by example !
Mr President , although Bavaria , Saxony and Austria were also very badly hit by the floods , I have had an opportunity , as Federal Chairman of the Sudeten German Association , to mount a major relief programme for the Czech Republic . This stems not only from our traditional links with the country our families come from , but also from the fact that in situations like this we realise that as neighbours we are dependent on each other , for good or ill .
Sometimes there are what you might call neighbour disputes , but in emergencies like this we see the value of good neighbourliness .
Czechs were in action in Germany and in Austria , Austrians and Germans were in action in the Czech Republic , and I believe that there are two important points here . The first is that no victim of the floods should be worse off in the Czech Republic , which is a candidate country , than they would be in the existing Member States of the European Union .
Secondly , we also need to show solidarity when it comes to prevention .
We need to recognise that we are all in the same boat and that what is happening in central Europe today could happen tomorrow in southern Europe or northern Europe .
Above all , we should avoid something which I heard in this House earlier - by which I mean adopting the disdainful tone we heard during the topical and urgent debate about victims of the floods in the south .
A lot of people from the north said that is typical , special pleading for the south , and vice versa .
We Europeans are all in the same boat , and that is the key message of this disaster .
Like my colleagues , the Belgian Socialists , I abstained during the final vote on the resolution on the floods in Europe for two reasons .
First of all , solidarity can have no borders .
As Mrs Zrihen said , in the open sitting , the European Parliament is wrongly trying to compile a list of Member States whose regions have suffered torrential flooding .
Italy had to be added , as it did not appear in the current list , and the final text does not mention , in particular , the floods in Switzerland .
Secondly , if we want to better protect the territory of the Union against floods - and this is undoubtedly the desire of the European Parliament - we must take into account river basins , which ignore borders mapped out by history .
It is regrettable that , in our haste , we did not include this essential clarification in the text .
. ( NL ) During the past few years , the Rhine , Oder , Vistula and Elbe basins have been affected by flooding one after the other .
This is no coincidence .
They carry rainwater and ice water from the Alps and the Carpathians to the North Sea and the Baltic .
Rain has been on the increase due to global warming , the deforested soil is no longer able to retain the water and the river beds have become too narrow .
The dikes along these canalised rivers have been built too close to the main flow and houses have been built in alluvial areas where flood water was previously allowed to overflow .
This is therefore certainly not about chance but about predictable accidents .
The reference to the need to implement the Kyoto agreements worldwide is extremely appropriate , but it is to be feared that America will remain obstructive on account of pressure from the oil companies and the motor industry until they themselves become more and more affected by desertification and flooding .
Attention is now once more being paid to finding the money to help the victims of flooding .
This is necessary but unsatisfactory .
The same disasters may happen again in future years , and the likelihood of their happening again is unfortunately very great .
Our river management will therefore have to change radically , and this is still in danger of falling by the wayside .
The serious floods which recently devastated various countries in Central Europe clearly deserve our full attention and solidarity , especially for the families of the victims and for all those who have lost their homes and possessions .
We are also fully aware that the consequences of this type of natural disaster , which are to a large extent due to the climate changes that we have been seeing , take on a transnational dimension and call for the support and solidarity of the European Union as single entity .
We have not abstained , therefore , due to any disagreement with the basic reasons or proposals for immediate aid contained in the joint resolution that has been adopted . We simply have doubts about establishing a permanent financial reserve for emergency actions to respond to disasters of this type by harnessing some of the structural funds .
Indeed , it does not seem reasonable to us that financial resources from the structural funds should be permanently mobilised for emergency actions , which are by definition unpredictable , since it is possible to find , as has in fact happened in this case , more appropriate alternatives for dealing with this type of tragedy without affecting the permanent objectives that the use of these funds is intended to achieve .
Mr President , I would rather like to take a slightly different approach to the one I adopted during the debate on Afghanistan .
I am afraid to say that I am very pessimistic , as I have the very clear feeling that we are heading towards a fresh crisis .
In Afghanistan , which is a multi-ethnic state , there is an increasingly strong feeling amongst the largest national group , the Pashtuns , and whether it is justified or not I cannot say , that they are being neglected as compared with the peoples who lead the Northern Alliance , such as the Tadzhiks and the Uzbeks . This feeling is giving rise to an increasing potential for conflict , which the surviving Taliban are exploiting .
People talk about the Taliban withdrawal area in eastern Afghanistan as if it were just a military or police problem .
Unfortunately this is a nationality problem , since as I have said the largest group in this multi-ethnic state feels that it is being treated as second class , and that is something that could be explosively dangerous in the long run .
That is why we need a clever strategy for Afghanistan , in order to integrate all the ethnic groups more or less uniformly , which up to now clearly has not been the case .
Despite all the humanitarian successes and all the progress made on paper there is still a time bomb ticking away in Afghanistan .
The main reason for our voting against this joint resolution is the approval of parts of the resolution that seek to justify war and US intervention in Afghanistan , a situation which is all the more serious because of all of the US pressure for a new war against Iraq .
In fact , we totally disagree with resorting to war to resolve the problems of terrorism .
As we have stated repeatedly , there are other ways of combating terrorism , such as acting to resolve its direct and indirect causes .
By the same token , we cannot accept the calling into question of fundamental rights and freedoms or the practice of State terrorism on the pretext of combating terrorism .
Nevertheless , we welcome - which is why we have voted in favour of this point - the approval of the request for a detailed investigation , under the auspices of the United Nations , of the allegations of massacres and war crimes , which our group has condemned on more than one occasion , specifically by inviting the film-maker Jamie Doran to show his film in the European Parliament on 12 June .
We also support the call for greater financial aid for the economic and social reconstruction of the country and urgent humanitarian aid .
. I have voted in favour of the joint resolution even though it contains certain points with which I do not agree .
First of all I disagree with the analysis that the intervention in Afghanistan was necessary - on the contrary !
Second , the UN mandate for peace enforcing should not be prolonged but changed to peacekeeping .
But I support the joint resolution in the demand for investigation of all war crimes committed in Afghanistan and in the demand that prisoners should be treated in accordance with international conventions .
. ( NL ) Afghanistan is a sort of Switzerland .
In every valley the people determine their often stubborn points-of-view and they do not appreciate outside interference .
Over the last twenty-five years , ideologues from Russia , Saudi Arabia and now the US have wanted to try out their various experiments on Afghan society .
This has mainly resulted in death and destruction .
The latest intervention was not so much aimed at helping to solve the many problems that exist in Afghanistan , but to avenge the destruction of two office towers in New York a year ago .
Whether this dreadful attack was devised from within Afghanistan has never been proven , but the American response was that the established regime there had to be punished and ousted . Just as they now also want to oust the Iraqi regime .
In a world in which there is only one big military and economic superpower left , will the national government of another country only be legitimate from now on if it is well-disposed towards America and acts in line with American interests ?
The resolution falls between two stools .
On the one hand , it justifies the war and the continuing military presence .
On the other hand , it is looking at the war crimes of the victors and the need to investigate and punish for the first time .
The latter is new , and is a step forward compared with earlier attitudes .
In the light of this improvement , I am voting in favour of the resolution .
I am sorry that Mr Fatuzzo is not here today - I seem to be standing in for him .
However , I am genuinely concerned about this issue .
On the subject of Mrs Stenzel 's report , I would like to congratulate her very warmly on it .
I am pleased that we have adopted it today , as elections are being held in Macedonia on 15 September .
What is at stake here is the democratic stability of this important country , to which we are now linked by an association agreement .
This country has experienced a huge refugee problem .
It has had two wars within its borders , many disasters , and now it is afflicted by terrorism .
That is why it is very important for us to signal to Macedonia today that this democracy has our support , this democracy , which over the last four years - during which there have been several major disasters - has amazingly succeeded in achieving a balance between different nationalities .
Even if quite a lot that glitters is still not gold , when you see the remarkable things the Macedonians have achieved , you have to say that they have earned our solidarity .
One sign that we could give would be to abolish the visa requirement for Macedonia at long last .
There was never such a requirement for Yugoslavia , there is not one for Croatia or Slovenia , and in fact Macedonia is the only associated country with a visa requirement .
We should finally accept this small country as a genuine European partner .
The report presented by the Commission on its strategy on Asia gives a great deal of room to pious hopes .
It has the advantage , however , of being extremely clear on certain key issues , particularly on the desire of the EU 's leading bodies to take action over any unequal liberalisation in trade and in the movement of capital , and to provide the WTO with even greater powers .
No lessons have been learned from the 1997-1998 financial crises and from the crash in Asia , the current stock market crisis or from the crash in South America .
Reality must fade into the background in the face of liberal dogma in the era of capitalist globalisation .
The ASEM 4 Summit in Copenhagen will also discuss security .
At a time when , in Europe , immigrants are being used as scapegoats for the social crisis and , in Asia , Washington is deploying its policy of a ' lasting war ' in the name of combating terrorism , is once again sending forces to the Philippines and is threatening to invade Iraq , we would hope that the EU would guarantee the rights of immigrants and would oppose American interventionism .
In the real world , however , the European Union is behaving like an economically dominant force in Asia and the United States like an aggressive force .
This is certainly something that the European Parliament should oppose .
There may be different situations that set Asia apart but there are general developments which affect the entire continent of Europe and Asia .
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
. ( NL ) The crux of this report is not the greenhouse effect in newly industrialised countries , the fight against poverty , capital punishment in China or the dictatorship in Burma .
These comments serve only as padding for the EU 's stance favouring Taiwan over China .
Taiwan has recently changed from a place of exile from the old pre-1949 Chinese regime into a country in which the majority is non-Chinese , where the old Kuo Min Tang party has lost power to movements of indigenous Taiwanese , and which is looking more and more like Europe and Japan from a political and economic point of view .
The majority will probably now choose to become an independent state in a referendum .
Not even so much because this has actually been the case for 53 years , but rather because they never felt much kinship with the Chinese mainland .
The fact that the previous regime in Taiwan had for decades sought foreign backing to recapture the mainland is a problem .
The existence of two Germanies , two Vietnams and two Yemens ultimately came to an end because one was able to swallow up the other .
The EU Member States withdrew their recognition of Taiwan in favour of China .
If a majority of the European Parliament now chooses to recognise two states after all , the debate about this must be conducted openly instead of being concealed .
. ( NL ) EU Member States caused much damage in the former Yugoslavia through their participation in the war in 1999 .
It is therefore their duty to contribute to its restoration .
Not only in Kosovo but also in Serbia .
This has now been proposed , and rightly so .
In 1999 there were good grounds for suspecting that the war was not only about Kosovo .
The deep loathing that the inhabitants of Kosovo had developed against Yugoslavia looked as if it would be misused as a crowbar with which to achieve a whole different set of objectives .
The coercive proposals made to Milosevic before the outbreak of the war did not , oddly enough , provide for independence for Kosovo , but rather for foreign influence on the government and the economy of Serbia and Montenegro .
If it is now being proposed that the European Agency for Reconstruction , which was originally intended for Kosovo , now be extended to include Serbia and Montenegro and if there are also calls for Kosovo , Serbia and Montenegro to be made more dependent on one another by creating a common energy supply , this raises the question as to whether Serbia has been promised that it will get Kosovo back in exchange for adapting to and integrating into the EU .
If this is the case , it will not only evoke a lot of resistance within Serbia but will in particular cause uncontrollable anger on the part of the deceived inhabitants of Kosovo .
The EU is playing with fire .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 12.50 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

The next item is the debates on the cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law .
The next item is the debate on the following five motions for resolution regarding the case of Dr Saad Eddin Ibrahim , in Egypt .
B5-0465 / 2002 by Mr Wuori , Mrs Boumediene-Thiery and Mr Piétrasanta , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on the case of Saad Eddin Ibrahim ;
B5-0471 / 2002 by Mrs Napoletano and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the sentencing of Saad Eddin Ibrahim in Egypt ;
B5-0473 / 2002 by Mr Hugues Martin and Mr Posselt , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on the case of Saad Eddin Ibrahim ( Egypt ) ;
B5-0480 / 2002 by Mrs Boudjenah and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on human rights in Egypt ;
B5-0484 / 2002 by Mr van den Bos and Mrs Malmström , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on Egypt .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Union devotes particular attention to the area of freedom of expression and fundamental rights .
Strict observance of these rights is an essential condition of our association agreement .
The Euro-Mediterranean partnership cannot be strengthened , therefore , by denying this indispensable and irrevocable clause .
Since 1981 , Egypt has been under an emergency law which grants extensive powers to the authorities , with a total disregard for human rights .
Freedoms are increasingly restricted and subject to the tightest control by the police authorities , which are approved by the judicial authorities .


Saad Eddine Ibrahim and his colleagues from the Ibn Khaldoun Centre have been sentenced on the pretext of misuse of funds or of procedures , but the real reason for this is that they are defending democratic freedoms , as Nawal El Saadawi or other human rights activists have done in the past , whilst individual freedoms are also flouted , several homosexuals having been sentenced .

We therefore urge the Egyptian Government to put an end to the emergency law to allow all citizens to fully enjoy their lawful rights , to allow sexual orientation , freedom of religion and freedom of opinion to be expressed without being equated to crimes and to allow the freedom of association to be guaranteed so that civil liberties campaigners will no longer be persecuted .
We want the State of Egypt , like the other States which have signed the association agreements , to understand that the democratic clause in Article 2 is not a luxury , nor is it an option .
We want our friends to know that we are not interfering , not acting out of a notion of superiority , nor a wish to preach , but we are in fact acting out of duty , a duty to denounce and condemn violations of freedom wherever they occur .
Human rights are universal and transcend all borders .
Mr President , we welcome the fact that all the Parliamentary groups are willing to discuss and vote on this subject for urgent debate which involves the case of Professor Ibrahim , who has been sentenced by the supreme court for state security to seven years ' imprisonment for two offences : conspiracy and activities against the state , and fraud .
The first question needs to be considered in more general terms , since the Constitutions of some of these countries - in particular , I would recall the recent modification in Tunisia - contain an article to the effect that the citizens must not carry out any activity which may be directed against the state , which can even be interpreted as conspiracy .
Moreover , this is applied to freedom of speech , and therefore an opposition supporter , a journalist or any free person who criticises the government may then be accused of activities against the state .
This is a very serious issue , which requires a more general response .
As regards the offence of fraud , however , checks , will , of course , have to be carried out , but according to our records , as Commissioner Patten has said , there has been no fraud with regard to the use of the Community funds which Professor Ibrahim 's institute has administered on behalf of the Commission .
I believe that we are dealing with a case of defence of human rights and I therefore feel that the European institutions should exert every possible pressure on the Egyptian authorities .
Mr President , Ibn-Khaldoun was one of those major historical figures who demonstrate how much we in Europe owe to the Arab and Islamic world .
We accordingly have a duty to give our support to a man , Professor Ibrahim , who has worked in the tradition of Ibn-Khaldoun , and we should make it clear - and this is also something that we owe , as it were , to the heritage of Ibn-Khaldoun - that there are not two concepts of human rights , one for Europe and one for Egypt , but that there is a single concept of human rights here , which is also appropriate in common cultural and historical terms and which should apply universally today .
That is precisely why we owe it to both Professor Ibrahim and the Egyptian people to get involved here .
First , to get Professor Ibrahim released and second , as his health is poor , to secure help for him .
However , the third issue is for us to very clearly advocate close cooperation between Egypt and the European Union .
Egypt is one of our most important partners in the Mediterranean area .
As is evident from the current political crisis , Egypt , alongside Morocco and Turkey , is our most important ally in the Islamic world in the Mediterranean area .
Precisely because Egypt is a partner and an ally and not a debtor country or a country we do not want anything to do with , and precisely because Egypt is an important ally , we should not mince our words in talking to them , as is usual between friends , and we should plead the case of persecuted minorities and persecuted people in general . Above all we should support those people within the Egyptian State and within the Egyptian Government who want to strengthen human rights rather than demolish them .
Egypt has a great tradition of which I have personal experience from the times when Anwar al Sadat and President Mubarak addressed this House .
We are taking about important partners , and I believe that we should continue along that path and support Professor Ibrahim .
Mr President , the Barcelona Process will never get off the ground as long as the common principles are not being complied with .
Fine words like peace , stability and prosperity will degenerate into empty slogans if partner countries continue to sacrifice the constitutional state on the altar of unbridled political power .
The intensification of economic cooperation cannot be seen as a separate issue from progress in the areas of human rights and democracy .
Many Arab leaders refuse to realise that openness , power-sharing and fair judicial procedures will promote rather than hinder stability and economic development .
A properly functioning civil society is not a threat , it is a necessary precondition for decent government .
Egypt is a big and important country with a rich history .
She must play a leading role in the political modernisation of the Arab world .
In order to achieve this , she must set an example that other states can emulate .
Unfortunately , there is no evidence of this as yet .
Openness and democracy still leave much to be desired , and the constitutional state is often violated .
Thus Dr Ibrahim 's recent seven year prison sentence is a flagrant breach of every legal concept .
The accusations of fraud with EU money are not only unsubstantiated , according to the Commission , they are completely unfounded .
This sentence therefore undermines the cooperation treaty .
We are therefore urgently appealing to President Mubarak to do everything in his power to reverse this injustice .
Good relations with Egypt are also of vital importance for us .
The European Union is willing to inject new life into the Barcelona Process , but this can only be done if our partners stop flouting the principles .
Mr President , it is always sad to talk about human rights abuses because we in the EU take for granted the universal rights that we exercise day in , day out .
The case of Dr Ibrahim is deeply worrying because it is part of a trend that we see increasing in Egypt .
Yet Egypt - as we have heard from Mr Posselt - is a friend and ally .
Therefore I urge the Commissioner on his visit to Egypt to raise at the highest level with President Mubarak the case of Dr Ibrahim and his colleagues .
He should be released immediately .
There should be a fair appeal process .
I equally urge him to raise the case of the ' Cairo 52 ' , who are also undergoing a retrial , and of the four British men held pending trial in Cairo at this moment .
We are friends of Egypt .
We must encourage dialogue .
When dialogue fails , we must bring forward sanctions .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that we must first of all pay tribute to one of the greatest enemies of our topical and urgent debates and one of the champions of the bureaucratisation of our Parliament , Mr Corbett . The damage has been done .
We are not talking today about tough regimes . We should be devoting much more attention to Saudi Arabia or Syria .
We are dealing with a so-called moderate regime , Egypt , as a way of hiding all our shame and cowardice .
We are talking about Professor Saad Ibrahim , who is one of the most ardent Egyptian supporters of democracy in his country , and we too should be much more determined in our quest for democratisation in the Arab world .
I would like to thank Commissioner Patten for his clear statements in defence of Professor Ibrahim and refuting allegations of any kind of fraud .
I believe that all possible checks have been carried out and that there is therefore no excuse : we must fight for his release .
Lastly , I would also like to thank all those who have supported his nomination for the Sakharov prize .
Mr President , the trial of Dr Saad Eddin Ibrahim and his colleagues has aroused widespread international interest and concern , not least among those who , like many of us here , consider ourselves true friends of Egypt and the Egyptian people .
When Dr Ibrahim and his co-accused successfully appealed for a retrial last February , we hoped that the best traditions of justice would prevail , not only on the merits of the case , but because of the evident damage to Egypt 's international reputation caused by the handling of the case by the Egyptian authorities .
We were therefore profoundly shocked on 29 July when Dr Ibrahim was again sentenced to seven years ' imprisonment with hard labour , a cruel sentence for a man in his frail physical condition .
A further four defendants were also sentenced to prison and the remaining 24 have suspended sentences .
Even if the charges were credible , and we do not find them so , these sentences are completely disproportionate .
The following day I personally voiced my dismay and repeated that , despite careful monitoring and a mid-term external audit , the Commission has no evidence of financial or other wrongdoings by Dr Ibrahim or his co-defendants with respect to the two NGO contracts managed by them .
We made this clear in an affidavit submitted during the appeal .
Furthermore , I repeated then and I repeat now that we deplore the use of state security courts and procedures to pursue cases of this nature .
Even the Court of Appeal has misgivings on the use of Military Court Order No 4 under which this prosecution was brought .
We were disturbed by the decision to retry the defendants after a successful appeal and despite Dr Ibrahim 's failing health .
We are troubled by the conduct of the trial and the speed and manner of the court 's decision .
This unseemly rush to judgment did nothing to improve the court 's credibility .
The case has been closely followed by the EC and Member States and we made our concern clear at the highest levels from the beginning .
With respect to the charge of accepting foreign European Union funds without authorisation , the Commission insists that direct grants to civil society are perfectly proper and are covered by the EU-Egypt Framework Convention on Financial and Technical Cooperation .
At the conclusion of the first trial last year , the severe sentences led to an EC statement on 23 May and the presidency declaration two days later , expressing deep concern .
Then , as now , the European Union stressed the importance it attaches to the development of civil society and reiterated that actions to this end are an integral part of Barcelona and bilateral programming which Egypt has signed up to .
With respect to the claimed misuse of EU funds , the Commission is , to say the least , surprised that the Court has reportedly ruled as irrelevant the views of the Commission , the alleged victim , that its normal monitoring procedures , including an external mid-term audit , gave no cause for concern whatsoever , financial or otherwise .
We have no access at present to the NGO files , which have been confiscated by the authorities .
The European Union has always hoped that due legal process and justice would prevail .
We have scrupulously avoided any intervention that might prejudice that expectation .
The Commission 's affidavit during the appeal was strictly factual and correct .
We are concerned that the Court , in its written explanations , is reported to have implied the contrary .
The Commission and the Member States continue to follow the case closely .
The Cairo-based Troika has already visited Dr Ibrahim in prison and the Swedes visited again this weekend .
We are in close touch with the family .
If , as first press reports indicate , the Court 's formal explanation of its verdict , which still has to be translated , misrepresents the European Union 's position , we will not hesitate to rectify it .
The legal process is not finished and I understand that the defendants will appeal .
The Egyptian authorities are well aware of the wider implications of a judgment that is perceived as unjust and politically influenced .
Only the due process of law in full transparency can prevent further damage to Egypt 's international standing .
The Ibrahim case raises issues of real concern , but the overall human rights situation in Egypt is complex and not entirely clear .
There is some cause for optimism , for example , in relation to women 's rights , judicial control of general elections and social legislation .
But there are also some signs which give cause for concern , such as the new law on non-governmental organisations , the alleged harassment of homosexuals referred to earlier and the further arrests of members of the Islamic opposition .
What we have to do is discern the trend and react accordingly .
The Ibrahim case casts a long , but hopefully temporary , shadow over the Egyptian human rights and democracy movement .
Although the international outcry at the verdict has provoked a strong reaction in Cairo , many influential Egyptians accept that Egypt must adopt the highest judicial and democratic standards if it is to achieve its developmental and political ambitions .
We can only agree with that .
We will continue to use appropriate measures to express our concern on individual cases .
We shall discuss the broader issues concerning human rights and the promotion of democracy within the context of our cooperation programming and the enhanced political dialogue that must characterise the new and privileged relationship between the European Union and its Mediterranean partners .
I confirm directly to the Member who raised this question that I shall certainly be discussing the matter when , God willing , I visit Egypt myself next month .
Thank you very much indeed , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 4 p.m. or as soon as we finish the debates .
The next item is the debate on the following six motions for resolution on Nigeria , and more specifically the case of Mrs Amina Lawal :
B5-0466 / 2002 by Mrs Frassoni and others , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on the human rights breaches in Nigeria ;
B5-0470 / 2002 by Mrs Gröner and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the death sentence of Mrs Amina Lawal in Nigeria ;
B5-0472 / 2002 by Mrs Muscardini , on behalf of the UEN Group , on the case of Mrs Amina Lawal in Nigeria ;
B5-0474 / 2002 by Mr McCartin and others , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on the human rights situation in Nigeria ;
B5-0479 / 2002 by Mrs Eriksson and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on human rights breaches in Nigeria ;
B5-0486 / 2002 by Baroness Nicholson of Winterbourne and others , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on human rights breaches in Nigeria .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the African continent , which , for far too long , has been synonymous with tragedies and loss , recently wanted to present a new face to the international community .
The foundation of the African Union as an off-shoot of the OAU and as a role model to the European Union is a promise of the future for this continent and a homage to the institutions that make up our own .
As well as providing a model of political structure and a single project for the continent , the European Union must also protect the rights recognised by the international conventions .
The tragedy of another age , however , currently being suffered by Amina Lawal , is threatening all these promises and signatures ratified by her country , Nigeria .
The extreme distress experienced by Mrs Lawal and Mrs Husseini before her and so many other ignored voices , is evidence of the ludicrous gap between commitments and political and legal practices in certain countries of Africa .
It is difficult to understand that , in this day and age , a sentence of death by stoning could be passed down .
It is difficult to accept such a barbaric act could be carried out for the mere fact of having had a baby after a divorce .
Above all , it is difficult to accept regional laws , in a federal state which denies and flouts a national constitution .
Admittedly , it is the primary responsibility of the federal authorities of Nigeria to establish conformity and respect of its national laws and international commitments throughout its territory and the jurisdiction of its state .
However , it is also the moral and political duty of the Union , many of whose Member States share a common history with the African continent , to oppose criminal abuses , such as certain interpretations of the Sharia law and to support , using every effort and every means at our disposal , those who are fighting for the rule of law , for rights and for real justice for all .
If we are satisfied with a token statement each time a Kafkaesque crime befalls a citizen of the ACP countries , we are essentially becoming accomplices and are upholding , due to our diplomatic inertia , the return to obscurantist ways .
That is why my group and I are calling for a working group to be set up on the question of Sharia law and women 's rights as part of our forthcoming ACP-EU delegation .
The stability of Nigeria is under threat and the stability of the whole country could be affected by what is happening in Nigeria , the most densely populated country in Africa .
The shockwaves created by Amina Lawal 's case have just reached Europe ; let us take action to prevent further shockwaves in the future .
Mr President , Commissioner , I wish to express in the strongest terms my horror and disgust at what has been happening over the last two years in the northern provinces of Nigeria , where Islamic fundamentalists have imposed Sharia law over and above the laws of the country and international law .
I wonder , how can women - not men of course - be condemned to death by stoning for adultery in a country which has ratified the UN treaty on eliminating all forms of discrimination against women , in a country which has ratified the treaty against torture and the international covenant on civil and political rights , in a country with which the European Union has close ties under the Cotonou agreement ?
How come the federal government of Nigeria is unable to make the Islamic fundamentalists respect the very constitution of the country ?
What is the point of having a president if he is unable to guarantee the fundamental freedoms and human rights of his citizens ?
I find it impossible to believe , Commissioner Patten , that intolerance , obscurantism and misogyny can triumph over reason and human values .
I cannot accept that the Union does not have ways and means of preventing these criminal practices against women and that , in this specific case , we are unable to force the federal government of Nigeria to apply the law throughout its territory .
We need to send out a very strong message from this House today both to Nigeria and to any other country in which crimes are being committed against women because , as we know from the press , sentences of death by stoning are also passed in Iran .
We need to tell fundamentalists the world over that no tradition or culture can sanction the violation of the rights of half of mankind , which is why we are calling here and now for Amina Lawal to be released .
Mr President , I have read up the case of Ms Amina Lawal and checked it out with Amnesty International , which I would like to thank for the assistance it gave , as also the staff of my own group who confirmed the facts that had been published .
I looked into these facts and the first thing that strikes us about this case is the cruel and unusual punishment that is involved .
Above all , we have to look at the unfairness of the decision that was taken in imposing a punishment on the female partner in the name of some kind of religious belief .
This is not religious justice ; this is a purely political policy by which men in many parts of the world , in the past and still today , maintain their control and domination over the weaker sex .
The second hurtful aspect of this case is the absolute and wanton cruelty involved . It violates every instinct in mankind that prompts us to work for a world that can be shared in peace and enjoyment by us all .
Above all , this case reminds us of the barbarous days when witches were burned , as somebody pointed out earlier , and when human beings were sacrificed to satisfy an unseen , unknown and uncaring deity .
There are many people in this world who recognise many different visions and manifestations of their god or gods .
There are many people who recognise no god whatsoever .
This does not prevent us from sharing and enjoying the same world together .
But if some people believe that on behalf of their god , they can take it upon themselves to punish and persecute their fellow men because they follow a different religion or do not have any religious beliefs , then mankind cannot co-exist in peace in this world .
That is why we in this Parliament must make it clear that only democratic institutions have the right to make laws and impose humane punishment on other human beings and that the code of the United Nations will be upheld by the European Union at all costs .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , once again , a woman , Mrs Amina Lawal , has been sentenced to death by stoning in one of the Muslim states of the Federation of Nigeria .
Her crime is to have given birth to a child after her divorce .
Some months ago , Safiya Husseini , sentenced to the same fate , was spared following an international outcry .
But how many people have been sentenced to the same barbaric fate before this victory and how many will be sentenced in the future ?
It is high time that these highly antiquated legal decisions , which show complete contempt for human dignity , are prevented from being passed in Nigeria and elsewhere .
This strict application of Sharia law , which has nothing to do with respect of the Muslim religion , was declared unconstitutional by the Nigerian Minister for Justice , including in the federal Muslim states of the north .
In its constitution , the Federation of Nigeria describes itself as a secular State .
Nigeria is also signatory to conventions which spell out its commitments at international level .
Although the Katsina state is involved , there are other responsibilities : those of the federal Nigerian authorities which have a duty to ensure strict respect of the constitution and the protection of human rights for all Nigerian citizens , regardless of status , religion or sex .
The international community , and Europe in particular , must condemn this unacceptable breach of fundamental human rights .
Europe is opposed to the death penalty .
It has committed itself to protect women 's rights against sexual discrimination and against religious intolerance .
Doing everything in our power to save Amina Lawal from death by stoning is also one of Europe 's duties .
Human rights organisations are bravely fighting in Nigeria .
These organisations are often under threat , but they are working together despite the lack of resources and the lack of support , other than support from European organisations .
We must support their demands .
Lastly , as part of the Cotonou partnership agreements , Europe can and must urge Nigeria to respect its international commitments and to promote democracy and women 's rights .
Mr President , are we going to support a country that pursues barbaric practices ?
Now we are faced with the drama of Mrs Lawal .
More and more states within Nigeria are introducing Sharia law .
The political climate is often so influenced by Islam that politicians only have a chance in elections if they support this legislation .
Barbaric ancient desert practices such as stoning women or hacking off limbs are naturally at odds with the most fundamental human rights .
The much-discussed clash of civilisations , cultures or faiths can only be prevented if the strict Sharia law is abolished everywhere .
Nigeria is a very fragile and unstable democracy .
The European Union supports the democratisation process there , and with good reason .
However , it can only continue to do so if the federal government does everything in its constitutional power to stop barbaric punishments from being administered .
If they fail to do so , the support we recently promised must be reconsidered .
Development aid and support for good government makes little sense if the recipients of this aid persist with their barbaric practices .
Mr President , Commissioner , as Christian Democrats , and as the PPE-DE Group , our commitment to the defence of the value of human life and dignity , and the defence of the fundamental rights and freedoms required for that dignity , lead us once again to vigorously condemn the violations of human life and dignity represented by the death sentences - and , what is more , death by stoning - handed down in strict application of Islamic law ; and to urge the authorities responsible to show clemency in order to prevent the ignominy of the execution of such sentences .
It also leads us to remind not only the Federal State of Nigeria , but also Niger , Sudan and Somalia , that the current interpretation and application of the sharia is not only a clear violation of fundamental rights , but that it evidently contravenes the international commitments to human rights which they have signed up to , including the Cotonou agreements , article one of which clearly states that the rights of the individual will be respected and that the situation of women and issues of sex equality will systematically be taken into account in all areas , political , economic and social .
Therefore , as well as our absolute rejection of the death sentences which have been handed down , and as well as asking for mercy for Amina Lawal , Ahmadu Ibrahin and Fatima Usman , we must and want to demand that the governments of these countries bring their legislation into line with the international standards and commitments in the field of human rights , in order to prevent an application of the sharia which violates human rights .
Furthermore , as the European Union we must be prepared to use the mechanisms available to us under the Cotonou agreements in the event of the violation of the principles they stand for .
Only in this way , Mr President , will we contribute to progress on freedom and respect for human rights in the world .
Mr President , Commissioner , this mother , Amina Lawal , has been sentenced to death , to die by stoning , brutally , for having had sexual relations after being divorced , something very common which is done by millions of people , men and women , on all five continents , regardless of their beliefs , Muslims , Catholics , protestants and any other .
' Why Amina and not me ? ' , the whole world asks in the face of this Islamic hypocrisy .
Mr President , Commissioner , the current application of the sharia in the states of the north of Nigeria did not exist before .
It is simply a fundamentalist interpretation .
The harm it would do to the life of Amina is irreversible .
Later , power relationships will change , there will be other tribunals , Islamic ones or American ones , which establish different criteria , but Amina 's right to life will be irreversibly violated .
Paragraph 11 reiterates that the European Parliament wants to see consideration of the victims of fundamentalist persecutions being given the right to asylum , particularly in cases of sentences to death by stoning .
Mr President , Commissioner , we must not forget that these sentences to death by stoning are also being carried out in Iran .
And a top official close to Khatami even had the nerve to praise them .
Commissioner , we want to strengthen links with Iran , but are these stonings compatible with our coherence on foreign and security policy and the defence of human rights ?
Commissioner , I would ask you also to take account of the stonings in Iran .
Mr President , Commissioner , it is with great sorrow that we follow the events in Nigeria .
I was among those who believed that the election of President Obasanjo some years ago would usher in change .
This latest report and discussion is just one in a long line indicating that the security forces are not acting as they should and that the causes are not being investigated .
There are reports that some years ago the president was in principle calling for all those belonging to the Oodua People 's Congress , that is , several hundred people , to be fired upon .
Transparency International still classes Nigeria as the second most corrupt country in the world .
The figures for child labour and trafficking in children are highest in Nigeria .
If we were really sincere about these matters , we should now also call on the ambassadors to take steps in Nigeria to publicise the fact that Amina Lawal is welcome in any European country .
We should act to say that she can come here , that we , as Europeans together , are prepared to save her .
That is the only honourable way to proceed .
I would ask the Commissioner to consider speaking with the ambassadors .
Mr President , we shall vote in favour of this resolution in spite of all the criticism that can be directed at it .
If the European Parliament can prevent a crime from being committed against Amina Lawal by adopting a position , then this is what it must do .
Condemning a woman for having given birth to a child , in the name of antiquated laws , is a despicable crime , in the same way as all forms of oppression of women and all forms of mutilation are despicable , whether or not they are perpetrated in the name of religion .
We firmly echo the protests against the fact that women are oppressed and deprived of their human rights in the name of the Sharia law , but we are equally firmly opposed to what is being done in the name of the Vatican or the Bible .
We must , of course , condemn the barbaric acts in Nigeria , but we must also condemn these acts when they are committed in the United States , this superpower which poses as a model of modern civilisation , or even here , in the European Union which tolerates some of its Member States implementing laws which ban women from enjoying the basic right to own and control their own bodies .
Whilst we oppose acts of barbarism perpetuated elsewhere , we must also ensure that our own house is in order .
Mr President , in every part of the world we see examples of violence and cruelty by individuals and sometimes appalling scenes of mob violence and lynch rule .
These are horrors which every civilised person , government and judicial system condemns .
Some acts of savagery are doubly chilling because they are authorised by people supposedly appointed to administer justice .
It is not just in Nigeria , but today we are focusing on Nigeria .
The practices carried out there in the name of Sharia law are beyond the pale of any society that calls itself civilised and humane .
Stoning for adultery is barbaric ; flogging for sex before marriage or alcohol consumption and amputation for theft may be considered excessive .
To give judicial approval to a stoning to death by a legal mob cannot be acceptable to the vast majority of Nigerians who are decent and responsible , including their president , and it certainly cannot be acceptable to us .
Earlier this year , we saw international pressure helping to put a stop to plans to stone Safiya Husseini to death . Now Amina Lawal faces the same threat of death by torture .
Safiya was married at 12 years old and Amina at 14 years old .
They lost their childhood and Amina may now lose her life .
The young couple Ahmadu Ibrahim and Fatima Usman face the same prospect , as does an older man accused of rape .
This punishment is incompatible with the conventions and covenants signed by Nigeria .
Tens of thousands of people have written from 110 countries to appeal for clemency in the Amina case .
I believe the federal government understands that and indeed the minister of justice has also condemned the verdict .
The key is the governor of Katsina state and it is important that the presidency and the Commission and the President of our Parliament add their pleas to those many of us have already sent to Umaru Musa Yar 'Adua .
Mr President , Commissioner , following the success of international action to save the life of Safiya Husseini in March this year , it is all the more shocking to again be faced with the threatened execution of a Nigerian woman and mother by being stoned to death .
Despite international pressure , the Nigerian Government is not willing to meet its obligations under international law and is allowing 10 Nigerian federal states to apply local and religiously motivated criminal law contrary to national constitutional law and international human rights .
At the same time , however , we need to be aware that Nigeria is by no means a unique case .
According to information from Amnesty International , in Iran , for example , in 2001 and 2002 at least six women were sentenced to death by stoning for crimes such as ' adultery and earthly depravity ' , in some cases after a long prison sentence , and these sentences were carried out .
In Iran alone a total of 35 people , both men and women , have already been executed this year in various ways .
It is therefore high time that the European Union took a stand against this barbaric practice not just in individual cases , but as a matter of principle .
It should also be possible to endeavour to impose sanctions on regimes where practices of this kind take place .
This is , as every Member who has spoken in this debate has pointed out , an extremely troubling case .
I am not surprised that it has caused so much outrage , as well as shock , in Parliament .
Throughout , the Commission has been deeply concerned by the possible application of harsh penalties in Nigeria .
This time we , like Members , are particularly concerned about the case of Amina Lawal , who has been condemned to death by stoning , which , as Mr Bowis said , is in effect a state-sanctioned and organised brutality , although she is at present awaiting appeal .

The Commission is as strongly opposed as every Member who has spoken to the use of cruel and discriminatory punishments .
We have consistently expressed concern over Sharia punishments in Nigeria and - I shall return to this point - we have expressed our concern about Sharia punishments elsewhere as well . This concern has been expressed , among other places , at the Commission on Human Rights .
Quite simply , we expect all communities to accept international norms concerning human rights , gender equality and respect for human life .
We are resolutely opposed to the use of the death penalty and fully subscribe to the European Union guidelines against the death penalty adopted in 1998 .
We have had the opportunity on more than one occasion to discuss those guidelines in this Parliament .
A Troika démarche was carried out to restate this position only last year in Nigeria .
The Commission will continue to provide support for human rights and democracy initiatives , through its cooperation programme with Nigeria and through other instruments such as the European Initiative for Democracy and Human Rights , which has so many eloquent champions in this Parliament .
This initiative includes Nigeria as a focus country , and will support interventions in the field of good governance and legal reform with the aim of achieving a positive impact on the status of women and awareness of their legal rights .
The Union is , of course , in constant political dialogue with the Nigerian Government , as a number of Members have pointed out , for example , Mrs Karamanou .
This could be intensified as foreseen under the Cotonou Agreement , depending on how the situation evolves .
I was interested by the proposal , which was also mentioned by one of the authors of this resolution , to establish a working group on Sharia and human rights and women 's rights under the Cotonou Agreement .
As Parliament may know , we financed a study - the Peters report - on the problems of applying the Sharia Law in Nigeria .
I am sure Parliament will not be surprised at the main conclusions .
The report believed that some legal texts were poorly drafted and contradictory , that application of the texts was inconsistent , that the judges concerned were incompetent and poorly trained and that there were contradictions not just with international laws but also federal laws .
I can assure Parliament that we will continue to raise this deeply troubling issue .
As I have had occasion to say to foreign ministers from a number of countries , it is very difficult for us in Europe to accept that female lapidation is consistent with internationally acceptable norms of behaviour and of human rights .
Mrs Izquierdo Rojo raised the question of female lapidation in Iran .
I can assure her that I have raised that issue with Iranian ministers .
I have raised it in Tehran , as well as at meetings outside Tehran .
I very much hope that in the course of the next months we will be able to begin a comprehensive human rights dialogue with Iran , alongside the discussions we will be having with it on political issues and on trade and cooperation , so that we can continue to raise the issue with it , as we raise it with every other country where it is relevant .
Parliament is concerned about this ; we are concerned about it ; European public opinion is deeply troubled by it .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 4 p.m. or at the end of the debates .
The next item is the debate on the following seven motions for resolutions on human rights in Zimbabwe :
B5-0464 / 2002 by Mr Van Orden and others , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on Zimbabwe ;
B5-0467 / 2002 by Mrs Maes and others , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on Zimbabwe ;
B5-0468 / 2002 by Mr Andrews , on behalf of the UEN Group , on Zimbabwe ;
B5-0469 / 2002 by Mrs Kinnock and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the human rights situation in Zimbabwe ;
B5-0481 / 2002 by Mr Vinci , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on human rights in Zimbabwe ;
B5-0482 / 2002 by Mr Belder , on behalf of the EDD Group , on Zimbabwe ;
B5-0485 / 2002 by Mr van den Bos , Mr Mulder and Mrs Sanders-ten Holte , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the human rights situation in Zimbabwe .
Mr President , it is with both sadness and frustration that I find myself presenting yet another resolution on Zimbabwe - the sixth within a year .
The fact is that the situation there is getting worse and the European Union 's actions to date have clearly been ineffective .
They are not being pursued with sufficient determination or vigour .
The European Union sends diplomatic missions to southern Africa but they come back empty handed and leave behind no impression that action against Zimbabwe is a high priority and a determining factor in the overall approach to southern Africa .
Let us be clear : the issue is not the rights of white farmers , it is the rights of all of the people of Zimbabwe .
If you are not a card-carrying Zanu-PF member then you are subject to harassment , discrimination , assault , selective starvation policies and murder .
How serious does it have to get before effective action is taken ?
President Mugabe has just returned to Harare from Johannesburg claiming support for his land policies .
This is a travesty .
To quote the opposition MDC , ' Mugabe 's land reform programme has resulted in massive environmental degradation , condemned hundreds of thousands to poverty and put six million people at risk of starvation ' .
That is the reality .
President Mugabe is a tyrant who has plundered the resources of his country for his own benefit and that of his cronies and who uses the apparatus of the state , including the police , to terrify and abuse his political opponents .
Imagine our horror , therefore , when we discovered that Augustine Chihuri , the Zimbabwe police chief who is actually named on the European Union 's prescribed list as being banned from travelling to EU countries , was nevertheless in France last week , at an Interpol meeting in Lyon .
You might rightly ask what a person like Chihuri is doing as a vice-president of Interpol in the first place , but that is a different question .
The fact is that he should not have been in France and the Council must now take vigorous and effective steps to close the loopholes and galvanise international moves against President Mugabe before the tragedy of Zimbabwe is again overshadowed by other international crises .
Let us have some determined action for the sake of all the people of Zimbabwe .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , President Mugabe 's dictatorship is reprehensible .
He is running his country into the ground , the fields are bare , the economy is going downhill , the people are suffering shortages , there is hunger ; he gags the press , he terrorises the opposition and his motive is to remain in power .
Nevertheless , he still finds sympathy in black Africa .
After all , Zimbabwe 's neighbours do not want to go to war against her .
The farm workers working on the white farms often have to live in unacceptable social conditions .
The landless poor want to be given the chance to survive .
There is therefore a need to redistribute the land , but this must be done according to legal and transparent procedures , without violence and without corruption .
The European Union must therefore play its own role .
We have too much respect for the people of Zimbabwe .
We cannot interfere in the internal affairs of a sovereign country .
Our sanctions must affect President Mugabe and his circle , but not the people of Zimbabwe .
The people must know that we understand their desire to acquire land and that we want to provide financial support for a legal procedure for acquiring land .
We must help Zimbabwe 's neighbours to take care of refugees .
If we do not do this , we will actually be providing them with an excuse to send the refugees back over the border , where they will once again fall prey to the repression .
This is the role that I hope this Parliament will support , and that is why we have submitted the amendments .
I understand that some people will not support them , but I really do not want to be seen simply as the white man wagging an admonishing finger at Africa .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , what is happening in Zimbabwe is quite simply an unparalleled tragedy .
In his speech in Johannesburg , Mr Mugabe made the unspeakable assertion that these events , which are totally contrary to constitutional law , are even contributing to sustainable development . That really takes the biscuit !
It would be hard to top that comment for audacity .
It would be good if there were some louder voices in black Africa exposing this for what it really is : a power struggle on the part of a man who has failed in the course of 20 years to push forward a process of land reform that could have been carried out constitutionally .
He only took action on this when his personal position was threatened , and only resorted to these tactics when his hold on power was at risk .
We must never forget that this action is only partly directed again white farmers .
It is above all aimed at Zimbabwe 's opposition , which managed , despite enormous repression in the parliamentary elections , to achieve a very remarkable result , and which of course has a great deal of backing amongst the public .
That is the real background to this .
I would like to quote some comments from the South African newspaper the Daily Newspaper , because it is one of the voices in a country which is , after all , our ally , which is important .
It has criticised the way the Mugabe Government has carried out land reform as brutal , and as a means of bringing production to a standstill , which is futile .
This paper has pointed out that Mr Mugabe is attempting to propagate a myth when he says he has the backing of all Zimbabweans .
We know after all that there is a strong opposition and that it is not therefore legitimate , and I am quoting now , to talk about ' my Zimbabweans and my Zimbabwe ' , while ignoring his many opponents , and that Mr Mugabe is creating a false impression when he alleges that Zimbabwe is , as it were , his property .
But as far as I understand he is in the process of selling off that property to his own family , so that the occupation of land is being misused to bestow gifts on his family members .
As I have already said , the European Union should be willing to support a legal and constitutional process of land reform , but it should not support such machinations .
We have to say that very clearly to our partner countries .
Mr President , in the Zimbabwe of President Mugabe , there are terrible things happening every day .
Just listen to this : ' The game we are going to play needs music , ' the Zimbabwean police agent told the 12-year-old girl at 10 o 'clock at night .
But when he threw a mattress on the ground , it became clear that he had something other than a game in mind .
For the next four hours , the girl 's mother and her nine-year-old and seven-year-old sisters were forced to continuously sing the praises of Robert Mugabe and watch while the undernourished Dora was raped by a gang of five so-called ' war veterans ' and the policeman behind the shack until 2.30 in the morning .
' This is the punishment for those who want to sell the country to Tony Blair and the whites , ' they screamed at the terrified girl .
Dora was abused because her absent father was an ordinary supporter of the opposition , the Movement for Democratic Change .
Unfortunately , the abovementioned tragedy ( see the Sunday Telegraph of 25 August ) was not an isolated incident .
Dora is just one of hundreds of young girls raped as part of a state campaign of systematic political purging of the population .
Not to mention the approximately 50 militia camps where President Mugabe 's opponents are locked up and tortured for ' re-education ' , but which are also increasingly being used as rape camps .
Meanwhile , President Mugabe does not seem to be in the least ashamed of this reign of terror .
Quite the opposite .
For example , take his outrageous performance at the UN Summit in Johannesburg , where this self-made pariah passed himself off as a victim of colonialism who wanted to free his ' occupied country ' from ' British colonialism ' .
The fact that he is allowing half of his 12 million compatriots to starve on account of this non-argument does not bother him in the least .
Namibian President Nujoma 's active support for President Mugabe and the deafening silence from President Mbeki , the great initiator of the NEPAD programme , which is all about rulers ' responsibilities towards the ruled , is worrying .
In order to prevent the ' oil slick effect ' , I call on the Council and Commission to continue to give the crisis in Zimbabwe political priority .
Because the fact that according to today 's Frankfurter Allgemeine , only the US Secretary of State expressly criticised Mr Mugabe 's reign of terror in the plenary assembly at Johannesburg hurt me personally a great deal .
Was Europe really silent on this ?
President Mugabe is allowing his people to starve and is blaming the West .
It is not he who has driven his own people to starvation , but the neo-liberal development model .
It is not he who has crushed democracy , violently intimidated his political opponents and manipulated elections , but the neo-colonial powers in Europe .
It is not he who attacks the independent media , but reprobates who are beyond his control .
It is not he who allows his militia to rape women who oppose him , but total strangers .
And it is not he who withholds food from his political opponents , but the enemies of Zimbabwe .
All this former freedom fighter 's political actions now have just one goal : how to stay in power at any cost .
No decent person objects to land reform , but every decent person objects to land reform as practised by President Mugabe .
Farmers are deprived of everything without any compensation and are forced to flee .
It is not the people of Zimbabwe who get the land they are entitled to , but Mr Mugabe 's political buddies .
The President was allowed to unashamedly propound misleading political propaganda at the Johannesburg Summit .
The so-called smart sanctions against the regime are not being particularly smartly enforced .
The penalties must be applied more strictly and the target group must be expanded .
I therefore ask Commissioner Patten what the position is regarding the promised investigation into the freezing of these men 's assets in Europe .
It is high time that new , honest elections were held in this country .
President Mbeki of South Africa and other leaders in the region must ultimately accept their responsibility and must support the people of Zimbabwe and not a president who neglects his citizens because of his own hunger for power .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Junker has already mentioned Mr Mugabe 's cynical speech at the Johannesburg Summit .
I tend to get the impression that speeches of this kind are , unfortunately , infectious .
I hope that the crass speech by Namibia 's President Nujoma in Johannesburg on the same day will not have any political consequences in Namibia itself .
Meanwhile , the politicisation of food aid in Zimbabwe is continuing , amongst other things .
Maize is being specifically distributed to the party faithful , church food stores are being stormed by the so-called war veterans , and the church has been banned from distributing aid on the grounds that it is creating parallel structures .
What should we be doing ?
We should do what we have decided to do .
To be precise , I expect that Zimbabwe 's Foreign Minister will not be invited to the EU-SADEC meeting of Foreign Ministers in Copenhagen in November , and we should make it clear to our partners in southern Africa that European money is not intended to finance an African renaissance or a new NEPAD programme of African development for President Mugabe and his political allies .
We should financially participate in the reconstruction of Zimbabwe and land reform there once Mr Mugabe has gone and within a proper constitutional framework - but not now .
If Zimbabwe 's neighbours exert pressure in their own interest , because they themselves are suffering from the impact of Mr Mugabe 's policies - for example the flow of refugees into neighbouring countries - then we should support them in accommodating refugees , but certainly not now .
We should make our own policy perfectly clear and bring appropriate pressure to bear on our own Council of Ministers , because I really have the impression - as a number of Members have already said - that this is not really being given priority , and that no very clear statement was made about Mr Mugabe in Johannesburg .
That is why I hope that we will at least take a hard line in relation to the meeting in November in Copenhagen .
Our partners in southern Africa will then have to decide for themselves if they want to show solidarity with Mr Mugabe or with the people of Zimbabwe , and join us in the dialogue to put an end to this situation .
Mr President , of course this resolution speaks for itself .
It is an appalling litany of crimes against humanity .
President Mugabe is bereft of principles , devoid of any sense of justice , his regime sinks to unimagined levels as each day passes .
He has no respect for human rights , minority rights , international law or international opinion .
He is a vile despot and we must cease all links with him and his regime .
As Mr Van Orden said , we must hit Mr Mugabe and his regime where it matters most , i.e. in the pocket .
There must be an end to international trade and effective freezing of the bank accounts of Mr Mugabe and his entourage .
Further financial and targeted sanctions must be vigorously imposed .
At the same time , we must aid and support those African states which take similar punitive actions against the Mugabe regime .
The great sadness in all of this is the effect it is having on the citizens of Zimbabwe , whose only crime is to have Mr Mugabe as their president .
Let us target Mr Mugabe , not the citizens of Zimbabwe , and let us ensure that our actions are effective and not merely international window-dressing .
Mr President , once again , a Marxist dictator - or rather a dictator with Marxist leanings - who has come to power with the blessing of western governments and their advisors , has revealed his true colours .
On the pretext of land reform , and completely illegally , he is waging vandalism pure and simple , but also intimidation and the most brutal violence ; atrocities are being perpetrated against white farmers , and against black farmers too , with whom they work and whose situation continues to deteriorate .
We already know what the outcome of the situation will be .
President Mugabe 's militia , spurred on by envy and a taste for pillaging , are forcing white farmers into exile , at best .
Their departure will spell the end of farms , famine for 12 million inhabitants of Zimbabwe and widespread poverty .
But the icing on the cake is that even here there will be support for holding the West responsible for this situation and this poverty .
We have already seen this happen in Congo , Algeria , Angola and Mozambique .
This has happened in several African countries whose leaders very recently applauded Mr Mugabe in Johannesburg .
In the light of this situation , I do not know whether we can do anything for the people of Zimbabwe , but we must at least have the honesty to say to the leaders of these countries that the primary cause of their underdevelopment is nothing to do with the western world .
Mr Posselt has the floor on a point of order .
Mr President , just a few words . I wanted to mention that this is the first time we are holding an urgent debate since the Corbett reform of our Rules of Procedure .
That means that the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance is cut from three to two hours , in order to free up two hours for legislative work .
That was the official reasoning .
Having seen today 's agenda , I have to say that this legislative work must be taking place in secret .
I would like to emphasise that I am very willing to make concessions , but not when the other side throws them away .
By that I mean that I accept the idea of allowing two hours for legislative work , but in that case legislative work must actually been done here on Thursday afternoon .
If no such work is being done , then I would like to have those two hours back for the urgencies .
I know Zimbabwe reasonably well .
When I was my own country 's Overseas Development Minister in the 1980s I visited Zimbabwe frequently in the years after its independence .
I recall the hope with which Zimbabwe set out on its own road as a sovereign country and how blessed it had been by the Almighty with food and other resources .
I can remember , for example , during a famine in Mozambique , purchasing food aid in Zimbabwe for dispersal in Mozambique .
Recalling all that it makes me even more sad when I look at the situation in Zimbabwe today .
The Commission has , as Parliament knows , suspended official development assistance to Zimbabwe since early 2002 .
We remain deeply concerned regarding the grave deterioration of the human rights situation in the country .
The International Crisis Group , which is an admirable organisation that reports regularly on trouble spots around the world , recently described Zimbabwe as a country in freefall .
That is no exaggeration of the position .
We , in the Commission , will contribute to support any peer pressure that Heads of State in Africa , and southern Africa in particular , may put on the Zimbabwe Government to respect the essential elements of the Cotonou Agreement , such as human rights , the rule of law and democracy .
I have to say in passing , and this is not irrelevant to the points made by Mr Van Orden , that I wish we had recently seen more evidence of that sort of peer pressure in southern Africa .
The political situation in the run-up to the local elections due this September continues to be tense , and the deadline for eviction orders for 2 900 white farmers to leave their properties expired on 8 August 2002 .
The Commission is therefore continuing to contribute to projects which directly support the population in the field of democratisation , respect for human rights and the rule of law , and the European Initiative for Democracy and Human Rights includes Zimbabwe as a focal country .
The food crisis in Zimbabwe is the worst in southern Africa .
There are credible reports of extensive politicisation of the Government of Zimbabwe 's own food supplies .
I am sure many Members of Parliament will have seen reports of Zanu-PF supporters saying to the people of Zimbabwe that only fools starve .
In other words , they have to subscribe to a set of political views in order to get fed .
The Commission deplores this .
The Commission , for its part , has responded with an estimated 110 000 tonnes of food aid , for a global allocation of about EUR 3.5 million .
The food is largely being distributed through the World Food Programme and the NGOs , with extensive involvement of local communities to identify needy groups .
An initial EUR 2 million was provided through our humanitarian organisation , ECHO , for vulnerable groups , particularly children and farm workers .
A sizeable part of the humanitarian financing decision to be taken shortly for EUR 30 million for the region will go to respond to the emergency in Zimbabwe including monitoring needs and food aid distribution .
An additional regional allocation of EUR 30 million within the 2002 programme of cooperation with the World Food Programme will provide food aid assistance in the region , in particular in Zimbabwe .
The Commission believes that SADC has a leading role to play in the resolution of the increasingly serious Zimbabwe crisis .
The Union will seek to ensure an enhanced dialogue with SADC , in particular during the forthcoming Ministerial Conference in Copenhagen in November .
It is planned to raise the issue of Zimbabwe as a specific point on the agenda .
Parliament will know of the targeted sanctions that we have introduced - sanctions which are focused on the leading members of this particularly nasty and deeply corrupt regime , on their travel and on their assets .
It is important , as some Members have pointed out , that we should do everything possible to make those sanctions stick .
I will certainly report the views of Parliament to Member States on this particular point .
I would also like to draw the attention of Parliament to the recent report of the Expert Panel established by the Security Council on the rape and pillage of the assets of the Democratic Republic of Congo and , in particular , to what is said there about Zimbabwe 's role in that systematic pillage .
The report itself makes extremely disturbing reading . The report is , in my judgement , something which the international community has to make plain that it intends to do something about .
President Mugabe and his cronies have wrecked a once prosperous and once stable country .
Their record is a deplorable blot on the history of southern Africa .
The sooner Zimbabwe is rid of them the better for that wonderful country and the better for its people .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Patten .
The debate is closed .
Mr President , looking through the Minutes I have just noticed that my name does not appear in yesterday 's Minutes .
It is very easy to confirm this , because I was present for the roll-call votes .
There is no doubt about the fact that you were present , Mrs Schierhuber !
I declare this sitting of the European Parliament closed .
( The sitting was closed at 4.25 p.m. )
I have voted in favour of the report but against approved Amendment Nos 1 and 2 .
I find it extremely regrettable that my own Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats tabled two amendments which weaken the committee 's original text .
Amendment No 1 removed the wording in paragraph 30 to the effect that the European Parliament ' expresses its indignation at the increasing number of executions in China ' and ' recalls that the Chinese government systematically uses persecution and torture as a means to silence dissidents and minorities ' .
The way in which the Chinese Government violates human rights is clear from , for example , its treatment of Christians and Falun Gong adherents .
I also voted against Amendment No 2 , relating to paragraph 35 , because , remarkably enough , it does not include Taiwan in the group of democratic countries .
Moreover , there is a desire only to give Taiwan observer status , while other democracies in the region are to be given the opportunity of becoming full members .
I also welcome the fact that the report sheds light on the ser