Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Monday , 18 December 2006 .
( The sitting was opened at 6.20 p.m. )
Membership of Parliament : see Minutes
Statement by the President
Before starting on the agenda , it is with a heavy heart that I have to remind you that the terrorist organisation , ETA has broken the ceasefire it had declared last March . Its barbarous attack on Madrid airport has caused the deaths of two Ecuadoreans , Carlos Alonso Palate and Diego Armando Estacio , who , as immigrants , had found their place in Spanish society and so were able to support their families in Ecuador .
With this attack , ETA has put an end to the process that was initiated by the Spanish Government and that was debated in October 2006 .
I should like , on behalf of the European Parliament , to express our most sincere sympathy and condolences to the families and friends of the two men who were murdered and to all Spaniards and Ecuadoreans .
I also want firmly to reiterate in this House the condemnation of this savage act of terrorism and to make it absolutely clear that , in a democracy , violence is wholly incompatible with dialogue and that peace ,
( Applause )
coexistence in freedom and respect for human rights are non-negotiable .
I also want to reiterate our support for all of Spain 's democratic institutions in that country 's fight against ETA terrorism and to express the hope of all the European democracies that , sooner rather than later , Spaniards will put an end to violence throughout Spain .
I am going to ask you to observe a minute 's silence for Carlos Alonso Palate and Diego Armando Estacio .
( The House rose and observed a minute 's silence )
Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Membership of Parliament : see Minutes
Verification of credentials : see Minutes
Formation of a political group
I would inform you of the creation of a new political group in the European Parliament , known as ' Identity , Traditions and Sovereignty ' .
This group is composed of twenty Members from more than a fifth of the Member States and therefore fulfils the conditions laid down in the Rules of Procedure .
The composition of this group will be published in the Minutes of this part-session .

( DE ) Mr President , I rise to speak further to Rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of this House , according to which it is a fundamental requirement , where a political parliamentary group is to be formed , that those who are to be its members share a political affinity .
I take it as read that the interview given by Mrs Mussolini to the APA news agency - or , at any rate , published by it - on 8 January cannot be seen as other than contrary to Rule 29 , for , in it , she described the group - which was , at the time , yet to be set up - as technical rather than political , and indicated that there was much in this group 's political programme that was not in line with her own thinking .
It follows , then , that the requirements of Rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure have not been met , since technical groups - as we know from this House 's history - are not permitted , and I therefore ask that the House 's procedural committee be tasked with examining the legitimacy of this group 's formation .

( Applause )
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Schulz , I understand your anger that a group , albeit one modest in size , has been set up on this occasion .
Your objection , Mr Schulz , would have some credence if all of our fellow Members had not signed an explicit declaration , which undeniably has political content and which the President and Parliament 's administration have at their disposal .
I will be delighted to send you a copy .
This declaration is in favour of maintaining European identity and the identities of our countries in order to ensure that our modernity is rooted in European traditions .
It is also in favour of financial transparency and includes non-confessional reference to Christian values and human rights .
It is a very precise text signed by all our Members .
As Mrs Mussolini said , we are also planning to bring an end to the somewhat discriminatory situation suffered by the Non-Attached Members by comparison with those MEPs who belong to a group .
Unfortunately , this discrimination will continue for those who remain Non-Attached as they do not have the same political , administrative and financial resources as the other groups .
I must put your mind completely at rest , Mr Schulz : the Identity , Tradition and Sovereignty Group most assuredly does have political content and complies entirely with Parliament 's Rules of Procedure and the case law of the European Court of Justice .
Please , Mr Schulz , do not set yourself up as the bad guy seeking to bully a minority group and running the risk of censure by the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg .


Mr Schulz , Mr Gollnisch , Rule 29 , together with the footnote that clarifies the scope of its provisions , states that Parliament does not evaluate the political affinity of members of a group . Only when any of the members concerned deny that they have the political affinity declared by the group is it necessary for Parliament to evaluate whether the group has been constituted in conformity with the Rules .
I do not believe that this is the case .
The group has made a declaration of principles or political statement . This has been communicated to me , and it will be published in the Official Journal and signed by all the members of the group .
I believe that this is , for the moment , sufficient indication of political affinity between its members and I cannot therefore accede to your request , Mr Schulz .
Address by the President of Parliament
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , I should like , if I may , to extend warm greetings to Romania and Bulgaria as new members of the European family and welcome the new MEPs from those two countries .
This is their home now .
We have been working with the Bulgarian and Romanian observers since September 2005 , and I feel sure that we will continue to work extremely well together in the years ahead .
As far as our group is concerned , these new accessions constitute a highly significant event .
The EU-27 must now face the great challenges of the future head on .
I trust it will do so in as unified and , most importantly , as responsible a way as possible .
One thing is for sure : the current Treaties no longer equip us sufficiently for meeting the new reality .
What we need , and the sooner the better , is new institutional rules of the game , without which Europe will not be in a position to resolve the major problems facing the continent .
Since your election , two and a half years ago , Mr President , Parliament has made great progress ; the powers it now enjoys , the manner in which it performs its duties and its political maturity are clear for all to see .
To cite just two examples , the Services Directive and the REACH regulation on chemicals are two important cases in which Parliament has played a key role .
Another positive development is that relations with the Commission have become better defined with the new framework agreement .
I have no doubt , Mrs Wallström , that , like Parliament , the Commission will honour all its commitments in this regard .
Europe will only move forward if the European institutions , and in particular the Commission and Parliament , work in an atmosphere of mutual respect and positive cooperation .
Mr President , you have worked hard to strengthen dialogue between the European and national parliaments .
This is how we will succeed in convincing the citizens of the importance of action taken jointly by the EU Member States to address their day-to-day concerns .
We must step up this partnership and improve its structure .
The PPE-DE Group will propose strong initiatives to meet this objective .
During your term of office , Mr President , you have shown that Parliament is capable of functioning effectively with representatives of the 25 Member States , now 27 , including the Bulgarian and Romanian observers .
In order for this to work even better in the future , you had the wisdom to propose parliamentary reform , which will also help us meet this objective from the moment it is adopted .
You have also succeeded , along with the Luxembourg Presidency , in overseeing the adoption of a Members ' Statute , on which I congratulate you .
We are all aware that this was a particularly tough task that you had to accomplish .
Mr President - my dear Mr Borrell - you have been a President for all of us .
The PPE-DE Group placed its trust in you and you did not let us down . You have always been open to requests made by Members of this House .
You have made sure that Parliament 's voice has been heard loud and clear , not least in European Council meetings .
On behalf of the PPE-DE Group , I should like to thank you most warmly .
By way of a good luck message , I should like to borrow the words of Federico García Lorca , who said , excuse my Spanish , ' Caminante , no hay camino .
Se hace camino al andar . ' [ Wanderer , there is no path .
The path is made walking . ]
( Applause )
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me start by joining in the congratulations to Mr Daul , who , I think , out of all the people in the plenary today , has taken on the most difficult job .
I wish him much success in leading the not entirely straightforward group whose chairman he has now become .
May your decisions , my dear Joseph , always be the right ones .
I welcome our new Members from Bulgaria and Romania .
We in the Socialist Group in the European Parliament fought like no other in this House for the 1 January 2007 deadline to be retained , for , where the restoration of our continent 's unity in freedom , peace and - soon - undivided prosperity was concerned , we believed that the sooner it happened , the better .
Today is a good day , for , from now on , our Bulgarian and Romanian friends are officially of our number , and that is also a success for our group .
( Applause )
There are two reasons , as I see it , why it matters that I should say a word of thanks to you , Mr Borrell .
I shall start with a word of apology .
I have to apologise to you for all the unspeakable meetings of the Conference of Presidents , which you , in the chair , had to sit through and suffer through , enduring me and my temperament , which is , of course , notoriously equable , and which you attempted to keep within bounds as you watched over the proceedings .
You did not always get your way , and nor , for that matter , did I , so , speaking personally , I ask your indulgence for all the things I put you through .
I also , however , want to tell you , on behalf of the Socialist Group , that you made an extraordinarily dignified president for this Chamber .
Within Europe and outside it , you brought great dignity to representing Europe and earned much respect for so doing .
I was told by a member of the European Council that there is not one Head of State or Government who does not , at the councils of Heads of State or Government , listen attentively when Josep Borrell rises to speak , and there are two reasons for this , namely your personal dignity and the intelligent content of your speeches , to both of which , in equal measure , is attributable the fact that you were an outstanding representative of this freely-elected European institution .
We in the Socialist Group voted for you ; many Members of this House put their trust in you , new and unknown as you were , and I think I can speak for everyone when I say , today , that you justified that trust in every way .
We , in the Socialist Group , rejoice that you are now returning to our ranks , to become , once more , an ordinary MEP .
Everyone who knows you , knows that that is what you will be - an ordinary and unpretentious Member of this House - for you are capable of exercising high office and then returning to the anonymity of the ranks .
It is that sort of personal modesty that is perhaps the distinguishing and outstanding characteristic of the personality that is Josep Borrell .
Many warm thanks , then , from me , on behalf of my group , for all that you have done for this House .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I have to be honest : you were not my group 's candidate in 2004 .
We had proposed Bronisław Geremek , one of the fathers and architects of today 's Europe of 27 Member States and a symbol of Europe 's reunification .
But you have been fair and gentlemanly in your chairmanship of this House : you have treated its Members with courtesy and its business with patience and serenity .
As a newcomer to this Parliament , it is not easy to be asked to lead it , and you rose to the challenge .
Given the words of Mr Schulz , I wonder whether he fears for his own position should you return to his benches !
( Laughter )
Mr President , particularly I appreciate your commitment to engaging with our citizens .
You have invited many of us to join you in your work as an active European in your home country .
You have also shown commendable commitment and almost endless energy in promoting the European Union across the continent , and your mission in particular to Europe 's young people has marked your work .
However , it has not been limited to the European Union : you have been an active President of this House beyond our shores in your promotion of the Euromed Parliamentary Assembly , in your facilitation of the establishment of a Euro-Latin American Parliamentary Assembly and beyond .
Nonetheless , I suspect that your greatest success during your presidency has been overseeing the successful integration of Bulgarian and Romanian Observers into this House .
The presence today of new Members signals the completion of the fifth enlargement of our Union .
The sight here today of two new Commissioners , Leonard Orban and Meglena Kuneva - at work since 1 January - warms our hearts , and the presence in the Council of Ministers of two new countries strengthens our Union as it prepares for an important birthday .
Mr President , your predecessor , Pat Cox , put much effort into modernising our House .
While recognising the reforms you have promoted , my group would have liked to have seen more reforms in the working of this House .
We know that you tried , only to find yourself bound , like Gulliver , at every turn by the bureaucracies of two political groups .
Their presence - the stubborn presence of the centuries - hangs heavy on our work .
Why should the European Parliament not meet formally every week to receive a report from the Commission ?
Why should every Member not have a screen on their desks to bring us into the 21st century ?
Why should our democracy be governed by rules laid down by a 19th century Belgian mathematician called D 'Hondt ?
These rules produce a result that is worked out on a calculator rather than a ballot paper , influenced more by the size and influence of nations than the European commitment and competence of the candidates .
It is something we must review if we are to reassert our democratic credibility in this , the 50th year since the signing of the Treaty of Rome , for if we fail to keep up with the times , public disillusion will grow .
The appeal of the abhorrent forces of knee-jerk nationalism on the far right may widen .
Therefore , I trust , Mr President , that your successors will engage with all Members of this House in a debate about the organisation of Parliament 's affairs in order to preserve and develop the values which you have upheld so courageously in your term as President .
In closing , let me congratulate Mr Daul on his maiden speech as leader of his group .
We will no doubt hear far more from him in the years to come .
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , too , I should like to welcome our fellow Members from Romania and Bulgaria and our new Commissioners .
I should also like to thank you , Mr President , for having given us the opportunity to listen to the European anthem again - it truly is the world 's finest anthem , and it is always a very moving experience to hear it .
Starting from today , in good times and in bad , our problems , our aspirations and our objectives will also to some extent be yours , and your worries , weaknesses and objectives will also to some extent be ours .
We hope that , after accession , the difficult road to reform will continue , even though , unfortunately , I have to say that being a member of the European Union is not always a sufficient guarantee of stability and of any imbalances and problems being eliminated , as the example of some old and new countries - among which I must sadly mention my own - clearly demonstrates .
Mr President , I should like to thank you on behalf of my group , too .
You have given a summary in this House of the events of the last two and a half years , which I did not recall being so dense and , in some ways , so dramatic .
I wish to thank you on behalf of my group , even though you know that we did not support your election , for reasons that clearly have nothing to do with you as a person , but I specifically wanted to thank you because you have always done your best to make this Parliament a credible forum for debate and to spread its values of democracy and harmony throughout the world .
We often supported you precisely when two majority groups , which , unlike us , voted for you , left you somewhat in the lurch , for example when you wanted to make progress with the Constitution , with the financial perspective and with internal reforms , which sadly remain incomplete .
Today , you are relinquishing your role as President of the European Parliament ; no doubt you will assume others , or sit alongside us here , in plenary .
Once again , I wish to thank you for your kindness and for your friendship and , if I may say so , also for your affability as a person .
Mr President , at the start of this parliamentary term , I gave the following response to your first speech , in which you set out the broad outlines of your Presidency : ' Your words ' , I said , ' reinforce our view that we can develop very constructive and cooperative relations with you . '
That is exactly how it has proved to be , and I thank you for a number of reasons .
I should first like to commend you for being a genuine progressive .
In spite of the constraints of your office and the particular conditions under which you exercised your mandate , you have succeeded in remaining true to our shared ideals .
Just a few days ago , in your speech to Humboldt University , you fiercely criticised the trend , and I quote , ' of letting social and fiscal competition develop between our countries , which leads to Europe coming across not as a constructive response to globalisation , but rather as a Trojan horse that undermines social connections . '
I share that view .
This type of convergence could , on its own , justify the view that we enjoy an excellent relationship .
There is another quality , however , that you have shown and that I should like to highlight .
Although they are close in certain areas , your political views do not coincide a great deal with those promoted by my group , and on some issues they are far apart , a case in point being the draft Constitutional Treaty .
Yet what we appreciate in you is your ability to listen to different points of view , even on a matter as tricky as this one .
It is not that you listen politely against a background of indifference ; rather , you listen attentively against a background of respect for the speaker and , by extension , a desire to understand the speaker 's motivations .
I am grateful to you for understanding the idea that one can be in favour of the European project whilst being staunchly opposed to a headlong commercial and financial rush forwards , and to the widespread competition that goes with it , which we call liberal Europe .
I repeat this today , the day on which we welcome our fellow Members from Romania and Bulgaria : if we want to haul ourselves out of the crisis of confidence - the crisis of common sense , even - afflicting Europe , we need to view the current model with a critical eye .
If we call for far-reaching changes , we do so in order that the citizens of our 27 countries might recognise that the Union is theirs .
Our criticism is therefore constructive , and I am grateful to you for understanding this .
When we take stock of a term of office of a President of Parliament , there is almost always a defining event or act that stands out , a landmark moment of some kind .
If I had to pinpoint that key point in your term of office I would say it was last summer as war was being waged against Palestine and Lebanon .
As all politicians should do in such a case , you clearly asked yourself : in my position , what can I do , however modestly , to oppose such an injustice ?
Your response was to call all the group chairmen back from holiday to do something on Parliament 's behalf that the EU-25 , at their level , had proved incapable of doing , namely to call for , at the very least , an immediate cease-fire and a return to the rule of international law ; you also called for talks to begin aimed at exchanging prisoners and for international negotiations to be held at the earliest opportunity on the basis of all the relevant UN resolutions on the Middle East .
Admittedly , we did not change the face of the world with our unanimous resolution , but we at least , thanks to you , saved Europe 's honour .
For these reasons , Mr President , I thank you .
I hope that your future duties will enable us to pursue our excellent , fruitful cooperation .
( Applause )

on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , bună seara , Romania ; добър ден , Bulgaria ; welcome , and let me , as the longest-serving Member , show you the House from the inside .
84 % of German laws come from Brussels - an alarming lack of democracy and a de facto suspension of the separation of powers , in the words of Roman Herzog , the former President of Germany .
Unfortunately , he is right .
If the EU had to apply for EU membership , it would be told , ' sorry , solve your democratic deficit first ' .
The core of democracy is normally to hold elections , to have a new majority and then new laws .
This core can hardly be found here .
Therefore , Romanian and Bulgarian friends , you enter a Parliament with no vivid debates and a planned coronation of our next President .
Welcome to the waste of 22 working days , 50 extra hotel bills , EUR 250 million spent on the travelling circus between Strasbourg , Luxembourg and Brussels , and welcome to the 5 500 votes in a year where it is difficult to know exactly what you voted for .
The D 'Hondt system will prevent you from having the most interesting posts and reports .
In your committees , young assistants and trainees from the Council will sit behind you with all the secret legislative documents you are not allowed to read .
The EU has more than 90 000 pages of law - red tape - which you can never amend as an elected Member of this Parliament .
To change anything , you need to go to someone who is not elected .
Of 480 million citizens , only the 27 non-elected Commissioners are allowed to put forward proposals for a new law or an amendment to an existing law .
In 2005 , we decided more than 3000 different rules in the EU , applying codecision in only 57 cases .
Most rules are decided by civil servants in 300 secret working groups in the Council , prepared by another 3000 secret working groups in the Commission .
Dear new colleagues , welcome to a fight for transparency , proximity and democracy .
My welcome gift is this new orange handbook with a long list of victories for transparency and a longer list of current tasks .
Members from all groups and independents have prepared a ' fair chair ' programme for our next President .
We could simply have one major seat , cut the travelling circus , introduce vivid debates , vote on major issues and change the D 'Hondt system into a fairer system to avoid discrimination against smaller delegations in the big groups , against the smaller groups and against the independents .
One million citizens have signed a petition in favour of one place of work , and Mr Poettering will not even allow us to debate the one-seat petition .
It is a secret vote tomorrow ; use your first vote at 10 o 'clock to show your support for one seat and a fair chair .
( ES ) Mr Borrell , tomorrow you will have the opportunity to change this system . Thank you very much , Mr President .
Mr President , a President leaves , and a new group arrives - the Identity , Tradition and Sovereignty Group .
I should like to start by thanking the Romanian , Bulgarian , Flemish , Italian , Austrian , British and , of course , French patriots who have enabled us to set up this group . We expect to welcome other brave , clear-sighted MEPs .
I should also like to extend my personal congratulations to Mr Daul on his election .
With this group , we shall have greater visibility , resources and powers in this institution and we shall be the mouthpiece for the tens of millions of Europeans , 23 million according to my calculations , who would be without representation here in Parliament were it not for our group .
The national forces are the future of Europe , the true Europe , that of the people and of sovereign nations , that of identities and traditions , as indicated by our group name .
To give an example , in the past five years , three patriots have reached the final round in the presidential elections in their respective countries : Mr Siderov in Bulgaria , Mr Tudor in Romania and Mr Le Pen in France , and that is just the beginning .



This is indicative of our political significance in both Eastern and Western Europe .
I should like , if I may , Mr President , to commend you , at least at the end of your Presidency , for the fact that , although you may sometimes have been mislead by calumnies that were circulating about some of us , you made a perfectly correct interpretation of both the Rules of Procedure and the declaration that our group drew up , and that , in performing your duties as President , you resisted calls that I find appallingly totalitarian .
In what way , ladies and gentlemen , is it unusual that in a democracy , politicians come together to bring their ideas to the fore and to promote their opinions , on which the voters elected them and which they want to hear ?
I am appalled by the kind of blurring of boundaries and collusion that goes on between the two major powers in this Chamber , which oppose one another in front of the voters , which present different manifestos and which appear to be rivals and competitors , whilst sharing the same view both on the appointment of a President and on the exclusion of some minority or other that does not share their dominant opinions .
A few words , Mr President , to take stock .
It is true that Parliament stood up to the Council and the Commission by making major changes to the Services Directive with the Gebhardt report , as well as to the REACH Directive .
I was dismayed that , in what is known as the institutional triangle , the appointment of the Italian Commissioner Mr Buttiglione was overturned .
This episode was tantamount to an intellectual and moral witch-hunt , and was , in my view , unworthy of this House .
On the other hand , the majority in Parliament suffered several setbacks , in particular on the European Constitution , which was rejected by the French and Dutch people .
I hope that this rejection is taken on board .
What will happen in the second half of 2008 under the French Presidency , that is to say under what may be the Presidency of Mr Le Pen , as we all hope ?

( Addressing Mr Schulz and Mr Cohn-Bendit who had heckled him )
Yes , Mr Schulz , history has thrown up events more surprising than that .
Mr Cohn-Bendit , we have seen even you become an MEP .
What will Europe 's energy policy be ?
What will its immigration policy be ?
What will Brussels ' policy be as regards the liberalisation of public services ?
We shall make our voice heard on these issues , of course , and on many others besides .
Rest assured , ladies and gentlemen , rest assured , Mr President , we will be Parliament 's bad conscience , its eagle-eyed critic , the unstinting defender of the European peoples and nations that made our continent and our civilisation great .
( Applause from the speaker 's group )
- ( SK ) We have half of our term in office behind us , and for many of us this has been our first experience in high-level European politics .
It would be appropriate to stop and take stock , and perhaps evaluate what we wanted to achieve and what we have in fact managed to achieve .
If I look at the activities of the European Parliament , and the regulations , directives and recommendations we have adopted for Member States and their citizens , I can say that we have been working well , doing an effective job to the benefit of our voters .
However , in order to achieve favourable results , we must face up to the realities of the situation and see what it is we have failed to accomplish , or where we have been unable to meet our voters ' expectations .
I think the main failing is the insufficient acceptance of the ten new Member States .
This is particularly apparent in our very poor representation in key positions , the small number of our citizens working in the European Commission and our almost zero representation in EU agencies , not to mention the fact that our citizens are appointed to the lowest positions .
I try to justify this situation by our lack of European-level experience .
This , however , is no longer true , and I hope that in the second half of the term the situation will be put right .
This is not a matter of boosting the profile of individuals , but primarily of accepting the ten new Member States as equal partners , not only with regard to their duties but also their rights .
We have set ourselves the great goal of becoming a global leader and prevailing in competition with major world players such as the USA and China .
However , the reality of the situation is quite different .
The European Union is unable to identify itself with the goals it has set .
We are marking time , and we are at a loss as regards the Constitutional Treaty , even though we know that its adoption would benefit us .
Competitiveness depends on our level of advancement in modern technologies , yet young scientists , doctors and engineers are leaving Europe every day , as they lack support here .
President Borrell , these are the last days of your presidency in the European Parliament .
Allow me to express my gratitude and respect for your work during what has been a challenging period , involving the accession of the ten new Member States .
You have handled many challenging situations with understanding and composure , and you have proved yourself willing to listen patiently to others .
I wish you much success in your professional and personal life .
This is a significant day for the European Union , not only due to the changing of the guard in key positions in the European Parliament , but also as the day on which the aims of the Treaty of Nice were fulfilled with the accession of Bulgaria and Romania to the European Union .
This brings to an end a very important period of political change in Europe .
I know from my own experience what a long and exhausting wait it has been for this day to dawn .
Meeting accession criteria has also necessitated the adoption of tough and often unpopular measures .
We have thereby put an important period behind us .
Your participation in the European Parliament , however , will depend on having an active approach , and to this end the experience acquired by the ten new Member States over the previous period may prove helpful .
A warm welcome to everyone whose actions and intentions have been fair and sincere .
I wish you stamina , courage and success .
( ES ) Mr President , allow me 30 seconds to point out that , as you relinquish the Presidency , only the Spanish MEPs of the People 's Party refused to applaud you when all MEPs in this House were paying tribute to you .
As an MEP elected in Spain who did not vote for you either , I want to deplore this attitude , bringing as it does to this House a division whose origins lie elsewhere and that is affecting very much more serious issues .
I want publicly to deplore and to denounce this state of affairs and , like other fellow Members of other political persuasions , to congratulate you , notwithstanding the measure of disagreement between us , and to say how much I regret this attitude on the part of members of the Spanish People 's Party , who have remained seated while the rest of the House stood to applaud you .
Thank you very much .
Regrettably , your words will not be recorded in the Minutes , because you have used a non-Community language , which I , for my part , have understood perfectly .
However , your purpose was , I am sure , not to have your comments recorded in the Minutes but to signal the warmth of your sentiments by using my maternal language , for which I am much obliged .
Mr President , the temperature in this Chamber definitely rose when our new colleagues from Romania and Bulgaria entered the Chamber , and they were helped by a proud and warm feeling .
However , we have also felt a rather chilling wind from nationalistic extremists and xenophobic forces that , unfortunately , exist throughout Europe .
( Applause )
This reminds us of the basic common task that we all have , despite party affiliations , to defend and deepen European democracy .
On behalf of the European Commission , I am honoured and pleased to issue a particularly heart-felt and warm welcome to the 53 new Members of the European Parliament from Bulgaria and Romania who join this Assembly today .
Bine aţi venit , Romania !
Добре дошли , Bulgaria !
Many of you have already participated in parliamentary proceedings as observers for more than one year now , and I am sure that you will quickly integrate into the fascinating rhythm of this House .
You contribute to the work and enrich the discussions and reflections with the political groups , the committees and also here in plenary .
The Commission and its services look forward very much to working together with you .
We , the representatives of the European Union 's institutions , have an enormous responsibility vis-à-vis the people in Romania and Bulgaria and their hopes for the future .
We must do our utmost to live up to their expectations and to prove that their belief in European integration will bear fruit and make Europe stronger as a whole .
Your role as parliamentarians is crucial in making your countries ' membership a success , and communication is key to everything .
Therefore , please go local and talk to your constituents , listen to your citizens and show them how you can take their views and concerns into account .
Take your time to explain to them how Europe works and how our policies affect their everyday lives , and try to give people a realistic picture of what Europe means and why being a European matters .
The first of January this year was a truly historic moment for all of us , not only for you , the 53 new Members of the European Parliament , who finally saw your countries join the European family , but also for all of us , because the accession of Bulgaria and Romania completed the fifth enlargement of the European Union , which has contributed to peace , prosperity , stability and democracy throughout Europe .
Let me now turn to you , President Borrell Fontelles . During this legislature , you have played a significant role in ensuring the smooth integration of the 162 Members from the 10 new Member States into the working procedures of the European Parliament .
You have also helped the Romanian and Bulgarian observers find their way and feel at ease both in Brussels and Strasbourg .
In the name of President Barroso and the whole Commission , I would like to thank you for the excellent cooperation our two institutions have had under your presidency , starting with the renegotiation and updating of the framework agreement , and also for your very strong personal commitment , your strong political commitment and tireless efforts to increase the responsibilities of this House to move our common European project forward and to defend our shared values .
Whether it has been your important role in finding an agreement on the financial perspective , as chairman of the temporary committee , your personal initiative to reform the working methods of the European Parliament or your visits to third countries , where you relentlessly pleaded the cause of pluralism and democracy , you have left a crucial fingerprint on this House .
You will pass on to your successor an assembly which , in the past two and a half years , has successfully demonstrated that it is a reliable and competent partner and which assumed its role as co-legislator with responsibility and authority , be it when finding a compromise on the Services Directive or when the institutions negotiated the important agreement on new chemicals legislation .
In your inaugural speech in 2004 , you said that , as President of the European Parliament , your passion for democracy would now be united with your passion for Europe .
On a personal note , let me say that I hope that this marriage of passions will continue for many more years .
Let me also say , on a very personal note , how proud I was to be with you on several occasions when we met with young people and how impressed I was by the way you handled those situations .
Like everybody else , I have also taken Spanish lessons with varied results , so I would like to say :
( ES ) Thank you for everything , and I wish you good luck in performing your new tasks .
Documents received : see Minutes
Written statements and oral questions ( tabling ) : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's resolutions : see Minutes
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was closed at 7.45 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 10.05 a.m. )
President . In accordance with the Act relating to the election of the Members of the European Parliament by direct universal suffrage , I declare the session open .
This is the second time that , quite undeservedly , I have had the honour of presiding over the election of the President of the European Parliament .
It will , of course , be the President who delivers a keynote speech .
The applause with which we welcomed the new Member States ( Bulgaria and Romania ) yesterday and the warm tribute paid to Mr Borrell are signs of trust and continuity .
In a few weeks ' time , it will be the 50th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome , which marks the birth of the European family , a newcomer to the international political and economic scene .
We will proudly celebrate it :
because of the extraordinary 60 years of practically uninterrupted peace on our continent ;
because of our shared values : freedom , democracy and social justice ; and
because of the hopes that political Europe has inspired in many parts of the world .
It is only by looking ahead that we can respond to these expectations , to the demands and also to the criticisms of Europeans on institutional and social issues .
I am referring to a globalised world , to the progress it has made and to the ever-growing injustice within it .
I am referring to the great responsibility that we have towards the future of energy and the environment , that is to say , towards the survival of the planet and towards future generations .
I am referring to new opportunities linked to developments in science , to the way in which the applications of these developments are managed , and to the advantages and ethical dilemmas that arise in everyone 's minds and that mean making informed decisions .
Announcement of the candidates for election to the office of President

I would remind you that the election of the President will begin at 10 a.m. and I would point out that , in accordance with the provisions of Rule 11 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure , no business shall be transacted while the oldest Member is in the Chair unless it is concerned with the election of the President or the verification of credentials .
I would also remind you that , in accordance with the provisions of Rule 12 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure , nominations for the presidency of the European Parliament must be submitted with the consent of the nominees and that they may only be made by a political group or by at least 40 Members .
Under the conditions laid down by the Rules of Procedure , I have received the following nominations for the presidency of the European Parliament :
Mr Jens-Peter Bonde
Mrs Monica Frassoni
Mr Hans-Gert Poettering
Mr Francis Wurtz
The candidates have stated that they accept their respective nominations .
I would also point out that , in accordance with Rule 13 ( 1 ) , a candidate must obtain an absolute majority of the votes cast in the first three ballots in order to be elected .
Blank and invalid ballot papers will not be considered when counting the votes .
( The President proceeded to draw the tellers )
The following Members are appointed as tellers :
Mrs Åsa Westlund
Mrs Edit Herczog
Mr Mogens N.J. Camre
Mrs Jamila Madeira
Mr Ioannis Kasoulides
Mr Thomas Wise
Mrs Gitte Seeberg
Mr Dariusz Rosati
I shall now appoint the tellers to the various ballot boxes , selected in alphabetical order .
Before proceeding to the vote , I shall give the floor to each of the four candidates for a speech which , in accordance with the Rules of Procedure , must not exceed five minutes .

Mr President , dear colleagues , since 2004 , we have known that Mr Poettering would be our next President , but we can still avoid a coronation .
Today 's vote is a secret ballot .
May I urge every colleague to use his or her vote in the first round to show Mr Poettering our urgent need for reforms .
Concerning the issue of one seat , at the next meeting of the Conference of Presidents our new President should propose an early debate on our seats and our calendar for 2008 .
We could simply decide to meet in the town where the Commission is meeting , not mentioning Brussels or Strasbourg , and then invite the Commission President and relevant Commissioners to explain their proposals from the same day 's meeting and to receive our political comments .
This is how a real parliament works .
Then we could have one fixed hour of well-organised voting in all areas of joint decision-making , allowing us to reach the magic 393 votes behind our amendments .
After the French presidential elections in May , we could then invite the new President of France and the Prime Ministers of Belgium and Luxembourg to a debate on a lasting solution for all seats .
Concerning voting , our new President should refuse any voting that is not properly prepared by the committees .
We must vote on real political differences , not on technicalities .
Last year we had 5 500 votes in which very few Members can say what they voted on .
As regards better legislation , Parliament has a real influence in the conciliation committees , but we are badly organised for that .
We need qualified legislative experts in all fields in order to balance the Commission .
We need to focus on legislation , instead of wasting hours on debate in areas where Parliament has no say .
On the allocation of rapporteurships and posts , we need to be more flexible in order to allow personal qualifications to be taken into account .
The D 'Hondt system is simply too rigid .
Why not use the Sainte-Laguë method instead ?
It is also a proportional system , but it allows both the smaller delegations in the big groups - that is , the majority of the Members - and the smallest groups and independents to have more interesting first choices .
On the façades of our buildings here in Strasbourg , they still campaign for a ' Yes ' to a Constitution that was rejected by the French and Dutch voters .
The buildings do not belong to a propaganda ministry ; this is a parliament .
Parliament makes decisions , but it should hold no view as an institution .
There are majorities and minorities , but all views are equal and all Members are equal , so , please , order your staff to clean the House of institutional propaganda in support of specific views .
On representation abroad , so far , Parliament 's Committee on Constitutional Affairs has sent 58 representatives to negotiate the Constitution with the national parliaments .
Of these , 54 were in favour of the Constitution and only 4 were against .
In 7 of 11 meetings , the ' No ' side was not even represented at all .
These figures do not proportionately represent the 137 Members who voted ' No ' to the Constitution .
Our new President must safeguard fair representation of different views when we are represented abroad .
There must be equal opportunities for the ' Yes ' and ' No ' sides when we resume the constitutional process under the German Presidency .
A democracy is also judged by how it treats its minorities .
As regards staff policy , most leading administrative posts are now divided between the two big groups .
Our next President should propose a new system for the future and immediately order all staff to cut their special links to their parties .
All staff must be politically impartial and serve Members equally .
On the President 's own position , our next President could establish a ' new ' old tradition .
Why not stop taking part in political group meetings and visible voting , and show us that our next President is the dedicated president for all of us ?
Why not introduce this good old practice from the first parliament in the world , the Westminster Parliament ?
Finally , I would like to welcome Mr Joseph Daul as the new leader of the PPE-DE Group .
People are innocent until the opposite is proved .
I would like to know if this principle was stated properly in the PPE-DE Group when they rejected Mr Hökmark in favour of Mr Daul in a very narrow vote .
( Applause )
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament is the only supranational parliament with genuine legislative powers in the world that is elected by universal suffrage , and the President is the voice and face of Parliament .
I am standing for election today precisely because I believe that the ambition to make the European dimension of democracy more of a reality and the ability to represent the will of the majority , while maintaining one 's own independence of judgment and while respecting the value of individual Members , are the crucial characteristics required of the person chosen to lead this House .
Over the next two and a half years the President , who I hope will be female , will have to be able to show on many occasions that he or she represents an institution that is free from the interests of the Member States and from the pressure of economic lobbies and that he or she is able to talk to an increasingly divided and indifferent public .
( FR ) The President will have to show that he or she is capable of fighting for the constitutional rights acquired by Parliament .
We shall have to know how to defend these essential and legitimate rights when we are told - perhaps by Mrs Merkel tomorrow - that , if we are to escape from the constitutional deadlock , there is no point in going through the European Parliament or holding a public debate and that a quick bout of intergovernmental negotiations will do very nicely : one more Intergovernmental Conference behind closed doors , which will produce one more unsatisfactory compromise on the cheap .

( ES ) In a world in which even the Commission and certain Member States tolerate the use of breaches of individual and collective rights as currency in the economic field , in the control of resources and in the fight against terrorism , the European Parliament and its President must continue to provide a voice and provide legitimacy for all of those people who are unable to talk or act freely , wherever they are , and they must continue to publicly denounce uncomfortable truths , as they did in Chechnya and in China and in the case of the CIA flights , Guantánamo , Cuba and many other issues .
( Applause )
The elected President will have to ensure that the question of the seat is not continually brushed under the carpet by the big groups .
More than one million citizens have signed the one-seat petition , yet the big groups in this House continue to side-step any discussion on the seat of Parliament .
This issue has become important for the credibility of our institution , whether we like it or not .
No matter which way we choose , we must take a clear stand , and this means at least holding a debate on the issue .
The elected President must also prioritise internal reforms which have been blocked for too long .
Our debates must be made more interesting and relevant , and this certainly entails greater flexibility .
However , the new President will have to engage with the Council and the Commission to encourage them to improve the quality of their answers during Question Time and statements : ensuring that responses are not simply diplomatic hot air is also a way to motivate our Members to be in this House during the plenary .
( DE ) If better governance also means the adoption of fewer laws , one must acquire the means for estimating their effects and better monitoring the application of European legislation .
The President of Parliament , though , needs not only to be available to all the groups , but must also guarantee that the House 's staff will remain independent and aloof from political trends .
( Applause )
There is a trend , now prevalent , for administration to take on more of a political colour and for posts to be openly shared out between the European People 's Party and the Socialists ; this is downgrading many of our officials and will weaken our institutions . It must be reversed .
Colleagues , I ask for your support today because I believe that across the political divide we share a profound concern about the risks and dangers of this Parliament becoming too quiet and obedient a place .
We can and we must reverse this trend , and whatever the outcome of this election , I pledge to work passionately to take forward the difficult task of building a coalition for change .
( Loud and sustained applause from the Verts / ALE Group )
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am , today , putting myself forward for the position of President of the European Parliament , and I am doing this in order to join with you in serving the citizens of the European Union , the law and solidarity between our peoples .
I am doing this on the basis of having served here in this House ever since the first direct elections in 1979 , when I started out as my group 's coordinator in the Committee on Regional Development , where I became familiar with the problems of the structurally weak areas throughout Europe .
I spent ten years chairing the Security and Disarmament Sub-Committee at a time when our embarking on this work was regarded with some amusement .
I have particular recollections of working together extremely well with our former President Klaus Hänsch .
As deputy chairman of our group - something in which I take particular pride - I was responsible , on behalf of my party and our political family , for the Treaty of Amsterdam , which represented a breakthrough in terms of this House 's legislative role .
I then took on responsibility for enlargement issues .
All those who witnessed what happened know that I , from the very outset , dedicated myself to ensuring that all the countries of Central Europe that are now Member States of the European Union were given equal treatment in the negotiations .
I rejoice that the countries of Central Europe are now part of our community of values in the European Union .
( Applause )
As chairman of my group , I subjected the Treaty of Nice to critical scrutiny here in this Chamber .
Back in December 2000 , I said this : ' What we need is a further reform .
We need a major convention to consider the future of Europe ' .
I am glad that this view was supported by our group and then by almost everyone in this House .
Building on this foundation , there are a number of things I would like to achieve together with you .
Europe must become a citizens ' Europe . People need to be won over to the great project that is ours - our continent united whilst maintaining the identities of our peoples - and this is a task for all of us to perform by doing our work in a convincing way .
There is a need for further improvement in cooperation with the national parliaments , but not only at the national level , for Europe is founded also on our regions , our cities and our communities , and in those , too , there is a need for cooperation in good faith .
Rather than being opponents , they and we are working together towards a common goal , the unity of our continent .
I would like to apply some determination to helping us make the substance of the constitutional treaty a reality .
This European Union of ours has 500 million people , and it needs reforms .
We will have to fight - peacefully - to make those reforms happen , and to that I would add that this Europe of ours has a chance of a future only if we affirm our values ; that is why the values on which we agreed in Part II of the Constitution matter , and , together , we must put them into practice .
Finally , what I would like to do is to join with you in making my contribution to the dialogue of cultures , particularly with the Arab and Islamic world .
Over the past five or six years I have visited sixteen Arab countries .
We need to cooperate better with them .
We want partnership and - if at all possible - friendship with the Arab and Muslim world on the basis of our convictions .
Whilst respecting the convictions of others , we must walk into the future in a peaceful manner .
I shall always be what I have been in the past - an advocate of human rights .
We have always taken a critical line on Chechnya and the massacres there , and I speak as a friend of the United States when I say that Guantánamo is incompatible with our European legal order .
( Applause )
I would like to extend warm thanks to the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and to its chairman Mr Daul , to the Socialist Group in the European Parliament and its chairman Mr Schulz for their support , and also express my gratitude for the support given by the Liberals and Democrats under their chairman Mr Watson , the Group for a Europe of the Nations and their chairman Mr Crowley and for the support I have received from other Members .
I would like to say how much I respect those other group chairmen who are applying for this position .
Together with you , Members of this House , I wish to work for the unification of our European continent with the same dedication as I have shown since 1979 .
I promise you that I will be a fair and objective President of this House , and I ask you to put your trust in me .
( Applause )
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the whole of my group , including those colleagues of mine who are unavoidably prevented from being in the House today , has come out in favour of my candidacy .
Why ?
We have always considered the election of the President of the European Parliament to be a political act of some significance and , as such , an opportunity not to blur the political differences between us but , on the contrary , to affirm them loud and clear , at least in the first round if there are also to be others .
That seems to us to be all the more true this time round , when the second half of the parliamentary term will be marked by the debate on the future of Europe .
In this connection , Mr Poettering consistently and unambiguously champions a certain vision of Europe with which most conservative and liberal MEPs and members of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group can readily identify .
It should be acknowledged that I , for my part , advocate in this House , just as consistently and unambiguously as Mr Poettering , another vision of Europe that might be referred to as an alternative to what we call liberal Europe .
If I had to define it in broad terms , I would refer to five areas .
First of all , there is the social dimension .
We must stop setting one social model up against another - models that systematically chip away at the social achievements of several generations .
Then there is the ecological dimension .
We must resist the ever stronger temptation to lower our sights in the name of competitiveness in an open economic set-up .
There is also the dimension of mutual support .
We must banish all forms of exclusion , mobilise every instrument at our disposal in combating inequalities in development and turn our back on Fortress Europe .
Above all , there is the democratic dimension .
We must encourage the critical spirit , dare to let the people speak and agree to question what needs to be questioned .
Finally , there is the global dimension .
We need to use what clout we have to transform international relations .
We must join forces in order to oppose the war in Iraq and fight for a just peace in Palestine and for a genuine partnership with Africa .
In our relations with the United States , the principle whereby we are allied , rather than aligned , nations needs to prevail .
My candidacy is aimed at simply offering fellow Members who identify with this desire for change and with this demand for critical reflection on the current social model the opportunity of expressing their opinions .
Democracy is about accepting the majority decision , and there is no doubt at all that Mr Poettering will be the next President of the European Parliament and one who represents all of us .
Democracy is also about respect for individuals .
I wish to say again in this House that I have nothing but praise for the loyalty and cooperation demonstrated by Mr Poettering in the Conference of Presidents , where we have sat together for seven and a half years .
Democracy is primarily , however , a debate about ideas , and , in a few moments , this will be demonstrated in the shape of a clear and unequivocal vote reflecting our convictions .
We all share political responsibility .
That is why I , for my part , did not feel the need to conduct any kind of election campaign .
It is for each of us to accept our responsibilities with our eyes wide open .
I should like to thank the four speakers for their speeches and for not having exceeded their speaking times .
Election of President of Parliament
In accordance with the provisions of our Rules of Procedure we shall now proceed to the election of the President .
I call on the tellers to proceed to the ballot boxes .
I also call on the Members to proceed to the ballot box corresponding to the first letter of their surnames .
I declare the vote open .
( The Members proceeded to vote )
I declare the vote closed .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.05 a.m. for the votes to be counted and resumed at 12 noon )

I can confirm the outcome of the vote on the election of the President .
Number of voters : 715
Blank or invalid ballot papers : 26
Votes cast : 689
Absolute majority for election at the first ballot : 345
The votes cast for each candidate are as follows :
Mr Jens-Peter Bonde : 46 votes
Mr Francis Wurtz : 48 votes
Mrs Monica Frassoni : 145 votes
Mr Hans-Gert Poettering : 450 votes
Mr Hans-Gert Poettering has obtained an absolute majority of the votes cast and is therefore elected President of Parliament .
( The House rose to applaud the new President )
Mr Poettering , I congratulate you on your election ; I invite you to take the Chair , which is rightfully yours .
My first duty must be to thank the Father of the House , Mr Berlinguer , for having conducted this election so worthily and so well .
For that he deserves our warm thanks .
( Applause )
Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank you all most sincerely for having given me the great , but also difficult and responsible , task of presiding over the European Parliament .
I will endeavour , with all my strength , to serve the citizens of the European Union , democracy and parliamentary government .
I wish to play my part in building a democratic European Union that is strong and effective at home and throughout the world .
In dedicating myself to this , I shall be guided by the principles of human dignity , observance of the law and the affirmation of solidarity between the peoples of the European Union .
To the citizens of the Union , I wish to say that it is only together that our peoples stand a chance of defending our values and interests in the world at large .
( Applause )
Ladies and gentlemen , I am delighted to be able to say that the President of that institution that has done so much for the cause of European values and will continue to do so , one with which we want to work well , is present with us in this House today .
The person to whom I refer is Mr René van der Linden , the President of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe , and I bid him a warm welcome .

I propose to present my work programme to this House on Tuesday 13 February at 10 a.m. ; that is of course conditional on the group chairmen - powerful people that they are - agreeing to it .
The President of the European Parliament is bound by their decisions .
I will be inviting the Presidents of all the European Union institutions and all former Presidents of this House to attend on that occasion .
My intention in so doing is to express the truth that , wherever we may stand politically , and by whatever convictions and ideals we may be guided , we are bound by the determined will to make , whilst retaining the identities of our peoples , the European Union an ever-closer union of peoples of the kind prescribed by the Treaties .
Right now , I should like , on behalf of us all , to thank my predecessor in office , Mr Borrell Fontelles , for his tireless endeavours , and I do this for a particular and personal reason , in that , in my former role as a group chairman , I had constant dealings , and a fruitful relationship , with him , so my heartfelt thanks go to Josep Borrell .



( Applause )
Now , ladies and gentlemen , I look forward to working with you in this new function , in which I shall endeavour to be a fair and objective President of your House , and I would also ask you to be fair and objective in judging how I do the job .
Thank you very much .
( Applause )
We now have a series of speeches from the group chairmen , and I give the floor to the chairman of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , Mr Joseph Daul , whom I warmly congratulate on his election .

Mr President , Mr Poettering , Mr President of the Commission , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and its 277 Members , I should like to congratulate you most warmly on your election to the Presidency of Parliament .
The European Parliament is the voice of Europeans .
From now on , this voice will be yours , Mr President .
Your election is a great moment for our political group .
You have been Chairman of the main political force in Parliament for eight years , and we know that you have all the qualities necessary for exercising your new responsibilities with a great deal of courage , determination , conviction and , above all , humanity .
I should like to thank all those MEPs who have been prepared to put their confidence in you .
I am sure that they will not regret their decision .
I should also very much like to congratulate Mr Bonde , Mrs Frassoni and Mr Wurtz and to tell them how much I appreciated the high standard of their campaigns .
Many national parliaments are no doubt deserving of such campaigns .
( Applause )
Mr President , Europe is already grateful to you for your political and personal commitment in favour of the reunification of the continent .
Parliament and the European institutions in general have already benefited from what you have done to increase their powers .
We know that you will ensure that all Members of the European Parliament benefit from your experience , knowledge and conviction .
We know that , European statesman as you are , you are firstly and above all concerned about human beings and anxious to respect their dignity and freedom .
Congratulations !
I wish you every success and the courage to achieve it .
Mr President , you know that you can count on the unfailing support of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
I was told that , in the experience of the previous Presidents , it was the political family from which they came that expected most of them , and that that was the most difficult thing .
I hope that things will turn out this time the way you have described .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall start by following the previous speaker 's example and addressing thanks to Mr Wurtz , Mr Bonde and Mrs Frassoni .
We have had a worthy election , a worthy debate , which was always fair and friendly in every respect .
I congratulate the three on the results they have achieved , and you , Mr President , on being elected to preside over this Chamber .

I can tell you , Mr Poettering , that the Socialist Group in the European Parliament will work together faithfully with you in your presidential capacity , and , by the same token , expect the President to exercise his office in complete neutrality and be a constantly reliable and loyal partner to our group .
Nobody who knows you , Mr Poettering , can have even the least doubt that you will do that , and so we are full of confidence as we embark on the forthcoming two and a half years of working together with you as the newly-elected President of this House and in which it is to be hoped that we , together , will help to make European integration a success .
Mr President , being among those who have been privileged to get to know you rather better over recent years , I claim the right to add a personal comment to the congratulations I bring on behalf of my group .
Everyone who knows you better and in your private capacity , knows that your political stance is inseparable from your personal situation and the course your life has taken .
You were born in September 1945 , and anyone who knows you will know that your father was killed in March 1945 , in the last days of the Second World War , and you yourself never knew him .
I am sure that this experience of childhood and youth without a father was one from which you learned , that it led into European politics and into the work of European unification , and that it was this experience - which , in Germany , and among people of your generation , is actually commonplace rather than unique - that motivated you to strive for European integration in the way that you have done .
It is this work of integration , the important part you have played in it , your personality as one active within it , the course of your life , that has now brought you to the head of this European Parliament , and so I would like to add to what I have said that I am certain that , if our nation , our people , had been able to take a path different to the one it actually did ; if your father had not been killed in action ; if he had been able to see where his son 's - Hans-Gert Poettering 's - path led him , he would certainly have been proud of his son , just as your sons have , today , every right to be proud of their father .
Well done !
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I offer you my warmest congratulations on your election as President of our House .
It is the pinnacle of a remarkable parliamentary career , stretching from the first direct elections to the European Parliament .
You know that my group opposed the process by which you and the Socialists carved up the House between you during this mandate .
Nonetheless , I believe that the majority in my group voted for you , recognising your experience , admiring your political work in this House and convinced of your capacity to be an objective and fair President .
In the five years that I have had the honour to lead my group , I have appreciated the cooperative relations that we have enjoyed .
I know the same can be said for my predecessor , Pat Cox , who sends through me his warmest regards to you on this day .
But as you know , in politics a halo is only 12 inches from being a noose and our reputations depend on our ability to meet ever-new challenges .
I hope you will listen to the swelling chorus in this House in favour of reform .
From having been ahead of our citizens in advancing the cause of European integration , our Member State leaders are now in danger of lagging behind .
The opportunity falls on this House to show a lead in building the European Union we need in order to meet the challenges we face .
That will require a house designed and organised so as to be capable of meeting that challenge .
I hope that we can work together to create that House with you during your term of office as President , for which I wish you every success .
( Applause )

on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , our group is today celebrating an important moment with your election ; in fact , we are convinced that , at a time when Parliament represents 27 countries , your election also gives a further boost to a Europe in which things are not just whispered quietly and to a House in which clarity and openness are such that the groups and the individuals count for what they say and for what they do - they are not just counted as numbers .
We have some difficult and important engagements : in my four terms in the European Parliament I have seen how you work and I therefore have faith that this parliamentary term - the second half of this parliamentary term - will follow a path that enables the European Parliament to stop focusing on so many futile matters , and to become more serious in tackling certain major challenges .
I am thinking about the many times we have forgotten about Africa , about our silence regarding what is happening in Nigeria and about how the European Union missed the mark in Somalia by supporting the terrorists over the legitimate government .
I am thinking about functional matters , about the translations that are of use to us , because , as you have rightly pointed out today , if we are to talk to other cultures and grow alongside them , we need to safeguard our own identities and our own traditions , too .
It is in this spirit and with this wish that we hope to turn over a new , important page today , one that will actually enable us not only to breathe life into the institutional reforms that are useful to us , but also to become closer to our citizens .
Good luck !
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , my dear Hans-Gert , who would have guessed that you were a Jimmy Cliff fan ?
' You can get it if you really want ! '
You have dreamed so long of getting your dream job that my congratulations to you on now having got it are heartfelt .
Bravo !
It was about time that you got to be President ; we recognise that .
Like everyone else , we have no doubt whatever about the fact that you will be an independent President .
Sometimes , it will be difficult , for example , when you are meant to be representing our House and feel the urge to hug a certain lady Head of Government ; that is the sort of thing you can do as chairman of a group , but not now .
Now that you are President of this House , your love for a Head of Government will have to take second place to the European ideal .
I would like to see how that turns out .
Tomorrow will be the first day of your probation .
( Laughter )
Secondly , I would just like to say that the independence of a parliament is shown by the independence of those who run it .
I hope that you were listening carefully to my colleague Mrs Frassoni 's speech ; if not , we will send you a copy so you can read up on it ready for your work programme .
In it , she talked about the independence of our administration .
All of us here in this House must take a stand together to stop this place being run on party lines ; we want the administration to be independent rather than politicised , and that is something for you , Mr Poettering , as our independent President , to do something about .
There is one thing I would like to add : it is that I know that the debate about Strasbourg is a difficult one ; it is one that divides all our groups , with majorities and minorities in favour or against every conceivable position .

Having this debated here in this House would be the decent thing to do , for we could then have a clear majority emerging in favour of the one-seat solution , the two-seat solution , or some other .
I think it is unworthy of this House that we refuse to debate something that is a live issue everywhere else , so your second task is to make this House a place where issues are aired .

( Applause )
Now for your third task . When we come to debate the constitution , I ask that you consistently present the line that this is a problem that only public debate - but no intergovernmental conference - can resolve .
It is this House , rather than some intergovernmental conference held under conditions of secrecy , that is the venue for public debate .
That is your third and last task .
Tell your beloved Federal Chancellor , and all the European Union 's Heads of Government , that we want this House to be the forum for debate .
Congratulations ; I hope you will enjoy us , and we will support you .
We Greens also congratulate Mrs Frassoni on her outstanding result .
( Applause )
You can take it as read that I always listen very , very carefully to the Members of this House .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , I offer you my sincere congratulations on your election to the Presidency of the European Parliament .
Quite apart from the agreements concluded between the groups and taking account of the power struggles at present going on in this House , your election is not only fully legitimate but also perfectly logical .
You are now the President of us all .
As for myself , I have no doubts at all about either your determination or your aptitude for performing this role without , of course , giving up either your ideas or the nature of your commitment .
You have strong convictions that often form the basis of our disagreements .
However , you also have an ethical code that earns you genuine respect and you display a commitment to pluralism that makes constructive cooperation possible .
We therefore have confidence in you .
I hope , Mr President , that you succeed fully on the challenging but pleasurable path ahead of you .
( Applause )
We have been together in this House since 1979 , and a great deal of trust has grown in that time .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , I wish to congratulate you and to thank all the Members and volunteers who ensured we had an election campaign .
Your election did not come as a great surprise , as we have known what the result would be since 2004 .
However , we have avoided a coronation and we have had a debate .
You are now the elected President of the European Parliament .
You are now the President for all Members .
You are my President too , and you know of my wishes for reform : a single seat , better organised voting , better legislation , fair distribution of rapporteurships and posts , clean façades in Strasbourg , fair representation abroad , neutral staff and a fair chair .
( DE ) My dear Hans-Gert , I have known you for 27 years , and you have been a good colleague .
You are the best qualified to be an outstanding President , and I hope you have the will and courage to be one .
I congratulate you on your election and wish you a good new year .
Mr President , the Identity , Tradition and Sovereignty Group congratulates you , of course .
It congratulates you as an individual , in the light of your courteousness and other human qualities and also in the hope of your impartial management of this Parliament that we are forming .
Admittedly , we find it rather embarrassing that your election - which , incidentally , you fully deserve , since you were previously the leader of the largest group in Parliament - has been obtained at the cost of a compromise between the two main groups which , as I had the opportunity to say yesterday , are seen as rivals by the electorate but are , rather too often for our taste , in agreement about the running of Parliament and the future of Europe .
We are relying on you to ensure that MEPs ' rights , which must be the same for everyone , are respected .
The parliamentary immunity of an MEP whose freedom of expression has been compromised is no less to be protected when the MEP in question belongs to the dominant political strand as when he forms part of a minority .
The Rules of Procedure must not be changed just because the provisions concerned have benefited a minority group .
I would take the liberty of recounting something that happened this morning .
I heard the President of the sitting - our senior Member , Mr Berlinguer - speak and then conclude very quickly , saying that he could not make a speech as senior Member , since the Rules of Procedure prohibited him from doing so .
The Rules of Procedure do indeed prohibit him from doing so following a change to the Rules that deprived the senior Member of the opportunity of speaking when he shared our sympathies .
The person whose speech prompted the change was Claude Autant-Lara , France 's greatest film-maker .
It was after his speech , admittedly a controversial one , that the relevant provision of the Rules was changed .
It is unfortunate that this petty trick subsequently deprived us of hearing the speech that Mr von Habsburg could have made or , this morning , of the speech that the senior Member , Mr Berlinguer , could have made , even though he does not at all share my own political opinions .
Finally , we are relying on you to defend us and to champion the rights and the dignity of MEPs .
Your predecessor , Mr Cox , was able to do this when Mr Schulz , for example , had been subject to attacks by the then President-in-Office of the Council .
Yesterday , I heard some remarks about my group - made , for example , by the representative of the Commission , Mrs Wallström - that were totally out of place .
This official should be reminded that it is Parliament that oversees the Commission , and not the other way around .
All MEPs are full Members of this House .
Indeed , to quarantine-off certain MEPs would amount to calling for a policy of discrimination against those who voted for them , and we are counting specifically on you to oppose a trend that would be the expression of an unfortunate drift towards totalitarianism .
( Applause )
( SK ) I too would like to offer you my warmest and most sincere congratulations on your election .
I wish you good health in this role and great patience for your decision-making .
There is a request I would like to make of you that has not been mentioned in previous speeches , as all of the speakers were from the fifteen old Member States .
May I ask you to bear it in mind that today the European Union consists of 27 Member States , and may I ask you as well to respect and try to support officials from the twelve new Member States , whose MEPs have also been elected in the hope that their voices will be heard here .
As regards non-attached MEPs , I would like to ask you to do away with the discrimination which those Members have been facing .
My best wishes for you in your new role - I am keeping my fingers crossed for you .
Mr President , on my own behalf and on behalf of the European Commission , I want to congratulate you very sincerely .
It gives me great pleasure to see you as President of the European Parliament .
Today the European Parliament has elected a new leader whose qualities as a person and as a politician are uniquely well suited to this high office .
I know the President as a person of political vision and integrity - qualities that will be needed in this very challenging job .
As the leader of your group for eight years , Mr President , you pursued your vision of a political Europe as the only guarantee for a peaceful and prosperous Europe .
Your attachment to the core values of justice , human rights and the dignity of the human being have , for so many years , been the hallmark of your work .
I want to highlight your fairness to everybody , from your insistence that everybody must be treated equally within Parliament to the view that , in the European Union , no one country is bigger than another .
We have all appreciated your honesty and transparency : with Mr Poettering , you know that a done deal is a done deal and one which he will honour and respect .
His experience as one of the longest-serving Members of this House will be of immense value to all of us .
No one knows this House and its ways better than him .
Mr President , you have always served this House with excellence , as an ardent defender of the interests of Europe and its citizens , and have thus promoted the European Parliament 's standing .
Mr President , let me highlight what I think will be a special responsibility for your mandate .
You are the first President elected in this Parliament after this great enlargement of the European Union .
You assume your office immediately after the conclusion of the fifth enlargement of the European Union with the accession of Bulgaria and Romania .
That is why this is a truly historic moment : the first President elected by a Parliament representing the citizens of 27 countries .
No other parliament in the world can compare to this .
I should like to make a personal remark .
Yesterday I was in Ljubljana , Slovenia , together with the current President of the Council , Chancellor Merkel , and many colleagues from the European Council , and I was really moved by the enthusiasm of the Slovenian citizens , who have now joined the euro area .
I was also moved by the enthusiasm and the dynamism that the new members of the European Union bring to our Union .
That is why I believe that our joint task is to make all Europe united , with no first- and second-class countries , with no first- and second-class citizens - and you may count on our cooperation to achieve this task .
I have no advice to give you : you have been involved in European politics longer than I - even if you look younger , you are not so young !
( Laughter )
However , let me use my experience as President of another European institution - the European Commission - to make a personal comment : today 's Union requires , more than ever , a spirit of partnership among all European institutions .
This Union is much more complex than before : it takes time and patience to find the necessary consensus .
It is sometimes difficult ; sometimes it is controversial and even painful , but we need , more than ever , this spirit of partnership .
No European institution can build its prestige and standing at the expense of another institution .
It is in the common interest of all the European institutions to reinforce each other in the service of the European project .
This is specifically true for relations between the European Parliament and the European Commission , because we know that the cause of greater and deeper European integration has been advanced only when there has been this spirit of cooperation among our institutions .
That is why I call for a great coalition of all those who stand for Europe and its values , including , of course , some on the left , some on the right and some in the centre , whose ideological differences contribute to the richness of Europe as a political system , but who are also able to go beyond those ideological differences and share what I believe is our common goal : a strong , united Europe for peace , democracy and human rights .
( Applause )
Mr President of the Commission , thank you for your remarks .
You can certainly always count on the President of the European Parliament , and indeed the whole European Parliament , as a fair partner .
We have different roles to play , but we have the same ambition : to make Europe united , so we can defend our values and interests .
( DE ) Several Members have made reference in their speeches to the equality of status enjoyed by both the larger and smaller Member States of the European Union .
On Thursday afternoon , on my way home from Strasbourg to Osnabrück in Lower Saxony , I shall be paying my first visit to Luxembourg , with the intention of thereby emphasising the equality of all Member States , and also of highlighting Luxembourg 's great commitment to Europe .
Its people , its citizens , have said ' yes ' to the constitutional treaty , and we must never forget the countries that have done that .
We now have to convince the ones that have not yet decided and those that have said ' no ' .
That is the task that we all , together , now face .
Election of Vice-Presidents of the European Parliament ( deadline for submitting nominations ) : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 12.40 p.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. )

Election of Vice-Presidents of Parliament
The next item is the election of the Vice-Presidents of the European Parliament .
I have received notice of the following candidacies :
Adam Bielan
Luigi Cocilovo
Rodi Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou
Mario Mauro
Edward McMillan-Scott
Luisa Morgantini
Pierre Moscovici
Miguel Angel Martínez Martínez
Gérard Onesta
Mechtild Rothe
Manuel António dos Santos
Marek Siwiec
Alejo Vidal Quadras
Diana Wallis
The candidates have informed me that they each accept their nomination as candidates .
Since the number of candidates does not exceed the number of vacant positions , the groups will not be consulted , and I propose that the election be by acclamation in accordance with Rule 12 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure , albeit with a subsequent vote to determine their seniority .

( Applause )
I therefore declare the candidates whose names I have just read out to be Vice-Presidents of the European Parliament .
I congratulate them all on their election .
The next item is the determination of the Vice-Presidents ' seniority .
Since all we need to do is to determine their seniority , qualified majority is not required for this vote , as they have all already been elected .
The voting slips are being distributed , so the voting is now open .
Election of Quaestors of the European Parliament ( deadline for submitting nominations ) : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 3.25 p.m. and resumed at 6.00 p.m. )

Election of Vice-Presidents of the European Parliament ( continuation )
I now announce the results of the vote on the seniority of the Vice-Presidents .
The number voting : 703
Void or invalid voting slips : 7
Votes cast : 696
The votes were cast as follows :
Rodi Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou : 322 votes
Alejo Vidal-Quadras : 300 votes
Gérard Onesta : 285 votes
Edward McMillan-Scott : 274 votes
Mario Mauro 262 votes
Miguel Angel Martínez Martínez : 260 votes
Luigi Cocilovo : 234 votes
Mechtild Rothe : 217 votes
Luisa Morgantini : 207 votes
Pierre Moscovici : 207 votes
Manuel António dos Santos : 193 votes
Diana Wallis : 192 votes
Marek Siwiec : 180 votes
Adam Bielan : 128 votes
Congratulations to all the Vice-Presidents : I hope we will work well together in the Bureau of this House .
In accordance with Rule 14 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure , the Vice-Presidents rank in order of the votes cast for them , and where there is a tie , the Member older in years of age takes precedence .
Election of Quaestors of Parliament
The next item on the agenda is the election of the Quaestors of the European Parliament .
I have received notice of the following candidacies :
Mia de Vits
Szabolcs Fazakas
Ingo Friedrich
Astrid Lulling
Jan Mulder
James Nicholson
The candidates have informed me that they each accept their nomination as candidates .
As the number of candidates does not exceed the number of vacancies , I propose that they be elected by acclamation in accordance with Rule 12 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure , albeit with their seniority then being determined by an electronic vote .
( Applause )
I therefore declare all the candidates elected quaestors of the European Parliament , again congratulating all these Members on their election and wishing us good cooperation in the Bureau .
We will now proceed to determine the quaestors ' seniority by secret electronic ballot .
Since all we need to do is to determine their seniority , this vote does not require a qualified majority .
- Following the vote :
Ladies and gentlemen ,
I now present the result of the vote for the quaestors .
Votes cast : 669
Void or invalid voting slips : 16
Valid votes : 653 .
The votes were cast as follows :
James Nicholson : 334 votes
Astrid Lulling : 298 votes
Mia De Vits : 285 votes
Ingo Friedrich : 280 votes
Szabolcs Fazakas : 267 votes
Jan Mulder : 265 votes
In accordance with Rules 15 and 14 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure , the Quaestors rank in order of the votes cast for them .
Congratulations !
That means that we can now announce the composition of the new Bureau and the names of the Quaestors to the institutions of the European Communities .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was closed at 6.15 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9.35 a.m. )
Documents received : see Minutes
Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Membership of Parliament : see Minutes
Order of business
As this is the first time I have presided over this House , allow me to start by thanking you for your applause , for your welcome and for the trust you have placed in me .
The final draft agenda has been distributed .
The following amendment has been proposed :
Wednesday :
I have received , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , a request for the oral question to the Commission by Mrs Pervenche Berès on greater convergence of supervisory practices at European Union level ( Ο-0126 / 2006 - Β6-449 / 2006 ) , which was planned for today 's debate , to be postponed to a later sitting , so that it can be examined jointly with the oral question to the Council on the same subject .
Madam President , I should like to congratulate you on your election .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs would like to put a question both to the Council and to the Commission regarding the convergence of supervisory practices .
However , the question to the Council has clearly got lost in the preparations for the Conference of Presidents .
We are still happy to be able to debate these kinds of subjects with the Commission , but there is a major issue at stake in the matter that we are discussing , including for the German Presidency .
We are therefore counting on its support to find a slot in the agenda of one of our forthcoming sittings so that we can deal at the same time with the oral question submitted to the Commission and with the one submitted to the Council on this absolutely crucial issue of the convergence of supervisory practices in the field of financial markets .
I am also counting on the support of the presidency of this Parliament to obtain a good slot for this debate .
( Parliament approved the requested postponement )
Development of the Community 's railways - Certification of train drivers operating locomotives and trains on the railway system in the Community - International rail passengers ' rights and obligations ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
the recommendation for second reading from the Committee on Transport and Tourism on the Council common position with a view to the adoption of a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Directive 91 / 440 / EEC on the development of the Community 's railways and Directive 2001 / 14 / EC of the European Parliament and of the Council on the allocation of railway infrastructure capacity and the levying of charges for the use of railway infrastructure ( 05895 / 2 / 2006 C6-0309 / 2006 ( Rapporteur : Georg Jarzembowski ) ;
the recommendation for second reading from the Committee on Transport and Tourism on the Council common position with a view to the adoption of a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the certification of train drivers operating locomotives and trains on the railway system in the Community ( 05893 / 5 / 2006 C6-0310 / 2006 ( Rapporteur : Gilles Savary ) ;
the recommendation for second reading from the Committee on Transport and Tourism on the Council common position with a view to the adoption of a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on international rail passengers ' rights and obligations ( 05892 / 1 / 2006 C6-0311 / 2006 ( Rapporteur : Dirk Sterckx ) .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , Madam Secretary of State , speaking as rapporteur for this House , I recommend to it that , tomorrow , the national railway networks should be not only opened up to cross-border passenger trains run by all railway companies , irrespective of their country of origin or of whether they are state-owned or private - which is what the Council envisages - but also that they should be opened up for the purposes of passenger traffic within the country at a later date .
This is the line that this House has been taking ever since 2003 .
We have always taken the view that the European internal market must be made , once and for all , in the railway sector as well , thus making possible , by way of fair competition among railway companies , more and better-value service for railway travellers .
By way of a concession , Madam Secretary of State , to the Council - which still has its own misgivings about opening up the networks to private passenger traffic at too early a juncture - the committee is now proposing 2017 as the date for networks to be opened up to domestic traffic .
It is also the intention that those states that acceded as recently as 1 May 2004 or later should be able to extend this deadline by another five years in order to give their railway companies more time to prepare themselves for the internal market and for the competition that it brings .
We ought really to agree that , for the Member States , ten or fifteen years really ought to be enough to reorganise their railway companies in such a way as to meet demand and the needs of their customers , for the public are entitled to efficient and good-value passenger transport within their own countries as much as anywhere else ; after all , without that , the railway sector will be unable to compete against cars and aircraft and thereby have a future .
Apart from a few minor amendments , the Committee on Transport and Tourism agrees with the Council and the Commission that the Member States must be allowed not to open up - or to open up only partially - their networks if their being opened up would endanger regional and local passenger traffic ; that is where we agree , for regional and local transport are of vital importance to the public , not least for environmental reasons .
We do not agree , however , Madam President-in-Office , when it comes to the great big package that the Council has come up with in order to further limit the opening up of networks .
The committee proposes that the introduction of the ' principal purpose ' criterion and the giving of pre-eminence to long-term concessions be rejected .
I am very pleased to note from Annex II to the Common Position , that the Portuguese presidency took exactly the same view as Parliament on this , for , if one weighs up the demands of the internal market - which should have become a reality a long time ago - against the special interests of public passenger and regional transport , it becomes apparent that the special rules imposed to secure the latter 's position already do enough to restrict the opening up of networks .
The committee did not do as I recommended and do away outright with the mandatory levy on all types of passenger transport to the benefit of public local service providers - which the Council surprised us by inserting - and instead recommended amendments to it .
In the conciliation procedure , Parliament and the Council need , together , to consider to what extent such a mandatory levy is actually justified by the facts of the situation and the system 's requirements , or whether , on the other hand , it risks being no more than a pretext for deliberate restrictions on the deregulation of the networks .
The committee also recommends the incorporation of the new rules on transit , the acceptance of the derogations for Malta and Cyprus , and the amended wordings for amending Directive 2001 / 14 / EC in the interests of the more effective planning of high-speed routes .
Through you , Commissioner and Vice-President Barrot , I appeal to the Commission to endorse the substance of this House 's proposals , since I see the statements made to the committee by your staff , to the effect that they could see no reason for the networks to be opened up to domestic traffic as well , as going against convictions that the Commission has held for many years .
I would remind you of the celebrated White Paper on the European single market that the Commission published in 1985 .
It will be evident to anyone who remembers what is in it that the principle has applied ever since that it is not the completion of the internal market , but resistance to it , that needs to be justified , and no such justification has been forthcoming from you .
Finally , let me say that I do not believe that the Presidency of the Council will accept Parliament 's proposals in toto , and so I appeal to it to set the conciliation procedure in motion without delay , if at all possible , as soon as February , so that we can get this wrapped up before the German presidency ends in the summer .
I believe that this third railway package is what the public and European businesses need , let us work together to get it adopted by the summer .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is an honour for me to present to you my report on the certification of train drivers operating locomotives and trains on the railway system in the Community .
I would like firstly to say that this is an exemplary issue , an extremely unusual one , because we are talking about the transposition into Community law of a sectoral social agreement , in this case a prior agreement between the European rail companies and rail employees .
All of this is laid down in the texts but , generally speaking , in our certainty , we quite often avoid this agreement between the railwaymen and the bosses of the rail companies , or more generally between the employees and the management , when really we should stop avoiding it when everybody feels affected by a European project and a directive .
I am one of those who believe that , in order to create the Europe of the railways that is so essential , the railway workers need to be in favour of that Europe and to have the conviction that , far from starting a kind of economic civil war amongst rail companies , its purpose is to develop the railways .
The text presented is entirely exemplary .
I would also say to Mr Jarzembowski , because we have always disagreed on this subject , that simply laying down dates for liberalisation is not sufficient to create a European internal market .
This battle of dates is terribly restrictive .
In order to create the internal market , we must first ensure that trains are interoperable , which requires considerable funding before anything else .
In this regard , it seems to me that the liberalisation train is travelling much faster than the budget train or the interoperability train .
Returning to the directive , it will have little impact on Great Britain because there is only one tunnel entering its territory and it has little in the way of land borders .
It will not affect Spain very much because it has a different gauge of rails .
It will not affect certain other countries that do not necessarily have direct rail borders with the Union : I am thinking of Finland and Greece .
Liberalisation is therefore basically about interoperability , and my report relates to human interoperability , that is to say , the recognition of a train driver 's licence throughout the Union 's territory .
I would like to thank the Members for doing such remarkable work .
I would like to make the following comments with regard to the directive .
First of all , we are talking about a licence for the whole of the network and not simply for the international network , since we believe that all train drivers should be able to aspire to move on to international level and that there is little difference between driving a TGV , a high-speed train , within one of the Member States and driving one that crosses the border .
I believe that that is absolutely essential .
Next , Parliament 's great contribution - which also led to a disagreement with the Council - is that we believe that crew members who carry out safety duties must be taken into account in a subsequent text , and we propose a road map .
Lives are regularly saved by crew members who have learnt a number of tasks : the evacuation of trains , the protection of passengers , signalling , the activation of certain alarm circuits .
It is entirely legitimate for these qualified people to be recognised and , above all , for us to attempt to harmonise their qualifications in all European countries in order to prevent any of them from being under-qualified .
This is a safety issue and not just a social issue .
Parliament has made a proposal on this subject , and we believe that it is very important to do so now : we are dealing with a world in which there is more than one rail company , and , since we are creating a Europe of railways , it is entirely legitimate to lay down rules on compensation that are applicable between rail companies when they exchange staff who they have trained .
In other words , when a company spends a lot on training a driver and that driver leaves the company for another company within two years , we need minimum rules to oblige the company taking on that driver to partly repay the company that trained him .
Since there is no railways university , training is currently provided by certain companies , principally the historic companies , and companies who are joining the market should not be able to benefit by becoming more competitive at less cost .
Commissioner , I believe that the European Parliament 's proposals are right .
I am entirely aware of the disagreements that remain with the Council , in particular the ones I have just mentioned regarding the scope .
Nevertheless , I believe that Parliament 's position is the right one .
I would remind you that our fellow Members , from all political groups , voted unanimously in the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
We therefore have a strong position , which we will uphold in conciliation , just as we will in relation to the other dossiers , such as that of Mr Jarzembowski .
I understand that he is in favour of liberalisation , though I do not understand ...
( The President asked the speaker to conclude )
I simply wished to say ' yes ' to liberalisation , provided that it is regulated and that public services are preserved .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , the purport of the reports that are here before us is to make European rail more attractive to its users .
One of the things that have for years provided the European Union with an enormous boost in this respect is the opening up of the market , which brings more investments to the railways and improves the quality of the services on offer , and it is to this , in fact , that the work related to the resolution on passenger rights relates .
Since the Commission 's proposal , much has been done at first reading and also with the Council 's common position and the vote in our Committee on Transport and Tourism .
I would like to extend warm thanks to the fellow Members who have taken part , more particularly the shadow rapporteurs , for the contribution they have made to this report .
As I see it , we are now drafting a comprehensive and viable set of rights , which provide for liability on the part of railway companies in the case of accidents - I hope that we will never witness one , but if we do , then this should be taken care of in the same way across Europe .
These rights also provide for areas including the reception of passengers and compensation in the event of delays or cancellations of train connections ; accessibility of trains and stations to people with disabilities ; rights and regulations with regard to luggage or larger items such as bicycles or buggies ; ticket accessibility , in which connection I should like to urge my fellow MEPs not to get carried away and not to compel railway companies to imperil their viability by adopting heavy and prohibitively expensive ticketing systems that are used by very few people .
We should , instead , ensure that tickets are widely accessible and available to people who choose to travel by train .
At the same time , information to passengers should be clear and accessible , and a complaints procedure should be in place which everyone is familiar with and which is easily accessible to everyone .
I should like to ask the President of the Council to talk her colleagues into adding one point , namely that the whole system of rights be made very clear to the citizens and train travellers at the stations and on the trains .
I think we have managed to compile a very balanced set of rights .
Where we still have differences of opinion with the Council , I hope that we can reach a compromise in conciliation based on sound dialogue .
There is , however , one important difference of opinion between the Council and Parliament : we cannot understand why all these rights will not apply to all railway passengers .
If somebody has an accident and sustains an injury , does it matter whether they are on a train that is crossing a national border or not ?
Liability must be provided for in a clear and understandable manner to all train passengers within the European Union .
Trains or stations should be accessible , whether I wanted to board the train in a wheelchair or whether this train travelled from Hanover to Amsterdam or from Hanover to Berlin .
I should therefore like to ask the Council to abandon its position in this respect and to ensure that all railway passengers have the rights they deserve . After all , every European citizen would then know , wherever they board a train in the European Union , that they would be entitled to a set of basic rights .
They would know that , when they board a train , they would be able to enjoy the EU 's diversity with peace of mind .
Since it is this diversity of the European Union , as Mrs Merkel stated this morning , that constitutes the soul of Europe , we would like to encourage everyone to get acquainted with this soul of Europe by train , if possible .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Federal Minister , Mr Tiefensee , who is unfortunately unable to be with us due to an important appointment , I would like to express my gratitude for this opportunity to address you all today .
The German Presidency of the Council is just getting under way and already , with the upcoming vote on the proposals for the Third Railway Package , we have before us on the agenda one of the most important dossiers of this six months ' Presidency in the field of transport .
These three measures will bring us a significant step closer to the complete opening up of the market and thus to the completion of the European railway area , continuing what we began together with the first programmes of measures .
Through the First Railway Package , adopted in 2001 , we made it possible for individual rail freight companies to make practical , independent use of neighbouring railway networks in cross-border traffic .
Adopting the Second Railway Package brought us to a further milestone on our journey towards the realisation of a single market in railways in Europe , something which is urgently needed .
Thus , on 1 January 2007 , the opening up of markets for freight traffic became a reality .
This step represents great progress in which the Council and Parliament can take pride in equal measure .
This opening up of markets is made urgently necessary by the tremendous rate at which freight traffic is increasing , but that will hardly be news to you .
According to the Commission 's estimates , there will be a 45 % increase in road freight traffic by 2020 , which would mean an extra 1.5 million lorries on the roads .
The railways , by contrast , still have great potential available for us to exploit .
We therefore urgently need , above all , to get more freight transported by rail .
If the opening up of the markets is to be more than just a date , we need to invigorate the process and put all our energies into ensuring that those obstacles still in place are quickly removed .
One part of this is also to ensure that it is also possible , in reality , to employ the staff carrying out freight transport operations - in particular the train drivers - on a cross-border basis without obstacles .
Regulations of this nature have been laid down in what is termed the directive on the certification of train drivers , on which a decision is now due .
I see no major differences between the positions of the Council and Parliament in respect of this piece of legislation , although there are a couple of points I would like to make .
Firstly , the committee now seeks to ensure - by means of amending Article 1 of the directive - that staff not working as train drivers but performing safety-related tasks are also required to undergo certification .
In principle , this approach is correct . The question , however , is to whom it is to apply .
The phrase ' other crew members performing safety-related tasks ' is so vague that we are at a complete loss to say who exactly it would cover .
In my opinion , it is worth clearing this up before doing anything else .
Only then can we decide under what conditions and on what terms a certificate is necessary .
The Council 's Common Position did take account of this issue .
The Common Position stipulates that the European Railway Agency ( ERA ) should examine whether additional staff should be certified .
The ERA can thus help us to work out under what conditions it makes sense to certify staff other than train drivers .
We should await the results of the ERA 's investigation before we rush to include this item in the directive prematurely .
Secondly , it is proposed in Amendment 23 that , if a train driver moves to a different undertaking , there should be statutory compensation for training costs .
There is a consensus between the Council and Parliament on this matter as far as content in concerned .
Yet why should we regulate this matter through legislation , when contractual solutions could be much more effective ?
It is envisaged in the Council 's Common Position that management and labour should regulate the transfer of training costs contractually .
To that extent there are , in fact , no differences .
I would now like to move on to the second piece of legislation in the Third Railway Package , namely the proposal relating to the rights and obligations of passengers , which aims not only to improve the rights of consumers but also to promote the long-term attractiveness of railway use within the Community .
The significance of this proposed regulation for those with mobility disabilities should also be pointed out , as the regulation would make rail travel considerably easier for them .
The Council 's Common Position overlaps , in many respects , with what your House is calling for , in , for example , taking up the COTIF / CIV provisions on the liability of railway undertakings for personal injury or damage to baggage and the conclusion of transport contracts .
There are , however , differences , in particular when it comes to the scope of the regulation .
By way of deviation from the Common Position , the European Parliament 's Committee on Transport and Tourism is calling for the regulation to apply , in principle , to domestic rail traffic .
It was , however , particularly difficult to reach agreement on this point in the Council .
It is the Presidency 's view that the compromise embodied by the Common Position ought therefore not to be jeopardised .
The same applies to the third and final legislative strand of the Third Railway Package , the directive on liberalisation .
The Common Position , which we have reached with all the Member States through considerable effort , provides for the opening up of international markets for passenger transport , including cabotage in connection with international journeys , as of 2010 , but initially without opening up the national networks .
It is very much to be welcomed that your House 's Committee on Transport and Tourism agrees with the date of 2010 .
On the very difficult topic of opening up the national networks , your House has proposed a new compromise .
Although I very much commend such a move , we do have serious doubts about the possibility of reaching agreement on the basis of this compromise proposal .
In this regard , the compromise proposal also represents a move away from the step-by-step approach that has characterised the liberalisation so far , and so it is to be feared that many Member States will fail to see the new compromise as a compromise at all .
In the case of the opening up of national rail networks , the question must be asked as to whether we are not asking too much of many of the Member States .
In the light of the desired joint approval of all three legislative proposals , we must allow ourselves to ask whether , by pushing for the highest requirements in relation to passenger transport , we are not ruining the much more urgently required solutions for freight transport .
I am aware that it will not be easy to reach agreement on this issue .
Europe 's passenger rail services must be attractive and reliable .
Parliament and the Council therefore need to recognise their joint responsibility and live up to it .
I think I can say that the Third Railway Package is so important to all of us that all of us must surely have an interest in coming to an agreement .
The German Presidency of the Council will be pulling out all the stops to make it a success and to realise the integrated rail area that we desperately need .
To do so does require bold changes , but it also calls for a sense of proportion and a little patience from time to time .
The Council and Parliament have , in the past , often proven their good faith and achieved mutually acceptable compromises from mutually opposing positions .
We are not afraid of searching out a durable compromise through a sensible conciliation process .
However , I call on Parliament not to introduce a large number of material amendments and thereby make reaching a consensus an almost impossible task before we begin .
I think I have got the message through .
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am delighted with the progress made on this third railways package since March 2004 .
We are talking about a raft of legislative proposals that are technically and legally rather complex .

I would also like specifically to thank Mr Jarzembowski , Mr Savary and Mr Stercx , all three of whom have done wonderful work .
Almost three years after the adoption of the initial proposals by the Commission , Parliament and the Council must reach a compromise on all of the texts , as Mrs Roth has just explained very well .
First of all , I would like to stress that , with one exception , the whole legislative package as proposed by the Commission has been maintained by Parliament and the Council .
There is a general philosophy underpinning these proposals that will make it possible to Europeanise the railways .
I would add that the new proposal on public service obligations has also made good progress , even though it is not on today 's agenda , and I believe that a reading of the third railways package in parallel with this proposal will make it possible to reach an overall compromise at the end of the legislative procedure .
Everybody will have to work hard , of course , as you have said , Minister .
The Commission is prepared to do so , and your Commissioner will endeavour to play a mediating role .
I would now like to make a few comments on the three reports .
I would like firstly to thank Mr Jarzembowski .
The Commission is pleased that the Council and Parliament have reached a consensus on the opening up of the market in international services with cabotage , which will take place in 2010 , as the Commission proposed .
On the other hand , the opening up of the market in domestic services raises certain problems .
In 2004 , the Commission was pleased to propose the opening up of the market in international services .
On the basis of its analysis , it concluded that the financial and legislative conditions were not in place to justify a broader opening up .
It should be pointed out that the operation of domestic lines , and particularly regional lines in certain European Union countries , is especially problematic and is not yet profitable .
It is true , Mr Jarzembowski , that the introduction of more competition in this market is beneficial in terms of increasing the efficiency of operation , but we are forced to achieve it by means of harmonised regulation of public service obligations .
We are not , therefore , in any way opposed to the principle of opening up the market in domestic services , but we believe that , within the framework of this third rail package , there is the risk that a decision would be premature .
We would like to assess this issue in the light of a more detailed analysis and we would like to take account of other elements contained in the proposal on public service obligations for which Mr Meijer is rapporteur .
That is why we have reservations about the opening up of domestic traffic , Mr Jarzembowski .
On the other hand , I can support a number of Parliament 's amendments to other articles of the text , such as the extension to fifteen years of the period in force of framework agreements for the awarding of services in the case of specialised infrastructures .
Furthermore , we are in favour of changing the wording of the article on framework agreements , the clarification of the scope of the levy to be paid for the funding of public services as well as the methods laid down for that purpose , and also the replacement of the concept of economic balance with that of profitability for the analysis of the possible impact of cabotage on an existing public service within the framework of an international service .
That is what I wished to say about this first proposal on which Mr Jarzembowski has worked so hard .
The second proposal is that of Mr Savary , which I know has been unanimously supported by the committee .
As Mr Savary quite rightly pointed out , this proposal makes it possible to implement human interoperability , which is just as important as the interoperability of equipment .
You have restored the scope proposed by the Commission at the outset .
In an increasingly open rail network , we feel that it is important to ensure that crew members - who , as you have pointed out , are qualified personnel , responsible for the safety of trains , and not only drivers - are properly trained and in an adequate state of health .
I have also taken note of Mrs Roth 's comments , but I believe that there is a possibility of reaching an agreement .
I would like , Mr Savary , to express a few reservations with regard to certain amendments relating to the funding of training .
You have proposed that a rail company employing a train driver whose training has been totally or partially funded by another rail company , which that driver has left voluntarily after less than five years ' activity , should repay part of the cost of the training to the company that has provided it .
We agree in principle , but it is true that the amendment raises problems , legal problems in particular - is that not the case with a more contractual approach ?
The Commission is wary about involving itself in an area for which we do not really have any factual data ; we are not fully aware of the scale of the problem or the possible options for resolving it .
Having expressed that reservation , Mr Savary , we agree with this proposal , which has been backed unanimously within the committee .
I shall now turn to the report by Mr Sterckx on international rail passengers ' rights and obligations .
The first problem relates to the scope and its extension to domestic services .
Mrs Roth has just explained to us that that scope posed certain problems within the Council .
I would like to say , however , Mr Sterckx , that I believe that we must accept that it is impossible to distinguish the sections from the different slots , because otherwise users will never know what their rights are , as you have quite rightly pointed out .
The Commission will therefore support your amendments and will assist in reaching a compromise with the Council on this point .
Furthermore , an approach that leaves more freedom for the Member States for all rail services subject to public service contracts seems logical and should facilitate that compromise .
The other issue is civil liability in the event of accidents .
Your desire to establish strict liability for rail companies would bring their liability into line with that of air companies .
In that regard , it clearly reflects the Commission 's approach , and I can therefore support this ambitious proposal , even though it goes further than the COTIF / CIM regime .
Mr President , Minister , ladies and gentlemen , our services will forward you the Commission 's detailed position on each amendment .
The Commission will naturally listen carefully to your debate and be at your disposal with regard to any issues that may be raised .
I shall conclude by reiterating what you have said , Minister .
I believe that we must all get to work on concluding this third rail package . It would be a real shame to miss this opportunity to re-evaluate Europe 's railways .
We need the railways so that we can transfer some of the freight to them from the roads .
It is essential that this third rail package is not derailed and that it arrives at its destination .
I would like to thank you all for the excellent work you have done so far and I promise that I will do everything I can to lead it to a successful conclusion .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to extend a warm welcome to Mrs Roth as President-in-Office of the Council .
As the rapporteur and also the Commissioner have already explained , the European licence for train drivers on which we are to vote tomorrow represents an important step towards the opening-up of rail transport throughout Europe .
The licence for train drivers forms part of the third railway package , which also includes two other legislative procedures we consider important , namely the one on passenger compensation and the one on the opening-up of cross-border passenger transport from 2010 .
These three legislative procedures create the essential preconditions for successfully implementing the full liberalisation of rail transport in the EU .
The European licence for train drivers takes on particular importance in the light of the EU-wide opening of freight-transport markets that entered into force at the start of this year .
It will save time and money .
At present , each of the 27 Member States of the EU has different requirements for which members of train crew require certification and for the means of certification .
Up to now , the recognition of the various licences for train drivers has involved a great deal of bureaucracy , but it is to be hoped that the EU-wide standardisation in question will eliminate these problems .
A further advantage of this European licence for train drivers is that it will significantly improve the free movement of railway workers and also improve railway safety .
However , this licence will only be a real success if , in the final reckoning , it also reduces bureaucracy - and we have set the course for this as well .
For example , we have been able to avoid bringing in certification for the whole crew , as some had wanted .
We shall now have certification of train drivers as a first step , and of crew members performing safety-related tasks as a second - which the Commissioner had not considered a good solution .
The European Railway Agency is to decide what form this second step should take on the basis of the experience acquired up to that date .
This is our position .
We have also managed to move the date of introduction forward to the end of this year , as prompt introduction will save railway undertakings money .
We have had to accept a compromise on the Annexes dealing with the technical aspects - but it is one that makes perfect sense , and so it has our support .
I find this very satisfactory .
I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Savary , for his constructive cooperation .
We shall be supporting this report tomorrow in plenary .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I represent the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , and our approach to the problem is as follows .
As regards Mr Jarzembowski 's report , we are very much concerned about railway regeneration and are committed to it .
We understand regeneration as making better use of the railways ' potential and reaping the benefit of the positive contribution they could make to a European transport system .
We have passengers ' interests very much at heart , including the need to make railways accessible to all social groups from both the technical and the economic point of view .
Finally , we believe it is very important for railways to be able to provide a wider range of attractive services on the market .
One way of achieving this is to allow competition between railways on the international market .
We therefore perceive liberalisation as a means to an end , not as an end in itself .
We are in favour of the liberalisation of international services in 2010 , and would like to emphasise that international services are at issue , not simply cross-border ones .
We can accept the Council 's position and its proposal concerning the role of national regulatory bodies and monitoring of the provision of public services .
We can also accept all the provisions designed to ensure efficient operation of national passenger service systems .
We tabled an amendment concerning submission , in 2012 , of a report assessing the effects of the 2010 liberalisation .
Our ideas are in line with those Commissioner Barrot was kind enough to put forward .
We expect a lot from that report .
The issue of the possible liberalisation of domestic services gave rise to much debate within the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
As a major compromise , we suggest that the possibility of liberalisation in the years 2017-2022 be considered , for the Fifteen and the EU as a whole respectively .
The group is divided on this issue .
We do believe , however , that it is important to send out the message that Europe is interested in creating a European transport system .
We were also delighted to hear from the Minister that the Council is ready to seek a compromise and a way of reaching agreement .
My group also warmly welcomed Commissioner Barrot 's stance and his statement that the Commission wishes to be actively involved .
As I conclude , I should like to thank the rapporteurs for their efforts . Thank you all .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , many years ago we agreed to create a common European area characterised by free movement within its borders of persons , goods , capital and services , and we have unquestionably made progress over the years since then , but we still have a lot to do in order to make what we proposed a reality .
One of the outstanding tasks is precisely the one we are discussing today : opening up passenger services by rail to the common European area .
We are talking about a service that affects the citizens directly and we must therefore act prudently in order to prevent the achievement of our objective from creating so much harm that the expected benefits are no longer worthwhile .
As in the case of other kinds of liberalisation , we must be careful and patient so that our decisions allow for a sufficient margin to adapt to the changes and do not have a negative effect on any basic public service .
The Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe is entirely in favour of opening up international services to the market , as the Commission proposed , as did the Council in its common position , but we also want other national services to be liberalised and for that to be included in this amendment of Directive 91 / 440 / EEC that we are debating .
With regard to this last aspect , we know that many people , including our French colleagues and others , fear that free competition may have a negative impact on the provision of the less profitable internal rail services .
We share that concern and therefore , although we are going to vote in general for the Committee on Transport and Tourism 's amendments , we are going to vote in favour of Amendment 37 so that in 2012 , on the basis of two years of experience in the liberalisation of international services , the Commission will present us with a report analysing , five years in advance , the state of preparation of the opening up of the market in passenger services within the States .
We are also going to reject Amendment 18 , because it seems to us to be reasonable to be able to limit for a maximum period of up to fifteen years the right of international services to cabotage when that means competing with another previous State concession awarded by means of a transparent and open public procedure .
We are going to argue that the introduction of new international services that represent competition should not affect the economic viability of the current regional and local rail services , and also that rules could be established to be met by both State and international services and which will be intended to compensate for public service obligations .
We also want to encourage private initiative to invest in the development of railways and , to that end , we propose that framework agreements on the award of rail services may last for fifteen years , and more in cases of large investments in specialised infrastructures that present an annual repayment plan that justify that exceptional duration .
I would like to end by thanking the rapporteurs , Mr Jarzembowski , Mr Sterckx and Mr Savary , for the work they have done .



on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( LV ) Mr President , Mrs Merkel and Mr Barrot , I am extremely pleased that three of my colleagues , with whom I initially had the honour of participating in drafting the third rail package , have very successfully prepared the second reading .
I say ' successfully ' because , firstly , the package has been preserved and , secondly , because the European Parliament is rigorously keeping to the line that in the future Europe we cannot apply differing standards as between so-called international transport and domestic transport .
Passengers in Europe should have the same protection whether they are crossing a state border or not .
Thinking about liberalisation in the passenger transport market , we need to be principled .
If the European Union internal market exists , then it exists also in internal transport .
It cannot be that in the services or goods market sector we say that there is a single internal European Union market , but that here the market is confined within Member States ' borders .
If I look with the eyes of a citizen of the Baltic States at this third rail package and ask what will change for me as a customer , then the Council 's common position would give me the reply that nothing will change .
For just as the Baltic is disconnected from the European Union 's electricity network , so is it also disconnected from the European Union 's international rail transport system .
Parliament must therefore be ready to go to the conciliation procedure , thinking of those with special needs , as well as of passengers in western and central Europe , and those in the eastern periphery .
In my view , we also need to find some new solution regarding the quality of rail freight transport , but this is a matter for the future . Thank you .
Mr President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , until now , unrestricted travel through Europe , from Lisbon to Tallinn , from London to Athens , from Paris to Warsaw , has been possible only by road or air .
The rail network , on the other hand , resembles a patchwork quilt with 27 patches , and so the railways are being left behind .
The national networks should be opened up .
At the same time , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance wants to be sure that social and environmental interests are also safeguarded .
In addition , we must learn from the mistakes made in the United Kingdom and Estonia , for example , where it was not only the networks that were opened up : the infrastructure was privatised , too .
That was a disaster .
For this reason , and also based on our experience of the monopoly structures of European electricity companies , we say that an essential requirement should be that the infrastructure remain in the public sector .
Europe cannot be content with the present situation on the railways - and customers certainly cannot .
An international European licence for train drivers is nothing short of exotic .
Nor is it acceptable that I am promoting the use of French trains on the German network whilst France is closing its network to other providers .
Thanks to the European licence for train drivers , it will no longer be necessary to change drivers at the border between Member States .
Passengers ' rights should be strengthened in the passenger rail services of all EU Member States , with the possibility of legally enforceable claims for compensation in the event of delays .
All trains - including high-speed trains such as the French TGV and the German ICE - should have a multi-purpose compartment to enable the carriage of sports equipment and bicycles on board .
Comprehensive information on European rail services and the option of buying tickets to anywhere in Europe should be the rule rather than the exception .
Access is to be guaranteed for people with reduced mobility .
National railway networks should be opened up for long-distance passenger transport , too , by 2017 at the latest - or 2022 in the case of the new Member States .
We shall be making our consent to this conditional upon the following , however : there must be no social dumping or destructive competition .
We know that the opening-up of the networks has meant a substantial increase in rail freight transport , but we also know that those Member States which have shut themselves off have recorded a decrease .
There are only five approved railway undertakings in France , and the tonne-kilometres transported in that country fell by 28 % between 1999 and 2005 .
There are more than 700 approved railway undertakings in Germany , and freight transport there increased by 25 % in the same period , whilst the figure for the Netherlands was even upwards of 40 % .
These are real success stories .
We want to replicate these positive results in passenger transport , and that is why we want to see networks opened up for European passenger transport , too .
I should like to thank the rapporteurs and my colleagues for their cooperation .

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , long before the European Union entered into existence , we enjoyed good cooperation on the railways , with cross-border , long-distance train services , with people being able to buy direct tickets to far-flung destinations in their own countries and an international time table being available in every country .
This good state of affairs is now under threat .
The European rail network is in a state of constant disintegration of a kind currently seen in the USA .
Soon , we will be left with only metropolitan district networks and high-speed links between the major cities .
On 27 and 28 September 2005 , at first reading , this Parliament missed an historic opportunity to retain and strengthen sound European coordination and high-standard services by going too far in its voting and by not going as far as the Commission suggested in the area of protecting passenger rights .
In Amendment 37 on passenger rights , the right for train travellers to be able to purchase integrated railway passes for the entire railway network of the European Union was replaced by a call for voluntary cooperation .
This is how railway companies are given the freedom to curtail the sale of tickets for , and information relating to , far-away destinations , and , to an increasing degree , to restrict passenger-friendly offers for travelling abroad .
Last year , three major Member States abolished their Euro Domino Cards that afforded residents of other states better access to their railway networks .
InterRail passes for travelling around the whole of Europe , which were mainly popular among young people for getting to know other countries of Europe , are granting less and less access to fast , long-distance trains .
The public no longer have any concept of the overall shape of European railways .
Since state monopolies have fallen by the wayside , the European railway business is being split up into a number of companies that are competing with each other on the same territory .
As a result , years of cooperation have turned this territory into a battleground and cross-border links are being thinned out or discontinued altogether .
The European Union is sitting on the fence as long as it continues to assume that , on the basis of Article 5 of Directive 91 / 4401 , railway companies must be run as trading companies and must , on this basis , seek to reduce costs as their main priority .
This is how we drive train travellers away to air travel for medium-long distances .
The more public transport relies on the market , the smaller its chance of survival becomes .
Not only the advent of cars and a widely available motorway network , but also tax exemption for aircraft fuel and the advent of price-cutting airlines has meant that rail transport is considered expensive in relative terms .
In order to survive , rail must be made appealing to younger generations .
If that generation starts to experience the car and aviation as normal and considers the train as an inaccessible museum piece , railway will only become more loss-making and will need to reduce their costs even more .
Those who expect that the position of railway is reinforced by inflicting the same mechanisms of competition on it as on air and road travel will end up catching a cold .
This development is as detrimental to passengers and railway staff as it is to the protection of our environment .

I am aware that for many years , Mr Jarzembowski has been fighting for more market and for more competitive companies being admitted more quickly to the rail network , not only in cross-border freight transport , but also in domestic passenger transport .
He claimed that , if his wishes were not met in the first railway package in 2001 , he would continue to fight in order to get what he wants eventually in the third package .
My group has never supported him in this .
In Amendment 35 , my group has suggested not to go along with Mr Jarzembowski 's liberalisation report and , in the event of it being adopted , to at least enable the Member States to restrict competition .
This can be done by adopting Amendments 33 , 34 and 36 , which have been drafted with that in mind .
With regard to the Sterckx report , we support the wishes of the European consumer organisation in our Amendments 70 to 73 .
Finally , only the Savary report , which makes it possible for train drivers to cross borders more easily and work under technically different circumstances , is a valuable contribution to the integration of European rail .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , all this week we have been told that this is a bright new dawn , with Parliament having a new President and Members .
However , as this report demonstrates , we still have ' leaves on the line ' .
At the first reading in 2005 , Mr Sterckx said that we must not tinker with international agreements that are already satisfactory .
I would therefore remind him that the COTIF Convention is a practical agreement between 42 individual nations , including many non-EU nations , to facilitate railway travel between them , yet today Mr Sterckx wants this agreement to be derailed .
He is lingering under the impression that neither Member States nor domestic rail companies are capable of establishing codes of passenger rights on their own .
That is certainly not true in the UK .
Mr Sterckx says this is really about consumer rights , yet it is conceded that more regulation means higher fares .
Why do my countrymen need EU regulations when they get higher fares ?
But Mr Sterckx has not drawn up a report about consumer rights .
It is about EU control .
The rapporteur says there is no point in drawing up regulations which only apply to the 5 % of rail passengers who use international services , so why are we doing this ?
There is a lot of EU regulation which will not affect the vast majority of people with no cross-border interests , but which at the same time damages the ability to provide domestic services .
In the EU , Mr Sterckx , the cross-border distinction is irrelevant , and until the EU gravy train finally hits the buffers , it is all unstoppable .
Behind all this week 's self-congratulation , that remains the real truth .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this speech celebrates the end of the well-known discrimination against those who used to be Non-attached Members .
It is also the first speech on behalf of the new Identity , Tradition and Sovereignty Group regarding a tabled report .
I shall therefore take this opportunity to point out that several million European citizens are at last no longer just half-represented , and that should be a source of satisfaction to those who claim to be fully democratic and who perhaps , in many EU countries , at least until the fall of the Berlin Wall , were and perhaps still are proud to share their responsibilities , ideals and so on with the Communist International .
Anyway , to return to the subject of our debate on the development of the Community 's railways , we are against liberalisation , not least in view of all the dreadful experiences that have resulted from liberalisation in a number of countries .
We cannot therefore support the proposals of the rapporteur , Mr Jarzembowski , on those aspects .
We consider the reciprocity clause to be essential ; otherwise liberalisation will not correspond at all to the kind of free competition that ought to favour the consumer .
On the subject of passengers ' rights and obligations , our ideas substantially coincide with those of Mr Sterckx : we agree with extending the scope of the regulation on passenger rights to include domestic transport .
I am thinking , for example , of how much we need it in my own country , not least because we believe that passengers should not be placed in different categories just because of the rail company they use .
Passengers ' dignity and rights should be guaranteed by all services , public or private , that operate within Union territory , and we therefore consider the temporary exemptions provided for in Amendment 22 to be more than sufficient in that respect .
Although the definition of a person with reduced mobility is as broad as it is vague , so much so that it will include several million passengers per day , we agree entirely that rolling stock and stations need to be adapted .
Assistance on board trains is also necessary , perhaps by allowing an accompanying person to travel free of charge , and we are therefore in favour of Amendments 47 and 66 .
On the other hand , we are against a number of amendments .
In particular , we do not think it should be made compulsory to have a special compartment for transporting bicycles and sports equipment on every train , especially without any further specification .
We therefore cannot support Amendments 26 , 58 , 59 or 69 .
Lastly , on the subject of licences for rail crews , our group agrees with the approach favouring certification for train drivers , but we are somewhat sceptical about whether it is appropriate to license other crew members as well , as happens in the case of other forms of transport .
Mr President , opening up the rail market to competition is all well and good and , indeed , necessary .
However , if you do not have a sufficient rail infrastructure , it is really a secondary consideration .
In my constituency of Northern Ireland , we benefited from essential improvements on the north-south rail connection from Larne through to the border with the Irish Republic and on to Dublin .
That has been done as part of the trans-European network .
However , the other key limb of our infrastructure is languishing in neglect and resulting decline , namely the link from Belfast to our second city , Londonderry .
This is something which I discussed with the Commissioner when he visited Northern Ireland some time ago .
This north-west route , particularly north of Ballymena , has had minimum investment , and mooted expenditure of GBP 10.5 million will not address the essential need for infrastructure improvements but merely arrest further deterioration , leaving us with a network incapable of carrying the necessary fast trains .
What is urgently needed is the inclusion of this north-west line into the TENs programme , followed by the investment and upgrade which could result .
It is for this that I appeal to the Commission .
A rail bridge across the River Foyle would open up the opportunity of a link into Donegal and thereby provide a truly transnational link .
This north-west line must not only be saved but also radically improved and , through TENs , the EU can make a worthwhile contribution .
Finally , on the Savary report , I must say that it seeks to place far too much regulatory burden on the rail industry .
It will provide a tier of EU regulation on top of already adequate national regulation , while providing no benefit , as I see it , to the rail sector or to its users .
( DE ) Mr President , Angela Merkel , the German Chancellor and President of the Council , gave a brilliant speech in the House this morning .
She showed us in simplified terms that the EU is not a straightforward issue , but it is one that is worth fighting for .
We can confirm both of these aspects specifically in the context of this afternoon 's topic .
Raising awareness of our work among the people at home is no simple matter .
They often feel it does not affect them .
Europe is so far away , they say , and this prejudice grows when politicians here join in .
It is a prejudice , however , and therefore incorrect .
In recent days and weeks , large numbers of interested parties and lobbyists have been contacting me and many of my fellow Members repeatedly on this very subject - and are continuing to do so .
The railways have spelt out to us what they want and need , and what they do not want and do not need .
They have shown that Europe does affect them .
Large numbers of consumer representatives have approached us and said what , in their eyes , the public expects and needs .
They , too , feel that Europe affects them .
In addition , very large numbers of workers ' and employers ' organisations have approached us repeatedly in recent weeks and months ; showing that Europe affects their clientele .
Admittedly , all these solicitations have involved widely differing concerns , and this leads to another fundamental problem for our European community .
Trying to reduce everything to a common denominator will complicate things greatly and dilute the matter , and the result will be neither fish nor fowl .
Besides - and this concerns a third element of European legislation - our processes take a very long time .
We know that our railway package , too , will have to go to conciliation .
It will be no easy task to reach agreement there with the Council , and long transitional periods in a number of cases will ultimately mean that it takes even longer .
We should not be discouraged by this , however .
The Sterckx report on passengers ' rights is worth fighting for .
We mean to , and shall , succeed in laying down a single legislative text for all passenger services in the EU .
We want financial compensation rather than just fine words .
We also want rights for passengers with disabilities and passengers with reduced mobility .
In this connection , it is important to me that we also see the case of mothers or fathers travelling alone with several young children as a problematic area and offer them help .
It is important to us all , however , that we ultimately achieve a good result , and that European citizens then see that Europe does affect them , and that it is something worth fighting for .
( NL ) Mr President , I should like to start by thanking the Members of this House who have contributed from afar or from close by to the result we are discussing today .
As you know , we will take this matter further , and will probably set the conciliation procedure in motion , which will involve quite a bit of work .
Turning to the Sterckx report , I should like to repeat what I said at first reading , namely that we managed to reach a consensus across the party-political divides about the key issues concerning passenger rights .
It may be possible to bridge the chasm that separates us from the Council , which wishes to restrict these rights to international passenger travel by putting in place transitional measures for situations where public service contracts already provide for these passenger rights .
At the same time , we must make sure that these exceptions are very clearly defined and thus prevent this regulation from becoming an empty shell .

Opinions are clearly divided over the Jarzembowski report , not only between the groups , but also within them , since the situation within the railway market and the potential implications of liberalising the national railway market make for very different opinions from one country to the next .
I deeply regret - and this is my personal view - the fact that most of my fellow Members , not least in the Committee on Transport and Tourism , have voted in favour of liberalising national passenger transport .
This is something that has not actually been requested by the sector , something the implications of which have not been properly looked into and something that the Commission , the Council , the trade unions , the consumer organisations , and the Association of European railway companies do not want to see approved today .
I have to tell Mr Sterckx that this is especially the case because we have failed to dispel , in a legally reliable manner , the fear that liberalisation will eat away at the public services in our Member States or render them unaffordable , for the simple reason that new competitors will obviously only be interested in the few profitable lines within the railway market , which will result in a considerable economic loss for the public service provider who will need to attract new sources of income in order to maintain the minor non-profitable lines , or else will be forced to cut these down .
It would have been preferable , as the Commissioner already said , to look at the issue of liberalisation in combination with the Meijer report , so that clear and uniform procedures could be put in place which would allow Member States or regions to offer sections of the network to one particular company in the framework of public service provision contracts .
To vote on liberalisation at this stage , without putting arrangements in place in this area first , is to put the cart before the horse , and this will not work .
Moreover , as I have already said several times , I do not think that the liberalisation of the market is in itself a panacea to get more people to use rail .
In Belgium , for example , the number of train travellers has rocketed in recent years - last year by 6.6 % - not because of liberalisation , but as a result of investment in new and comfortable rolling stock and of the adoption of an attractive pricing policy .
( DA ) Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , as my group 's rapporteur for the directive on the certification of train drivers , I wish sincerely to support the approach set out by Mr Savary .
For much of the way , the Council has , of course , agreed with Parliament 's approach from first reading , so there remain only a few outstanding points on which we can disagree .
The fact is that a common framework for the training of drivers is a logical consequence of the forms of liberalisation already adopted .
The big debate has been about who is to be covered by the Directive on the certification of train drivers .
Is it to be exclusively train drivers , or other staff too ?
My group is satisfied with the outcome now before us .
A proper balance has been found whereby train drivers and other staff with a direct involvement in safety are covered .
We also think it important for train drivers to be able to have access to data on themselves .
It is a simple issue of legal certainty , and we attach importance to the proposal that training costs should be refunded if the driver changes jobs shortly after being trained .
The fact is that the training is expensive , and we must not create a system in which a number of train companies can freewheel and systematically avoid paying training costs by recruiting newly trained staff from other companies .
I very much hope that , tomorrow , there will be a large enough majority here in Parliament in favour of the Jarzembowski report 's proposal on the liberalisation of passenger transport .
Liberalisation is necessary , and not just of the 5 % of passenger transport that crosses borders but also of national passenger transport .
It is necessary if trains in the EU are to be able to deliver a sufficiently competitive alternative to other forms of transport and , in so doing , provide more environmentally friendly and energy-saving transport .
What happens when liberalisation takes place and free competition is brought about ?
The passenger is put first , of course .
Punctual trains and good comfortable transport become main objectives and , instead of just being the stuff of slogans and advertisements , become integral to the self-image of the entire train company , which recognises that without customers there is no business .
Passenger rights must apply not only to cross-border , but also to national , transport .
Mr Sterckx has clearly shown that there is no sense in distinguishing between passenger rights in relation to , respectively , national and international transport .
In Denmark , train companies have taken the lead and have already adopted the proposals on passenger rights in the event of delays that we in Parliament have put forward - something , then , that obviously can be done .
( PL ) Mr President , in view of the time available I shall only refer to one issue .
The development of Community railways and decisions on railway infrastructure capacity and levies must be governed by the definition of the function of and the demand for the services concerned .
All of this is determined by the economy and the passengers .
Development of the railways should also involve cooperation with other forms of transport .
Such an approach could set the scene for private capital investment and for the European and national subsidies required for long-term investment guaranteeing the development of the railways .
It is appropriate to give priority to subsidising investment in high-speed passenger trains , but the development of freight transport is equally important .
Investment is needed to improve border junctions as part of the effort to create a common market and develop trade beyond our Eastern borders .
Countries like Poland have unused broad gauge track .
Dry container ports could be created at the end of these lines .
This would relieve the pressure on the inadequate road network and be beneficial to the environment .
I believe that the ideas contained in Mr Jarzembowski 's report will contribute to the process of liberalisation of rail transport and further development in Europe .
( FR ) Mr President , as you know , for we Greens it is essential that we implement a genuine European transport policy leading to a modal transfer from the roads to rail .
Road traffic creates 25 % of greenhouse gas emissions , and this is therefore a significant challenge .
We should be asking ourselves the following question : is opening up to competition , specifically in passenger transport by rail , going to respond to that challenge ?
On the contrary , I believe that the proposals contained in the Jarzembowski report are in danger of leading to a deterioration of the service for users .
Fares , ticketing , information on timetables , management of connections : how are users going to know how to make the most of the different services offered by the rail companies ?
We can expect the less profitable lines , which play a fundamental role in terms of social and territorial cohesion , to be abandoned .
We can also expect increased pressure on the working conditions of railway personnel , as is happening in the case of low-cost airlines in the aviation sector , and fierce competition for the most profitable slots , without this having any effect on the final number of passengers transported .
In order to strengthen the railways , we need a genuine European commitment to funding the modernisation of infrastructures , the obsolete nature of which is a major obstacle to their development .
We also need to overcome the obstacles to interoperability and to adopt - and this is crucial - a tax system which genuinely penalises the most polluting forms of transport , such as a tax on kerosene or the internalisation of environmental costs for road transport .
Liberalisation is by no means the only way to Europeanise transport policies .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , we have now reached the debate on the second reading of the third package of measures dealing with the railways .
The composition of the package has been controversial from the outset , a view shared by the social partners and not restricted just to MEPs from the Left .
We have clearly stated on several occasions that the failure to carry out an assessment of the second rail package is a breach of the conditions under which Parliament , jointly with the Commission , adopted it .
Rational debate has been cast aside in this discussion .
Without mentioning the state of the infrastructure and the rolling stock , or the implementation of measures under the Commissioner for Transport 's agreement with the Community of European Railways , we are discussing today the highly controversial report by Mr Jarzembowsky on opening up the market for rail transport .
Let me get straight to the point : the Commission and the Council are trying to extend the deadlines in this report or to make them flexible .
In view of this fundamental discrepancy , the members of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left will once again vote against the report .
Above all , there are some dangerous amendments that serve to exacerbate the situation .
On the other hand , we endorse the outstanding reports by Mr Savary and Mr Sterkcx , whom I wish to congratulate , as they take account of the practical situation , along with the demands of the unions and of the pragmatic senior executives .
I wish to reiterate the point that some amendments may make the situation considerably worse .
I believe that the outcome of the vote on this package will reflect similar concerns on the part of the new Member States .
This , among other things , is about making use of transitional periods , and about specifying the conditions of passenger transport services .
I hope that we can soon clarify the problems of the rail freight annex to the Convention Concerning International Carriage by Rail ( COTIF ) , and that we achieve this mainly on the basis of an agreement between the Member States that have ratified it .
The current state of affairs is unsatisfactory .
Perhaps just one further remark ; the wording adopted in the Stercx report comes across as an attempt to impose penalties in the event of trains being delayed .
Personally , rather than penalties , I would like to see attempts to comply with a contract of carriage along the lines of the Swiss model , the basis of which is transporting goods and passengers to their destination .
Along with a number of other Members , I shall vote on the amendments with this objective in mind .
Whatever the outcome , I believe that we will be returning again to this issue in the future .
( NL ) Mr President , in recent months , opinion on the subject of the third railway package has turned out to be anything but unanimous - in the Council and this House at any rate .
I can understand the Council 's cautious attitude , given the differences among Member States and the division of powers within Europe , and can , to a large extent , identify with it .
This does not , though , alter the fact that the Council has not opted for the best solution all round with the future in mind .

The Sterckx and Savary reports definitely have a hand in this , which cannot be said for the Jarzembowski report , in which , as I see it , the balance which the Council had struck between the future market opening and the existing situation , has been broken .
As a result of the amendments in this report , a situation has been created in which for all passenger transport , even though it is phased in time , services can be offered in different ways at the same time .
This can result in profitable lines being cherry-picked at the expense of less profitable ones , a lower quality of service provision and possible safety risks .
By giving Member States the choice between different competition models , the said drawbacks can be avoided .
On behalf of my group , I have tabled two amendments to that effect .
Since , moreover , it is important for existing agreements on time-limited rail services to be respected , Amendment 18 is , in my view , uncalled for .
I hope , although I have my doubts about the likelihood of it , that we will reach the right decision tomorrow .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , the railway package is an interesting trilogy , and all trilogies contain an element of drama .
Anyone who knows Mr Jarzembowski will know that he always likes to make sure his proposals are not boring .
The first two proposals attracted a very broad consensus in this House .
I consider it a very good thing that we are talking about the liberalisation of the railways and are discussing the accompanying measures early on .
It would be a shame to make the same mistake as we did with road transport , for example - namely liberalising first and only then looking at where further regulation may be needed .
This also applies to the European licence for train drivers , in my opinion .
It goes without saying that there should be equivalence of training throughout Europe , including for the staff directly entrusted with safety-related tasks .
We can hardly develop a European railway network when requirements for train drivers and criteria differ from country to country .
Mr Savary has largely reflected Parliament 's opinion on this , and I should like to thank him for his report .
The same goes for passengers ' rights .
Simply put , it would even be sufficient to say that rail transport should be punctual and of high quality .
In many countries , people would be pleased just to see these two requirements met .
Yet we have gone even further .
My concern is that we are perhaps setting the bar a little too high .
Whilst service quality and passenger rights should of course be respected , we should not set our sights too high , when we already know the kind of difficulties the fulfilment of all these requirements entails in international transport , in particular . In international transport , too , the same rules should apply .
As the Commissioner has already said , it is unacceptable that passengers ' rights suddenly change when they cross the border from one country to another .
The proposals regarding people with reduced mobility are particularly good .
I should like to remind the House , however , that the package originally contained a fourth proposal , which has been lost along the way .
We must not forget that a certain level of quality is to be ensured for freight transport , too .
The fact that we have introduced sanctions for this kind of transport must not result in its being neglected across the board for fear of sanctions being introduced in other fields , too .
On the subject of the liberalisation of the market , it goes without saying that international transport , too , must be liberalised .
The same criteria must apply in Paris , Brussels and Cologne .
The issue of domestic operation now arises .
I hail from a small country , Belgium , where we have missed the boat on this to a certain extent , as the major lines are cross-border , for example the Aachen-Brussels line and the line running from Brussels to Antwerp and continuing on to the Netherlands .
One question remains with regard to the small countries , however - as Mr Jarzembowski , too , knows - and that is who is willing and able to pay for these services and how can they be organised ?
This question must be dealt with alongside the present package .
This can be done within the framework of the Meijer report , before we express our opinion on this subject in general .
In addition , I support the Commissioner 's suggestion that we include the Meijer report in the overall package with this proposal by Mr Jarzembowski .
( DE ) Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , it is hard to imagine a mode of transport that is in such urgent need of political support as the railways .
The third railway package brings us a little further forward .
There is nothing controversial about the Savary and Sterckx reports , and I should like to thank the rapporteurs .
Not only train drivers , but other staff , too , must be covered .
We should not concern ourselves exclusively with passengers on cross-border services , but with passengers in general .
The controversial issue is - as it always has been - how to deal with market opening .
Both we and the Council have traditionally made heavy weather of this issue .
This has a good deal to do with national safeguard mechanisms , but it also has to do with fears .
These positions must of course be respected , but they do not help us achieve a result .
We could of course disregard the liberalisation of rail transport if it were not for the fact that - as has been pointed out several times - other transport sectors have been liberalised without regard for the social or environmental costs in recent years , with disastrous consequences .
Tremendous growth in road and air traffic has been recorded for the 1995-2004 period , whilst the railways have been lagging behind and stagnating .
The future looks even more bleak . By 2020 , the volume of freight transport will have increased by 50 % , and that of passenger transport by 35 % , yet the various modes of transport will not benefit equally from the expected 35 % increase in passenger transport .
The increase will be 108 % for the aeroplane , 36 % for the car , and just 19 % for the railways .
These are the Commission 's projections .
No one can seriously be happy about these figures .
It may well be that increases in passenger numbers are already being seen at national level ; but we have to look at the overall picture .
The realisation that it takes one person a 17 000 km rail journey to release a tonne of CO2 pollution into the atmosphere , but a journey of just 3 000 km by air , does lead one to reconsider one 's position on the opening of rail markets .
What we are discussing today is not the Meijer report , as that will have its turn soon , nor the ports package , but instead - for reasons of energy and environmental policy - we are discussing market opening .
I would say to Mrs Roth , on the subject of exacting requirements , that 2017 / 2022 is hardly a sledgehammer approach , but a very gentle one , one that also takes the smaller Member States into consideration .
Both the Council and Parliament have incorporated safeguard mechanisms for the smaller Member States .
These countries obviously need special protection and consideration .
I shall repeat that , if the railways are to have a real chance , we must permit a measure of market opening in this field .
I look forward to the conciliation procedure and hope that the Council Presidency will be very active and willing to compromise , and will bring the matter to a successful conclusion .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the distinction between international transport , and transport between Member States and national transport dates back to 1956 , specifically to Article 70 of the Treaty establishing the European Coal and Steel Community , in other words the first piece of European transport legislation .
It seems quite obvious to me that cross-border transport should have been prudently entrusted to the European institution when the internal market in transport began to be created , but it is just as obvious that the false distinction between international and domestic transport should subsequently have been abandoned for road , sea and air transport , for cabotage , and finally , on 1 January this year , for rail freight transport .
Why then , Mrs Roth , should this distinction persist just for this last enclave of premodernity : rail passenger traffic ?
Why , Mr Barrot , make so much effort to liberalise 5 % of the rail passenger market within three years , by 2010 ?
Why prevent the beneficial effects of competition from helping the remaining 95 % of the rail market to regain its competitiveness compared with road and air , without which we will not find a solution to any of the problems facing us ?
Why enable only 5 % of passengers to enjoy at last the obvious protection that all consumers deserve , particularly those with disabilities , when we have already extended it to all air passengers ?
Do you not think that a ten-year transition period for everyone , or even 15 for the new Member States , is enough to allow even the shakiest of national monopolies - which are today defending their exclusive internal markets - to get ready to face up to competition ? After all , competition cannot be destructive , because the market is already declining and only competition can help to expand the market for everyone .
In short , ladies and gentlemen , are we really incapable of giving up an attitude that was effective 50 years ago but today , frankly , is endangering our whole strategy ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) Mr President , honourable Members , I would like to thank you for your very open and interesting comments on the railway package .
They show how important the railways are in transport , and how they must become still more important .
Parliament is very united in this , and that strengthens the Commission , the Council and us all .
I firmly believe that the differences between the 27 countries must be taken into consideration , including when it comes to their enthusiasm for opening up access to the market .
If we show sound judgment and enthusiasm in accepting the requirements of the individual countries while at the same time providing options for regulation and deregulation , then we will achieve greater acceptance .
In many Member States , there is a legitimate fear that the opening up of the market in national passenger transport will result in certain companies simply taking over the market .
That is one of the viewpoints that result in the topic of market opening not being approached very energetically , as you made clear in your report , Mr Jarzembowski .
I would like to thank the rapporteurs and those who took part in the discussions for their commitment to transport policy , and in particular to the railways .
I am sure we will meet again at the next opportunity , in order to search out compromises .
The debate is suspended .
It will resume at 9 p.m.
Membership of committees ( deadline for tabling amendments ) : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 7 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Development of the Community 's railways Certification of train drivers operating locomotives and trains on the railway system in the Community International rail passengers ' rights and obligations ( continuation of debate )
The next item is the continuation of the joint debate on European railways .
At this moment when for the first time I am exercising my duty to preside over the European Parliament , I would like to acknowledge all of those people who have accompanied me until this point in my life and career , my party colleagues and the citizens of my province , Ciudad Real , in Spain , who kept me in my country 's Parliament for twenty-two years .
In particular , it is a happy historical coincidence that we should be talking about railways when I come from a town called Alcázar de San Juan , which was a central point in the history of the railways and in the history of the workers ' movement in my country .
- ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am essentially in favour of the third railway package .
Originally , I took the view that the State should never hand over operation of the railways to private companies , but , provided the infrastructure remains under State ownership , and local , regional and cross-border transport services are transferred to private companies only under very clear conditions , in a socially and environmentally responsible way , I now think that we must accept fair competition .
If , however , a State monopoly were simply to be replaced by a number of private monopolies , as has sometimes been the case with the energy companies , then liberalisation would certainly get us nowhere .
My experience as a frequent rail traveller has shown me that the quality of railway provision depends not on the level of privatisation , but rather on a clear political will to give rail preference over road .
What counts in this respect are the true costs and the attractiveness of the railways in general , including , for example , appealing stations , well-planned timetables , a reliable service , comfortable trains , and so on .
We have a good example in the middle of Europe : Switzerland . The Swiss Government has not abdicated its responsibilities , even though 45 % of the railways are not owned by Swiss Federal Railways .
There are clear requirements , and there is a political will on the part of those responsible .
The railways work , and can compete with the road network .
A bad example is Italy , where the focus has to date been on grand projects and the existing rail network has been seriously neglected for decades .
Perhaps this European initiative will gradually make Italy , too , change its approach .
( PT ) Once again , the majority in Parliament is trying to speed up the liberalisation and privatisation of rail passenger transport by seeking to broaden the scope of the proposed directive not only to international passenger transport , and by as early as 2010 , but also to national passenger transport by 2017 .
Its aim is to deliver the most profitable lines into the hands of the large private economic operators by privatising services , specifically by means of public-private partnerships , thereby fostering , as has happened in other sectors , the formation of monopolies whose aim is profit .
These monopolies often receive outlandish amounts of public funding , regardless of the interests and needs of each country and its people .
In Portugal , experience has shown that , following the implementation of such a policy , public rail transport services have deteriorated , thereby hampering people 's mobility . The policy has led to higher ticket prices , to the removal of hundreds of kilometres of the rail network , to the closure of stations and to a reduction in passenger numbers and in service quality .
Furthermore , fewer people are working in the rail sector , and there has been an onslaught on salaries and workers ' rights .
This is a policy to which the workers and the general public alike are opposed . We have therefore tabled a proposal to reject this directive , explained in general terms in the minority opinion in this report .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the third rail package is a major step towards the goal of a liberalised market and a common policy to protect passengers ' rights and obligations at a European level .
The Jarzembowski report certainly makes up the core of the third package , and I fully endorse the rapporteur 's position .
It opens up to competition not only international but also national rail transport , makes the principle of reciprocity compulsory , and thus avoids giving undeserved advantages to companies in countries closed to competition .
The Sterckx report concerns passengers ' rights and obligations .
Again , I agree with the rapporteur 's position , in that he rightly proposes extending the scope of the regulation to include all rail passengers , both national and international .
International passenger traffic in fact represents only 5 % of rail traffic , so what would be the point in approving a regulation that applies to such a small percentage of consumers ?
Another argument in favour of extending the scope is suggested by the legislation in force in the air transport sector , where no distinction is made between international and national traffic as regards passengers ' rights and obligations .
Many Member States will find it difficult to reconcile their current situation with the provisions proposed in this regulation , and we therefore think it appropriate that the proposed measures should be phased in gradually .
Above all , they should comply with the feasibility criterion : for example , passengers with reduced mobility will see the gradual removal of physical obstacles and barriers as major restructuring work is carried out , new stations are built and new trains and carriages are purchased .
Companies will be liable for passengers and their baggage , and in the event of delays there will be minimum compensation rights throughout the European Union .
Mr President , may I begin by congratulating you on your elevation .
I hope you will enjoy your two and a half years in the Chair and , of course , give me plenty of speaking time !
This debate is a bit like the political equivalent of Nero fiddling while Rome burns .
We talk a lot about encouraging a switch of people and goods from road to rail , and yet leave in place huge obstacles to operation of the railways .
No wonder passenger numbers and goods figures are falling .
We must have a European single market in railways , rather than a series of totally incompatible national markets .
Without it , the railways are at a handicap , particularly in relation to air travel .
I can get a plane ticket from Manchester to Prague on my computer at the click of a button , but just try getting a train ticket from Manchester to Prague .
It is impossible .
We must have liberalisation of the railways now .
We must open up the market now .
Of course we have to have safeguards .
I would not recommend anybody to follow the experience of the United Kingdom .
The privatisation - as opposed to liberalisation - there was a complete disaster .
However , under the current government , the UK has put things right and now has the highest investment in railways anywhere , the largest increase in passenger numbers and also has actually seen more kilometres of railway line being built .
Nobody needs this investment more than the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
Why are we delaying when they are desperate for investment ?
We need that investment in order to put a proper European railway market into operation .
We also need to ensure that passengers are properly treated .
I receive many complaints from people with reduced mobility who find it very difficult to travel by rail across Europe .
We need standards on this , and we need proper ticketing so that you can press a button in Manchester and get a ticket to wherever you want to go .
What is more , we need to move faster than is being proposed by the European Commission and the Council .
( NL ) So far , a broad majority in this House appears to be holding firm to liberalising a railway network for both cross-border and domestic transport , which does not come as a total surprise , as indeed , more extensive market forces in public transport have demonstrated to us that this produces 25 % more public transport for the same level of outlay .
I do consider Amendment 37 at any rate to be of key importance in this framework .
We should not only consider competition in the rail network , but also , and especially , around it , or the so-called concession model , an important form of market forces , whereby safety , efficiency , a logical timetable and healthy financial management can all be given equal weighting .
Following in the footsteps of the shadow rapporteur , Mr Ortuondo Larrea , I should like to ask the rapporteur to give full support to Amendment 37 .
I should like to finish off by saying a few words about Amendment 18 .
Unlike the rapporteur , I take the view that contracts for international passenger services that have already been put out to tender in accordance with an open commercial and fair procedure , and only those , should be respected .
To be honest , this simply strikes me as a matter of good governance .
If existing contracts with private parties must be broken , Member States could be faced with insurance claims running into hundreds of millions of euros , which is , in all honesty , not exactly the message that I , as a Member of Parliament , want to see going out to the European public .
The Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe will therefore be rejecting Amendment 18 , and I should like to ask the rapporteur to do likewise .
( FR ) I too would like to congratulate our new President of the sitting : welcome , Mr President !
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the fight against climate change requires a considerable commitment on the part of the Union in favour of public transport , and of the railways in particular .
In my region , Lorraine , a recent tragic cross-border accident , resulting from a signalling error , dramatically illustrated the urgent need to harmonise the rail network , which is no small challenge .
Because it involves the concepts of access to a public service and of land management , achieving uniformity requires the greatest possible prudence , as the Minster acknowledged just now .
I do not therefore believe that the liberalisation proposed in Mr Jarzembowski 's report is the right approach .
Apart from the fact that opening up to competition will jeopardise the Member States ' public service duties , it will not ultimately lead to fare reductions for our users .
Citizens travelling to work on a daily basis will not see any improvements to their travelling conditions either .
Quite the contrary !
Opening up to competition will lead to a deterioration of secondary lines , which are so important to local development .
And what about the impact of liberalisation on rail safety , Commissioner ?
The transfer from the roads to rail is essential , and it is essential that Europe implements that .
I shall end with a nod to the Minister , who is not present : I would like to say that yesterday 's utopias are today 's realities .
( HU ) The liberalisation of rail travel in the internal market will be fully implemented with the third railway package .
It is certainly true that Europe needs a sustainable , efficient rail service .
The third railway package , however , will be successful only if economically healthy and logistically prepared modern railway companies provide the service .
This is not the case today .
Railway companies in the new , and in some cases in old Member States , are struggling with an accumulated deficit , and Member States are faced with the problem of consolidation .
All this appears to be a domestic matter , but in terms of its dimensions and significance it is a European-wide problem and puts at risk the implementation of all three of the railway laws being discussed today , especially if we set the bar high .
The railway package contains a proposal that extends the preparation time for liberalising domestic passenger transport .
In my opinion , this extended preparation time is not sufficient .
I suggest to the European Council that it put on the agenda of its work programme the true situation in the expanded European Union , and to address the problem .
Furthermore , it is essential to examine what is to be done and what can be done in order to solve the existing railway problem in a significant part of Europe .
Thus , it is not a question here of drawing a line between the old and new Member States .
On the contrary , let us look for a way to create a well functioning , liberalised rail service throughout Europe that is competitive or complementary to the other transport branches .
The goal , therefore , is that existing values in the new Member States - in this case rail service - should not fall victim to the opening up of the internal market , but should instead become a valuable part of it .
Unfortunately , previously this did not succeed in the case of certain services .
With regard to the liberalisation of domestic passenger transport , I consider the proposed amendment which I submitted to be better than the compromise proposal .
The difference between the two is that my proposal would grant every Member State that is not able to prepare itself in time , or that runs into other obstacles , the possibility of a derogation .
The compromise proposal would make this possible only for the new Member States .
In my opinion , the impact assessment prior to the regulation should in each case extend to the specificities of the new Member States , but the regulation must be unified .
In any case , I welcome the fact that the rapporteur and the Committee on Transport and Tourism have striven - as was , in fact , the case the first time - to pay attention in drafting the law to the special problems affecting the new Member States .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like firstly to congratulate you most warmly .
Miguel Ángel , who would have guessed , when , under the isolation of the Franco dictatorship , you left from Alcázar de San Juan , which was Spain 's symbolic rail and trade union hub , that European railways would take you once again tonight to Alcázar de San Juan , but this time as Vice-President of the European Parliament ?
You look very handsome , and , furthermore , somebody must have put some flowers in republican colours just there to your left .
Well , I would like to thank the rapporteurs and the shadow rapporteurs , particularly Mr Jarzembowski , because he is the rapporteur who , as always , has been patient enough to stay here to listen to everybody , including those of us who disagree with him , but who , when it comes down to it , love him and respect him .
I would like to thank all of you for your intensive and meticulous work , and for your patience in dealing with our reservations and doubts .
I am pleased that the European Parliament has managed to persuade the Council and the Commission to take account of the majority of its proposals , aimed at the complex task of harmonising and modernising the twenty seven different current rail systems with a view to creating a European railways area that ensures that our railways are sustainable , attractive and safe and that they have a future .
I believe that the European Parliament should once again advocate a gradual and controlled opening-up , of which this third legislative package represents one more step .
However , we are not so naive or cynical as to deceive the European citizens by claiming that , by setting a specific date - which , furthermore , many believe to be premature - the current rail problems are going to disappear .
Do you imagine that the budgetary shortages suffered by the trans-European networks , which prevent us from eliminating the real cross-border obstacles in mountainous regions , such as the Alps or the Pyrenees , not to mention the RTMS , will disappear in 2017 ?
Do you imagine that , by setting this magic date , the congestion of infrastructures for goods transport by rail or the problems with the interoperability of systems - not to mention other problems which fortunately the Commission is currently dealing with , such as the certification of locomotives and rolling stock - will disappear ?
On the other hand , apart from the ceaseless liberalisation , there are also railway success stories that demonstrate that that is not the only sine qua non condition .
One example is the success of high-speed trains for passengers in Spain .
Admittedly we have not had the same success with goods , but I believe that Germany is the leader in this sector , and has been since before liberalisation .
Perhaps we should therefore learn from all of these experiences .
That is why we are advocating the method of gradual opening-up , which will enable us to focus on the criteria and conditions , paying particular attention to the viability of public services and the diversity of existing concession formulae .
Hence our vote in favour of Amendment 33 .
We therefore support the idea that , two years after opening up international passenger transport , the Commission should draw up an assessment of the progress made and of any problems and , where necessary , propose new measures to accompany the subsequent opening-up process , as proposed in the texts that the three institutions agree on , because on the study , at least , we are all in agreement .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to say that , in general terms , I am satisfied with the progress achieved thanks to the long and exacting work of the European Parliament and , more specifically , of the three rapporteurs .
This reform of passenger transport by rail is absolutely essential if we are to create a genuine internal market , which will promote the mobility of all Europeans under optimal safety and accessibility conditions and which will very quickly , I hope , help to reduce the often exorbitant fares , without leading to the disappearance of services .
Nevertheless , with regard to access to the market , I would like to express my concern this evening about the temptation to set a date at this point for the opening up of the national passenger market .
I personally am not in favour of altering the Council 's position on this point , since a hurried , and perhaps ill-prepared , opening up of national passenger transport could have serious consequences for the service .
I would like to see prior impact studies , particularly on the effects of opening up to international competition , on the cabotage system , which must be provided with a strict framework , and on the effects of the system of standardisation of tariffs .
Why not schedule a fourth rail package , which could look in detail at funding mechanisms , and particularly coordination with public service obligations , as well as the funding of loss-making lines ?
With regard to the directive on international rail passengers ' rights and obligations , I am delighted with the work that is going to give far greater responsibilities to rail operators and , at the end of the day , and very quickly I hope , give more rights to passengers , particularly those with reduced mobility .
I would also like to thank Mr Sterckx for supporting our group 's amendment , which is intended to take account of the specific situation of suburban transport , which is particularly relevant in terms of public service obligations .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate you !
Mr Jarzembowski , I would also like to take the opportunity to express my respect - even though we have different opinions on a certain specific area of your report - for the resolve , tenacity and vigour with which you have pursued this report , as long as I have been in this House , and for the relative success you have achieved .
On the surface , we all want the same thing for the European railways : high quality , high safety standards and good working conditions .
It has always been said that we have differing visions of that and differing ideas of how to get there , but I am not so sure that that is really true .
I wonder why it is mainly those Members who did not really strengthen the railways in the matter of the Infrastructure Costs Directive , by rather overemphasising certain things , that are now on the pro-liberalisation side .
Why , for example , did the former Austrian transport minister push so hard for liberalisation , while at the same time running the Austrian railways almost into the ground with his domestic railway policy ?
Why have we not all gone down the perhaps more sensible route of saying that we will first of all examine liberalisation in the international arena , and wait until we can see where this path takes us before we decide whether we want to continue down it ?
If we had done that , I would have been able to say with certainty that everybody here is in favour of progress on Europe 's railways .
I do not think that some kind of neoliberal anti-railway campaign is underway here .
I really do not think that , even though the rapporteur has shifted somewhat to the right in time to present the report to plenary .
I have shifted to the right with him , so that says nothing .
I do think , though , that there are many different reasons for following this path to liberalisation that I cannot fully share .
I therefore do not want to jump on this bandwagon just yet .
Perhaps I will be convinced in time , but at the moment , when it comes to national liberalisation , I do not want to be a part of it .
( PL ) Mr President , I am delighted with the results obtained in the course of negotiations led by the rapporteurs for this third railway package .
The package really has been improved as a result of these negotiations .
It has not just been repackaged more attractively , it simply is a better package .
One issue remains outstanding , however .
Perhaps I shall begin with a few words to put it into context .
In my region of south-west Poland , an increase in rail passenger services was recorded last year .
It was not a large increase , but it was actually the first increase for many years .
Up until then , nothing but a continuous fall in services was being recorded , not just in my region but across the whole of Poland .
Perhaps last year 's slight increase is an indication that railways are gradually beginning to compete with road transport , which is what we all very much want and a key principle of European transport policy .
I mention all this , because great care must be taken not to alter this trend when introducing new regulations concerning rail passengers ' rights .
Railways must be competitive , and must therefore be cheap or even very cheap .
They must also be well managed , and offer their passengers a high standard of travel .
The difficulty is that if these two objectives are taken literally , a degree of contradiction arises .
A service cannot be cheap and luxurious at the same time .
That is why an effort to devise a suitable compromise in this regard is needed .
The railways are very gradually emerging from a long period of decline .
They need us to help them in their endeavours .
We must not impose additional burdens on railways if we want to prevent them going back into decline .
( LT ) I would support the liberalisation of rail transport services if the social effect of opening up rail networks and its effects on the environment were to be analysed in depth .
On the other hand , opening of the EU countries ' railway lines going into third countries gives the green light to unfair competition .
The right to use these lines will be acquired by third-country companies with branches in EU countries , whose main interest is to carry passengers into their own countries .
Some EU countries run the risk of losing the right to carry passengers into neighbouring third countries , because the latter are not obliged to adhere to EU directives and to open up their passenger transport market .
Railway enterprises in EU countries with an external border would find themselves in a more difficult situation compared to other EU countries .
I would invite you to vote against the fifteenth amendment .
I would urge you not to support my colleague Mr Sterckx 's report on the twenty-first amendment , which , in my opinion , weakens the Council 's motion .
( HU ) I wish to draw attention to a few questions , the first of which is generally economic in nature .
When talking about liberalisation and the liberalisation of services , we always say the same thing .
It should not be the case that there is no deadline in the services directive , or that in some places we wish to liberalise only partially , because let us say as a German I am sensitive to this matter , whereas in other respects we need to open up services completely , for instance in financial or rail services .
I say this not in order to harm rail service .
Yes , some day this too will have to be completely liberalised , but to do so , we need to catch up in other areas as well .
The second question , concretely , is something I already mentioned at first reading .
The new Member States are struggling with a great many problems of domestic government administration .
I therefore say once again that only five years after the introduction of the euro can we truly accept full liberalisation , since before that time we are unable to capitalise our companies - in which there is enormous investment that must not be frittered away - in such a way that they are able to withstand competition .
The year 2022 in the current proposal is already quite friendly in this regard .
We must be very careful - especially in the new Member States - to maintain that we fulfil the obligation to provide public transport solely by means of buses .
That is , after one accident in which someone is hit , the State simply withdraws from the railways in its obligation to provide public transport .
The Savary proposal , in my opinion , goes in the right direction from this point of view , that is , truly towards the deepening of the internal market .
In connection with the Sterckx report - although of course everything it contains is very attractive - I must say , as a representative of a new Member State , that this will cost us a great deal , especially if we have to do this in the first ten years before the introduction of free movement of persons and the introduction of the euro .
This is very , very difficult .
I do not wish to oppose what is written in this report : as a goal it is very good , but in terms of timing , things do not fit together completely , and I would like it very much if such a degree of obligation were brought in only after the introduction of the euro and of the free movement of persons .
Actually , with liberalisation , quality will also improve , so that there will probably not be such serious problems in the future , but once again I repeat : we need to synchronise .
( SK ) Mr President , I congratulate you on your new role .
In order to improve the competitiveness of railways vis-à-vis road transport and to place railways on an equal footing in terms of competing for business , it is necessary to complete the harmonisation of the conditions governing railway and road transport operations .
In the energy sector we are unbundling transmission systems from energy suppliers ; in the railway transport sector as well , it is necessary to complete the reform of those state-owned railway companies that still have carriers and infrastructure operators in one and the same organisation .
The fact that road transport is flourishing , even in those countries where rail transport would be more appropriate from an environmental standpoint , is due to inadequate harmonisation , external factors , faulty interoperability and flawed transformation , as well as the poor quality of rail transport .
The second key factor is market liberalisation .
When opening up rail networks for passenger transport , however , it will be necessary to give the economies of the new Member States enough time to prepare themselves for this step .
( PT ) Thank you very much , Mr President , I also wish to congratulate you on your election and wish you all the best in your new post .
The liberalisation of rail transport is something that needs to be brought about , but progress has been painstaking .
We must therefore keep up the effort to move ever closer to a European rail services market , which will help us implement the important objectives of the common transport policy .
In this regard , I should like to congratulate our rapporteurs on their outstanding work .
Although , for many , trains still have an image of romanticism and adventure derived partly from the famous Orient Express , the fact is that they are a safe , environmentally friendly means of transport that is adept at moving large quantities of goods quickly and at conveying large numbers of people comfortably and equally quickly .
The dream of rail services from the Atlantic to the Baltic and Black Seas remains a distant one , as we continue to come up against major obstacles to effective freedom of movement in the rail sector .
The problem remains of discrepancies between , for example , gauges inside and outside the Iberian Peninsula , as do those of the management of internal and international traffic and of ticketing , which are not easy matters to resolve .
We face enormous difficulties and , without the will of the Member States , we will not be able to overcome them .
Congestion in Central Europe and the accessibility of Europe 's outlying regions are intimately linked .
If we want to see the economic growth of our countries , joint measures are required whereby development in one area ties in with progress in another .
The funding approved for the Trans-European Networks does not fill us with overwhelming enthusiasm . We must therefore derive some satisfaction from the progress for which we shall hopefully vote tomorrow .
In its diversity , Parliament is doing its best , but the Council must respond positively to this impetus for progress and for the liberalisation of rail transport .
How can this be achieved ?
It can be achieved by acknowledging that the deadlines for opening up the networks are reasonable and by not imposing unfair economic restrictions on this process ; by accepting compromise solutions for existing concessions and for public service obligations ; by agreeing to the rules on the certification of onboard staff in the interests of the security of people and property ; and lastly by ensuring universal protection for the rights of all passengers .
Along with quality of service , this is the best way of attracting people to this means of transport , thereby ensuring its development and continued employment for those working in the sector .
( DE ) Mr President , today we are discussing three essential steps that will help to breathe new life into Europe 's railways and bring about a considerable improvement in passenger rights .
I would like to focus on just one aspect of the overall package that fits in perfectly with the start of the European Year of Equal Opportunities .
It is good that , in the regulation on rail passengers ' rights and obligations , we are sending a signal and thus making our contribution to equal opportunities .
It obviously makes no sense to enact a regulation that is only relevant to international passengers .
In my view , all passengers should have equal rights .
At the forefront is the right of all citizens to transport , but passengers can only assert their rights if they know what they are , which is why information is a necessity .
I would call for all people with limited mobility , regardless of whether it is due to disability , age or another factor , to have equal opportunities to travel by rail .
It is quite clear that we need to work continuously to improve barrier-free accessibility . It is also clear , though , that is not possible to adapt all vehicles and all buildings straight away to meet the needs of these people .
Once the regulation enters into force , station operators and railway companies will have to pay particular attention to ensuring that people with limited mobility can get information regarding the accessibility of railway services , the conditions for accessing trains and the facilities on the trains .
To ensure that , in particular , passengers with sensory impairments are provided with information regarding delays as efficiently as possible , we would call for information announcements to be made using both acoustic and visual systems .
In future , people with restricted mobility will be able to buy tickets on the train without paying a supplement , and , if a person cannot access the services provided in the train due to their restricted mobility , they will be able to be accompanied by another person who will travel for free .
A social Europe is on its way !
( FR ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate you most warmly .
You ran a very good race .
11 October 2006 was a very dark day for the French railways and for the Luxembourg railways .
On a twin-track section of line , temporarily being used as a single track as a result of works , a collision between two trains killed six people and seriously wounded two .
A passenger train from Luxembourg collided with a freight train in French territory .
The accident , which , according to the enquiry , was due to a human signalling error on the Luxembourg side , was particularly tragic , since the signalman , having become aware of the error , triggered via the station to train radio an initial piercing alarm , which did not reach the driver of the passenger train .
He then wanted to switch off the current on the line , but it was not possible due to the difference in power supply between the two countries .
Furthermore , the Luxembourg train had already entered the French network and was therefore out of his reach .
Commissioner , this example illustrates the danger of a lack of coordination between rail networks , whether they be privatised or still under the public service system .
The responsibility falls as much to the signalman as to the two companies and the authorities of the two Member States , and also to the lack of a sustained will to make rail networks interoperable .
The citizens will not find it acceptable that , by crossing the border by train , they are risking their lives as a result of inadequate systems .
For Luxembourg , international traffic represents 70 % of its turnover .
Our situation is therefore a special one , and even more efforts are required in order to achieve interoperability of networks .
This is a key priority .
If our Parliament 's Committee on Transport 's approach leads to investments in the railways , then that is the right path to take .
Mr President , first of all , like all of the Members who have congratulated you warmly , I too would like to say what a pleasure it is to take part in this sitting over which you are presiding .
I would like to thank all of the Members .
We have had more than forty speeches , and I have seen that there is great interest in the future of Europe 's railways .
I thank you , because the Commission and myself see this as an absolute priority .
I would like to make a few brief comments , Mr President .
First of all , I would like to point out that the Commission is not opposed in principle to the opening up to competition of domestic services , but that it believes that a decision within the context of the third rail package would be premature .
The Commission will continue to examine the issue and if it feels that the circumstances are right , it will be able to exercise its right of initiative in the field .
I would add that we also have the possibility of introducing competition elements , particularly by means of the text on the regulation of public service obligations , which itself is based on contractualisation , transparency and a degree of opening up to competition , while respecting subsidiarity .
I believe that the Commission 's position has been clearly expressed in what I have said .
On the second point , I note that there is unanimity on the certification of train drivers operating locomotives and trains , and what Mrs Hennicot-Schoepges has just said to us demonstrates the absolute need for technical interoperability , but also for human interoperability .
Crew members responsible for rail safety , including drivers and all staff participating in the operation of the train , must receive training in accordance with their responsibilities .
I entirely agree with Mr Savary on this point .
Finally , the third proposal , which appears in Mr Sterckx 's report , has the merit of covering domestic services , while providing for a system of temporary exemption .
That seems to me to be a very good basis for future negotiations .
I would also like to take this opportunity to say , to Mr Grosch in particular , that we have not forgotten the fourth element of this rail package , which is the quality of freight .
The Commission has not forgotten this issue , which is important in terms of revitalising rail freight in Europe .
It has regular contacts with the associations representing freight customers , and I shall produce a report on the development of the quality of freight in Europe before the end of the year , as was indicated at first reading .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , those are the comments I wished to make at the end of this debate , a debate that has genuinely demonstrated Parliament 's interest in promoting the railways , both for passengers and for freight .
I hope that everybody , in their soul and conscience , will vote in a way that will allow us to move forward .
I would add that I am prepared to be fully involved in the delicate and difficult task of mediating between Parliament and the Council with a view to concluding this third rail package .
( FR ) I am delighted that rail passengers are finally going to have rights , particularly in relation to compensation , information and facilities for persons with reduced mobility .
With regard to Mr Jarzembowski 's report , while the liberalisation of international passenger transport is a good thing , which increases the efficiency of that mode of transport , I do not agree with the rapporteur 's views on the opening up to competition of national traffic .
If this Parliament votes for total liberalisation of rail traffic tomorrow , I would like to be certain that you have taken account of two fundamental points .
First of all , the issue of standardisation .
We adopted an amendment to that effect in committee .
It should allow loss-making railway lines to continue to be funded if they meet public service objectives .
Secondly , if Parliament decides to open up national rail traffic to competition , I feel that it is important to ensure that , during the transitional period in which only international traffic is opened up , we prevent the veiled opening up of national passenger transport through the practice of cabotage .
The transitional period is necessary in order to allow rail companies to adapt .
( EL ) The ' third package of measures ' on rail transport in the ΕU paves the way for full liberalisation , in other words for the railways to be handed over to the monopolies , in order to safeguard and increase the profits of euro-unifying capital .
The EU measures to date in this sector also have sent ticket prices rocketing , resulted in thousands of redundancies , exacerbated the workers ' slavery , struck at their wage and social rights and caused the number of accidents to spiral , despite the insulting government subsidies in the Member States .
The liberalisation of rail services also and the terms and conditions for certifying the qualifications of workers laid down by the ΕU signal the intensification of their exploitation , greater intensification of labour and more risks to passenger safety .
The hypocritical pronouncements about institutionalising passenger rights simply ' cloak ' the painful consequences of liberalisation for railway workers and passengers .
The basic conclusion is that , within this framework of the exploitative system which operates on the basis of profit for capital , this social requirement cannot be satisfied by the monopolies , which is why radical change is needed .
The Greek Communist Party voices its categorical opposition to the anti-grassroots policy of the ΕU and has voted against the third package of measures to liberalise rail transport .
Amendment of the ACP-EC Partnership Agreement ( debate )
The next item is the recommendation by Mr Ribeiro e Castro on behalf of the Committee on Development on the proposal for a Council decision concerning the conclusion of the Agreement amending the Partnership Agreement between the members of the African , Caribbean and Pacific Group of States , of the one part , and the European Community and its Member States , of the other part , signed in Cotonou on 23 June 2000 ( 6987 / 2006 - C6-0124 / 2006 - .
rapporteur . - ( PT ) Madam President , firstly , I wish to congratulate you on your election .
Ladies and gentlemen , almost 800 million people are now covered by the Cotonou Agreement , which , following on from the Lomé establishing agreement , has guided relations between the EU and African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) countries since 2000 .
I sincerely hope that these relations will be increasingly close and mutually beneficial .
The assent contained in my report , which I call on the Chamber to support , concerns the first five-yearly revision of the agreement , pursuant to Article 95 thereof .
Despite the fact that the amendments put forward are deliberately limited - after all , the stability of agreements of this type and size should be maintained - they are generally to be welcomed .
They are aimed at improving the effectiveness of compliance with the Lomé / Cotonou acquis , which is based primarily on equality between the parties and on respect for human rights , democracy , the rule of law and good governance .
After the fall of the Berlin Wall and the end of the Cold War , we were able to include references to human rights and subsequently , in 2000 , to provide for a stronger political dimension to our relations and to give priority to fighting poverty and improving our economic and financial partnership .
The 2005 revision , on the other hand , strengthened the aspect of political dialogue , which became more systematic , structured and formalised , with a view to helping prevent and resolve crises .
Other aspects that should be brought into the body of the agreement include combating terrorism , given its pressing , topical nature , and reference to the Millennium Goals , which bind the EU-ACP joint commitment to reducing poverty and improving levels of education and health , without which there cannot be genuine development .
Other issues that form part of this revision are decentralised local authorities , prevention of mercenary activities , promotion of traditional knowledge , prevention of HIV-AIDS , malaria and tuberculosis , and encouragement of student and youth exchanges , all of which demonstrates the signatories ' greater awareness of the specific problems and aspirations of the people of ACP countries .
I must also highlight , and welcome , the fact that , for the first time , express reference is made to national parliaments as aid recipients .
The development of parliamentary capacity is key to ensuring good governance and to ensuring that there is full public debate on the development policy choices and priorities of each of the recipient countries .
Many of the countries to which the Union sends substantial aid as part of the Cotonou framework integrate these funds into their budgets .
Nevertheless , there have been many complaints that the funds sent have not always made an effective contribution , in terms of what is necessary and desirable , to promoting and firmly establishing these values .
There have also been frequent criticisms that the countries concerned often distribute European funds in a way that is discriminatory and arbitrary and that public administration is not always objective and impartial .
This type of situation flies in the face of the core principles that underpin the award of EU funds . The Community institutions must therefore bring in tighter conditions as regards involving all of the political forces and the civil society of the recipient countries in discussing and defining the priorities for using the aid awarded .
As I proposed at the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly , which adopted this suggestion in November 2005 at the Edinburgh summit , this process of inculcating a sense of responsibility and of raising awareness at national level could take the form of an annual parliamentary debate in each national parliament of the recipient countries specifically focusing on external aid .
This should take place ideally some time before each country 's annual debate on the national budget and would have the benefit of strengthening democratic institutions and of encouraging the people to exercise their rights as citizens .
Thus , as part of the agreement and the main body set up by the agreement , a spirit conducive to the crucial involvement of parliaments in programming and monitoring cooperation and in assessing the impact of such cooperation in the countries concerned would be created .
It is our duty to persevere with , promote and support this effort .
Notwithstanding the amendments , the most important of which I have highlighted , the Cape Verde Foreign Minster , speaking on behalf of the ACP countries , felt that the simplification of the administrative procedures applicable to access to the European Development Fund could have gone much further .
I share this concern and feel it is right to echo it here and ask the Council and the Commission to take it into account in future revisions .
To conclude , I invite the Members of this House to give their assent and urge Parliament , the Council and the Commission to do all they can to maintain and , where possible , to increase targeted , responsible aid to the ACP countries in the future .

Madam President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Ribeiro e Castro and the Committee on Development for their positive assessment of the amendment of the Cotonou agreement , which is the cornerstone of the partnership between the ACP countries and the European Union .
This amendment will enable us to enhance our partnership and to extend it to security issues such as the fight against terrorism , the prevention of mercenary activities and the fight against the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction .
Thanks to that agreement , there will be a more systematic , more institutional , dialogue on issues involving human rights , democracy and the rule of law .
That dialogue will take place before the launch of the consultation procedure , known as the Rule 96 procedure , except in cases of particular urgency .
I would like to stress the increased role of national parliaments and of the joint parliamentary assembly within this context .
Furthermore , the revised agreement maintains a volume of aid identical to that provided for in the ninth European Development Fund with the addition of inflation , the impact of European Union GDP growth and the accession of ten new Member States in 2004 .
As you know , that decision in principle was translated , at the meeting of the ACP-EU Council of Ministers in Port-Moresby in June 2006 , into a commitment of around EUR 22 billion .
That is the total sum of the 10th European Development fund for geographical cooperation with the ACP countries for the six-year period from 2008 to 2013 .
On an annual basis , that represents a nominal increase of 35 % compared to the 9th European Development Fund .
Finally , since no money provided for in the 9th European Development Fund can be committed after 31 December 2007 , it is essential that the review of the Cotonou Agreement , and of what is known as the internal agreement of the 10th European Development Fund , is ratified by all of the Member States before the end of 2007 .
Otherwise , the operations of the 10th European Development Fund will be unable to begin on 1 January 2008 .
I am convinced , and I am speaking on behalf of my colleague Louis Michel , that the assent of the European Parliament will send a strong signal to the Member States and will speed up the internal ratification procedures .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , I would like you to know first of all that I am very happy to see you holding this Presidency .
It is rare to see women in that position .
The review of the Cotonou Agreement was a significant challenge .
We would like to give it real political content by refocusing it on the Millennium objectives and the eradication of poverty .
It should be acknowledged , however , that this revision does not entirely live up to its ambitions .
Our group has had the opportunity to express its disagreement on several occasions on two points in particular .
The first relates to the integration of two commitments into the fundamental values of the agreement : one relating to terrorism , the other to weapons of mass destruction .
We are not opposed to them as such , but we feel that the principles of democracy and respect for human rights must remain the main benchmarks of this agreement .
My second point relates to the financial dimension .
The tenth EDF , which has been the subject of tough negotiations , could not be integrated into the revised agreement .
Nevertheless , we are not now proposing that the assent be refused , firstly because progress has been made on many points , such as enhancement of political dialogue , the reference to national parliaments as beneficiaries of aid and support for the International Criminal Court from signatories of the agreement .
Secondly , because our ACP partners themselves have accepted the revised agreement and are eager to implement its financial chapter , for which I believe we have obtained a more or less acceptable sum .
It is therefore pointless to look back .
From now on we have a new battle to wage .
We must be certain that every euro genuinely contributes to achieving the development objectives and therefore ensure that the programming of the tenth EDF is better .
For example , by setting political objectives that would consist in allocating 20 % of the sums to basic education or health in the ACP countries , or by attaching more importance than we currently do to the gender dimension in our development policy .
That is the work facing us over the coming weeks , ladies and gentlemen .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , the new provision for building parliamentary capacity in ACP countries is particularly welcome .
In recent years the European Union has committed increasing resources to election observation missions in ACP countries , but those of us who have acted as observers are acutely aware that a well-conducted election is only the very first step in the process of establishing good governance .
Too many newly-elected parliaments have struggled in the absence of a trained civil service , or any opportunity to look at best practice in areas such as budget control , so the specific reference to enhancing parliamentary capacity is very important .
However , the fact that MEPs ' involvement in the Cotonou Agreement is limited to the assent procedure is frustrating , especially as we take on new areas of scrutiny under the Development Cooperation Instrument .
It would be helpful for us to have at least some input into the formulation of ACP countries ' strategy papers , which are the key instrument for the development of the Millennium Development Goals , now specifically referred to in the partnership agreement .
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we are discussing the revision of a complex agreement , the Cotonou Agreement , which contains 100 articles , 6 parts , 5 annexes and 5 protocols .
This revised agreement contains the whole catalogue of today 's politics , with human rights , democracy , terrorism , arms , the International Criminal Court .
All the ACP countries need now is REACH , since they risk being victims of the regulation on chemical products , with losses of income and 315 000 jobs under threat .
Metals , alcohol , oils , ammonia , which are exported from 24 major ACP countries , will be hit by REACH , representing a potential loss of income of EUR 6 billion for those countries .
That takes us to the real truth about Europe 's relations with the ACP countries over the last thirty years .
From the Yaoundé agreement of 1963 up to the Cotonou Agreement of 2000 , revised in 2005 , and the Lomé I , II , III and IV agreements from 1975 onwards , it appears that Europe has been audacious , particularly with the Stabex mechanism , which has protected cocoa , tea , coffee and groundnuts .
This demonstrates the spirit of the compensatory inequalities of the CNUCED .
Europe has also been generous by means of financial aid from the EDF .
Mr Barrot pointed out that there is an allocation of around EUR 25 billion for the 79 ACP countries in the 9th EDF .
The reality is different , however .
According to the figures , the ACP countries ' share in the Union market has dropped from 6.7 % in 1976 to 3 % in 1998 , and while the GDP of a European increased by an average of 2.3 % per year , that of an African from an ACP country , if I dare say it , increased by just 0.6 % .
In terms of actions too , Europe has forgotten about the ACP countries , just as it has forgotten about the Mediterranean .
Since the fall of the Berlin Wall , Europe has been interested in the East , but no longer in the South .
And what is worse , with the WTO , Europe has swallowed up the ACP countries in the world market , as we have seen in the case of sugar and bananas .
The multinational banana producer Chiquita has been given preference over Cameroon , which produces bananas , and the Ivory Coast .
Ultra-liberal Europe has chosen to make a customs gift of around EUR 2 billion to the multinationals Chiquita , Del Monte and others , rather than to the ACP countries , which have to face the same competition conditions as these multinationals .
Cotonou , with its talk of democracy and dialogue , is all very well , but when people have AIDS , human rights are not going to cure them .
In other words , rather than being revised , the Cotonou Agreement should be re-worked so as to be audacious in two respects .
Firstly , technical audacity through a new customs technology : rather than seeking , within the World Trade Organisation , to reduce , and eventually abolish , customs duties , we must establish a deduction of customs duties in the form of a customs credit deductible on all purchases in the economy of the importing country .
This customs credit would be reimbursable , that is to say , it would be higher than the sum of the customs duty paid , for example by the ACP country .
With new customs duties that are flexible , reimbursable and negotiable on the world stock market , Europe-ACP relations would be consistent with the necessary free trade and the equally necessary protection of the ACP countries .
Secondly , we should show political audacity in a reworked Cotonou Agreement .
With globalisation , the challenge of the 21st century consists in organising the common aspects of planetary co-ownership - that is to say , water , food , basic medicines and vaccines and education - all with a resource other than the classic State contribution of the EDF , a fiscal resource such as VAT based on the turnover of telecommunications services provided by space satellites .
In this case , we would no longer provide improved assistance in the name of co-development , but we would gradually move towards global land management .
That would restore the spirit of Lomé , and we would finally begin to build the world , which is the challenge of the 21st century .
( NL ) Madam President , I am delighted that this week in Strasbourg , we are able to vote on the first five-yearly review of the Cotonou Agreement since we concluded it in 2000 for a 20-year period .
This agreement covers 78 countries in Africa , the Caribbean and the Pacific Ocean and involves no fewer than some 750 million people .
It is a partnership agreement about aid and trade and sets an example others should follow with regard to sustainable relations between the EU and development partners .
Europe as a soft power in conflict prevention , good governance , the fight against corruption - these things mean that , together with the EU Member States , we can make the difference as far as the Millennium Objectives are concerned .
From 1 January 2008 , nearly EUR 24 billion , half of the total EU 's development budget , will be available for a six-year period .
This is why it would be useful for Parliament to monitor spending in respect of the European Development Fund , but unfortunately , Commissioner , this EDF budget is not incorporated in the EU 's own , which is something you in the Commission and we in this House would both have wanted .
In order to add meaning to the European Parliament 's role , you , together with the Council - which is unfortunately absent today - will need to make specific agreements with us , as we did for the Development Cooperation Instrument , the DCI , which I would urge you to take as a model for the national policy documents of the ACP countries , in other words for more or less the whole of our Africa policy .
This means that Parliament will be informed in good time , enabling it to make a meaningful contribution to the national policy documents .
This will also translate into a clear and transparent process and an open dialogue between the Council , the Commission and Parliament .
Moreover , this will improve Parliament 's input and scope for monitoring the programme , as well as implementing and assessing national policy documents .
This will also mean that the people 's representation is not far removed from us , or from them , the parliaments in those countries or society .
Ownership is all very well , but this does not just involve the Finance Minister in a country like this ; it also involves the parliament , the government and society .
If we go down this road , then , we are faced with the weighty opinions of the parties involved , even before the policy has been signed and voted on .
We want to move away from a situation where we all talk about the Millennium Objectives at the same time as Africa is actually moving further away from them , as is evident from the fact that we only appear to be filling in the cracks in the roads , however useful this may be .
We want the Millennium Objectives to take centre stage in the ACP countries too .
I would urge you to give this House democratic clout in respect of the EDF which amounts to half of the EU development budget .
This will stand both the Commission and the Council in good stead .
Pledge your support to democracy in Europe .
Which steps do the Commission and Council intend to take in order to achieve this ?
Thank you very much , Madam President , and congratulations .
It is very good to see you in the Chair .
As others have said , we are very proud of the fact that the Cotonou Partnership Agreement represents binding contractual agreements with 78 African , Caribbean and Pacific countries .
It is , therefore , a very special relationship indeed .
Commissioner , we regret the fact that the great flurry of activity that we saw in 2005 on development and funding for development did not , in fact , include a substantial increase in the contribution of Member States of the European Union to the European Development Fund for the ACP .
The reality is that the 10th EDF represents only 0.28 % of Member States ' GDP .
That contradicts what you said in terms of how you saw the results of those negotiations .
I agree with you on the pace of ratification ; that remains of enormous concern .
Only four Member States of the European Union and five of the ACP have currently ratified this part of the Agreement , and I think that is of some concern .
I have some questions for you .
I know you are not the Commissioner for Development , but perhaps if it is not possible for you answer them , you will pass them on .
In Barbados , Commissioner Michel promised to submit the country strategy papers to ACP countries ' parliaments for their scrutiny .
I want to know whether progress has been made on this commitment , and whether we can have some description from the Commission on where we stand on that .
Further to that , I would like to ask you whether you are prepared to enter into structural dialogue with the European Parliament on the country strategy papers for ACP countries .
My colleague , Mr van den Berg , has said that we want the same status for the ACP as we have for the DCI country strategy papers .
Furthermore , I want to know how the Commission responds to questions that , I think , we in the Parliament have to ask , for instance on budget support to a country like Haiti , which has been recognised by Transparency International as the most corrupt country in the world .
How is it that the Commission is now proposing to give budget support to Haiti ?
The same question applies to Equatorial Guinea .
On our committee , we find it very difficult to understand those decisions .
With regard to Togo , we see that the Commission is now prepared to normalise relations .
We want to know where we stand on the 22 commitments : are they being fulfilled by Togo .
At the Vienna JPA , the Commission promised to send details to us on the progress with Togo and we have , as yet , as I understand it from our secretariat , received absolutely no information on that .
Finally , Commissioner , will you undertake to work more closely with the European Parliament on these issues in order to make sure that the Joint Parliamentary Assembly 's views are taken into account ?
I urge the Commission to answer the serious questions of this kind that we are addressing to you this evening .
( FR ) Madam President , please allow me to stress the curious aspect of this parliamentary consultation procedure .
Our institution has been invited to give its assent to the conclusion of the revised Cotonou treaty , which was signed back in June 2005 .
By issuing our opinion today , we can only therefore approve something that has already been concluded .
Nevertheless , the decision-making process with the ACP countries would benefit from being enriched by the participation of the European Parliament .
Indeed , during the negotiations on the development cooperation instrument ( DCI ) , we demonstrated our very significant added value and our capacity to defend interests other than those of the Commission and the Council .
Having said that , I believe that the revised Cotonou Agreement represents considerable progress , particularly with regard to the role of local sectors in development policy : for the first time , their role has been clarified , and they are explicitly recognised as full partners in the political dialogue .
We have just obtained the same recognition for the DCI .
The great development challenges are faced at local level .
The time has come to decentralise our development policy .
Access to water , healthcare and education are social services provided locally by bodies that are close to their citizens .
If European Union funds remain blocked at central government level , there will be no effective aid to benefit populations directly .
That is one of the reasons why I welcome the adoption of the revised Cotonou Agreement .
We must now remain vigilant in order to ensure that it is implemented .
( PT ) I too should like to congratulate you , Madam President .
I also wish to congratulate Mr Ribeiro e Castro on his report and on the positive developments evidenced by this revision .
I wish to highlight the support for the International Criminal Court and reference to the Millennium Development Goals , without which there could not be a development strategy .
Furthermore , I should like to highlight the importance of the new cooperation clause on combating the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction , an area in which the EU must do more in terms of close collaboration and technical assistance . We must also do more on the proliferation of small arms , which are the biggest killers in our partner countries .
I must also admit to feeling a degree of frustration as regards EU-ACP relations in seeing our counterparts from some ACP countries in the Joint Parliamentary Assembly convey the official positions of their governments uncritically .
We must clearly do more to strengthen national parliaments and their capacity to scrutinise the national budgets , and their budgets for cooperation and for fighting corruption .
For its part , the EU must stop overlooking , and start using , the clauses laid down in this agreement aimed at urging signatory governments to put an end to serious violations of human rights and of the most fundamental principles of democracy and good governance .
I join those MEPs who called on the Commission to involve Parliament in scrutinising cooperation policy with ACP countries .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , though it has come late , I am delighted that the European Parliament is being consulted on this subject .
This evening 's debate gives us an opportunity to express our satisfaction once again with the progress introduced by the revision of the agreement , particularly in terms of the improvements between partners , as a result of their policies on protecting human rights and promoting democracy .
This consultation is also an opportunity to recall our concerns at the time when the text was being signed .
I am thinking in particular of the article that makes the fight against the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction a fundamental aspect of the ACP-EU partnership .
Having said that , I would like to stress , or recall , that the priority objective of the cooperation between the two regions was the fight against poverty and the fight for development .
Since 2005 , new concerns have arisen .
They involve the future of our commercial relations with the ACP countries .
How can we state , as in the case of the revised Cotonou Agreement , that the Millennium development objectives must underpin ACP-EU cooperation , without worrying about the consequences of future economic partnership agreements for the well-being of the populations of these countries , without carrying out an impact study prior to the launch of the negotiations ?
How can we emphasise the importance of supporting regional integration organisations created by the ACP countries , while not respecting existing groupings in the negotiations and also knowing that , in the negotiations as they are currently conducted , we cannot take account of the interests of countries of different sizes and different levels of development ?
The revision of the Cotonou Agreement has above all made it possible to highlight the importance of political dialogue amongst partners .
It is on this basis that the European Union and the ACP countries must from now on work towards eliminating misunderstandings , make progressive and constructive progress in the negotiations and reach agreements that are fully in favour of the development of the ACP countries .

Madam President , I would like to say to all of the honourable Members who have spoken that I shall communicate their remarks as accurately as possible to my colleague Louis Michel , who will pursue the dialogue on the whole of this development policy in the way you wish .
I shall tell him that Parliament takes great interest in the evolution of this policy , which he manages with great conviction , as you know .
Many of you have stressed the importance of this partnership .
I would like to return to the financial envelope .
It is true that EUR 23.7 billion of that sum should be allocated as operational credits for the ACP countries .
This sum can be compared to the EUR 22.7 billion proposed by the Luxembourg Presidency .
This sum will be integrated by means of an increased effort on the part of the European Investment Bank in its support for the ACP countries through own resources .
It is still a substantial sum .
On an annual basis , it represents an increase of 35 % compared to the 9th European Development Fund .
Furthermore , support for the ACP countries must be seen within the wider context of the Community 's external actions and , in general terms , the ACP countries will also benefit from thematic budget lines and funds reserved for the ACP countries that are signatories to the sugar protocol , in the sum of EUR 1.2 billion .
These funds , which are payable from the Community 's general budget , will increase the proportion of the Community 's development cooperation earmarked for the ACP countries , as compared with previous financial perspectives .
I believe that I have thereby highlighted the progress that some of you have mentioned , while accepting that this policy will be subject to many further developments , since it is true that it is now part of the European Union 's duty and purpose .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was suspended at 23.25 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 10 a.m. )
I declare the session open .
I am very pleased to have been elected : this is my first time as President of this House .
I regard it as absolutely crucial and highly symbolic that I am opening this session with a debate on gender parity and equality .
It must be said that our Parliament has made some significant progress , and I hope that it continues to do so .
Documents received : see Minutes
Equality between men and women in the committees ' work ( debate )
The next item is the report by Anna Záborská , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , on gender mainstreaming in the work of the committees .
rapporteur . - ( SK ) Over the past few years , the issues of women 's dignity and their mission have taken on a new dimension .
This is particularly evident within the framework of the European Union 's horizontal policies that have been shaped by the Lisbon Strategy , such as those addressing the demographic challenge and the work-life balance , as well as those combating violence against women .
Recognising the differences between women and men , on the one hand , and nurturing complementarities between them , on the other , may contribute significantly towards enhancing democracy and parliamentarianism , to the benefit of EU citizens .
Freedom means more than just the freedom to compete , as the Chancellor , my favourite politician , pointed out yesterday .
Women have a special value in a broad and distinctive context inspired mainly by the protection of human rights .
On the one hand , this is due to the value of women as human beings with a right to inviolable respect for their basic dignity .
On the other hand , this is due to their femininity , irrespective of the cultural context or their spiritual , mental or physical characteristics , such as age , health , education , employment or marital status .
The report on gender mainstreaming within the work of the European Parliament 's committees is the fruit of cooperation in the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality during the first half of the present term .
The report was unanimously approved in the committee , for which I am extremely grateful .
In parliamentary committees we do not often enjoy such shared triumphs or the benefits of such a well-targeted approach .
At present , the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality is the most important instrument for supporting the efforts that still need to be undertaken in other committees to ensure genuine equality between women and men .
My committee has come up with the first methodological model that can be applied to assess performance in all parliamentary committees .
The model is described in the Explanatory Statement .
The data from the questionnaires completed by the committees which responded to our survey were carefully processed by the secretariat of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality .
If all committees had responded , the evaluation would have been far more comprehensive .
All committees should heed our recommendations .
Following debates in the Committee on Women 's Rights , a number of amendments were adopted which reinforce the content of the report .
I would like , however , to dwell on the three amendments pertaining to paragraphs 8 , 21 and 22 .
In my opinion , these amendments would undermine the powers vested with the Committee for Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , and are not entirely consistent with the European Parliament 's Rules of Procedure .
I particularly value the fact that the drafting of the report has fuelled a pluralistic parliamentary debate , highlighting the importance of the underlying problem .
I would like to thank all of my fellow MEPs , both women and men , who have been actively involved in this exercise and have helped me to prepare the report .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( HU ) Madam President , the report of the chairwoman , Mrs Záborská , urges us toward an ever greater fulfilment of the most fundamental European issue , our common goal of equality between men and women , here within the walls of the European Parliament , with regard to the division of responsibilities and tasks within the existing parliamentary committees .
The question and the way the question is posed is far from unambiguous even within the walls of Parliament , as previous cycles and indeed the most recent one indicate ; this is perhaps why the problem has not yet been resolved , even though in recent times the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality has made great efforts to assess the situation and to bring about change .
Integrating the principle of gender equality into the everyday life of society , communicating it to all people , the struggle against established stereotypes , the ever more fruitful use of women 's capacities and knowledge , and our true equality of opportunity remain very distant goals in Europe .
This situation comes in for very sharp criticism by the rapporteur in the European Parliament .
In my experience , scepticism here in Parliament with regard to the question of gender equality is in many cases the consequence of the fact that equality of opportunity is still erroneously regarded by most people as a struggle in which one group - in this case men - surrender power and privileges in the interests of another group - in this case women .
The European Parliament is an institution that sets an example , and it can maintain and strengthen this status only if in the course of our daily parliamentary work we fully represent , in our professional committees as well , those principles and directives which we are struggling to realise on a European level , and which we set down as standards for the Member States .
We would like to see women in as many committee positions as possible .
The European political parties must strive to promote the participation of women in public life , to put more women forward for election , and here in Parliament they should encourage and create fairer and more equal representation .
The European Parliament must set an example .
In each policy area , from planning through evaluation , and for all practical questions before Parliament , we must keep the promotion of equal opportunities for men and women at the centre of our attention .
The struggle over committee positions and the Year of Equal Opportunities for All , in my view , provide an excellent framework right now for this purpose .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DA ) Madam President , excuse my being late , but I had to speak somewhere else .
I should like to start by thanking the rapporteur for this very important report , and I want to say how necessary it is for us to take this issue seriously .
We have just witnessed our election of 14 deputy chairmen here in Parliament , only three of whom are women .
We are in the process of electing chairmen and deputy chairmen for all of Parliament 's committees , and I think that we should have a policy on gentleman streaming where our own political appointments are concerned .
Thank you very much for the work done on the report .
I hope that it will be followed up .
Madam President , first of all I would like to wish you luck and success in your new and important position .
This year is a year of equal opportunities in the European Union , and thus it is a year for us all : men and women .
Today we are discussing gender mainstreaming in the context of the work of our own commissions .
And I would like to draw attention to the fact that this is the first document in the political work of the parliamentary commissions to be devoted to the concrete assessment of gender mainstreaming .
Here I would like to thank rapporteur Mrs Anna Záborská for her expert work .
In a few months we will be celebrating the fiftieth anniversary of the signing of the Treaty of Rome .
Pursuant to Article 2 of the Treaty Establishing the European Economic Community , equality between men and women is a fundamental principle of community law - I emphasise that this fundamental principle , and thus also its advancement , is the indisputable task of the community .
The Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms has been signed by all Member States of the European Union .
I ask you : why do we not implement it ?
Why do we not have a functioning supervisory mechanism and effective measures to carry out and guarantee what has been decided upon ?
These decisions were made half a century ago .
Parliament still passes new documents on the same topic every year , in which it emphasises , undertakes and requires .
In the document under discussion , however , we must recognise today , in the year 2007 , that women are underrepresented in our own parliamentary administration in the bodies that make political decisions .
Finally , I would ask that all of us who have been elected to the highest level of European politics should be decisive and put an end to the wasting of already poor human resources and potential .
In our actions , let us accept women as equals to men , whether in the making of political decisions or on pay day .
Equal rights must become the law not only on paper , but also in everyday life .
This will also be the key to the successful implementation of the Lisbon Strategy .
You have congratulated me , and I congratulate those few men present in the House for this debate on gender equality because I believe that their presence is crucial when it comes to opposing the discrimination that still exists .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I truly wish you all the very best for your first day as President .

However , there is still a great deal left to do where women 's rights are concerned ; we have a long history of parliamentary work behind us , and it is precisely for that reason that we recognise how increasingly important it is to ensure that gender-related aspects are genuinely integrated into the work of the committees , and integrated in an effective and operational manner .
If we look at the reality of the situation , there are many problems to be resolved , and the figures are quite clear : it is still exceedingly difficult for women to enter and participate in political and institutional life , and that is without mentioning the endless unresolved problems they have in actually reconciling their working lives with their family lives .
That is precisely why , if we are to attempt to do away with the inequalities , we need to intervene openly in every action and policy carried out by the Union .
Furthermore , the rapporteur - whom I thank for her excellent work - has done well to highlight the fact that there is still not a suitable culture encouraging women to participate in political life .
I should like to give an example : in Italy there is no law on the so-called pink quotas , and , personally , I am not convinced that quotas are necessarily the best system .
However , in Italy , parties that have freely decided to include more women on their lists of candidates , such as the party to which I belong , have actually seen an increase in the number of female politicians represented in parliament , and this is a positive development - it is an example of good practice that should be exported , nay , imposed at Community level .
To conclude , I expect all the Community institutions and , in particular , the German Presidency , to put women back in the spotlight and to launch a genuine European family pact .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FI ) Madam President , I too wish to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Záborská , for the excellent work she has done .
I would also like to congratulate the President on her election .
It is excellent that the European Parliament has made it compulsory for the committees to implement gender mainstreaming .
This is a process that is bound to take a long time , and it is important that the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality is heading the project .
I know that there are also those in Parliament that are doubtful about all this , and I feel that in most cases it is those very people who need to be educated in the matter of equality .
When I was made responsible for this issue in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , I asked the Committee on Women 's Rights to specify those tasks that had to be accomplished in gender mainstreaming , and the committee produced the questionnaire in a form that was instructive and very welcome .
I drafted a preliminary proposal for the Committee on the Environment based on this questionnaire .
There are still no decisions on it , but I will be proposing in my committee , for example , that every year the Committee on Women 's Rights should produce statistics on the gender distribution among coordinators and rapporteurs and in the secretariat .
I will also propose that a pilot project should be set up to establish mainstreaming in particular and to identify areas where especially close cooperation should be engaged in with the Committee on Women 's Rights .
In my view , the Committee on Women 's Rights could produce for the plenary sessions more concrete draft resolutions than these on what the committees should be doing .
I believe that this issue should be taken forward in the most effective way possible , so that plenary can both make binding decisions and recommendations on what should be done on the committee .
Finally , I would like to say that the political groups should also be paying heed to gender equality .
It is the political groups that will have the main role in deciding how equality is to be implemented when they elect their chairs and fill the posts of chair and deputy chair of committees in negotiations between groups .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( SV ) Thank you , Madam President .
Please accept my most sincere congratulations on your new appointment as Vice-President .
I am very pleased indeed .
The current report rightly states that there is still an imbalance between women and men in all areas of society .
The evaluation of the ways in which the committees have so far complied with Parliament 's decision that the gender equality perspective should always permeate our work shows , unsurprisingly , that there is still an incredible amount to be done before we can say that the equality perspective really has been integrated into our work .
This is not news .
There are many of us who , in the general run of our daily work , experience the inequality between men and women and the unequal conditions that apply to us .
That is not something peculiar to the European Parliament .
We are forced to observe that , whether we are talking about parliamentary work or about the way in which society operates in general , economic and political power is in practice still the province of the one gender , that is to say of men .
Despite all our talk about the importance of gender equality , it is clearly easier to talk about it than to implement it in practical terms .
We need a variety of instruments in order to tackle issues of gender equality and take steps to bring such equality about . Such instruments include education and knowledge .
If we are to change things , we need to clarify the power structures .
We are therefore looking forward to the work of the Institute for Gender Equality .
Among the tools with which it will be able to provide us are more widely shared knowledge , together with statistics broken down according to gender .
Another important tool when it comes to gender equality is education .
It is important for us to allow officials to continue with their further training on the integration of the gender equality perspective .
What is just as important , however , is that Members of the European Parliament too should receive training in equality .
It is not true to say that , as elected politicians , we automatically have a sufficient knowledge of gender equality and the integration of the gender equality perspective .
This is , however , a situation that we can do something about .
We can vote in favour of the proposal in the report that gender equality training should be arranged for all MEPs before the next term of office .
I urge you to vote for this in the report .
Thank you .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , the previous speaker has just made reference , regretfully , apparently , to lots of jobs in politics going to the stronger people - the men .
She obviously never met Mrs Thatcher !
Why cannot these reports be written in plain language ?
The term ' gender mainstreaming ' occurs throughout the report ; what is that ?
Is it some kind of political correctness ?
Paragraph 16 , which is all about filling vacancies in EU institutions , says that gender mainstreaming is ' to be taken into account ' .
Does that mean specific jobs for men and specific jobs for women ?
Paragraph 1 calls for ' gender equality [ ... ] which does not set women against men ' .
Does that mean men and women cannot apply for the same job in case it sets the one against the other ?
Recital A states that some committees ' never take an interest ' in gender mainstreaming .
Goodness , what do we do about that ?
But , wait a bit , there are some facts and figures to go with the jargon .
Recital F refers to the ' continuous increase in the percentage of female Members of the European Parliament , from 17.5 % in 1979 to 30.33 % in 2004 ' .
But , then , recital G notes that , in EU administration , ' women are under-represented in positions of responsibility ' where political decisions are taken .
Clearly , we are leading to reverse discrimination .
Any kind of discrimination is not only thoroughly bad , but surely goes against all that the EU stands for .
Inevitably , you then move on to quotas , but the report also calls for the dignity of women .
In Britain , other political parties have women-only candidate lists .
What kind of dignity is that ?
Our party does not do it .
In the situation under consideration here , what happens if not enough women apply to satisfy the quota ?
Do you leave the post unfilled ?
I suppose , now , some people will think they have got some kind of raving chauvinist on their hands - not so .
I am a teacher , I taught for 39 years and I did so happily with many women .
I worked for women in teaching , very happily - no problem .
I respected them all .
I simply believe that women should have no bar to going for qualifications and should apply for posts on a totally equal basis .
Anything else , like this report , is demeaning to women , and any self-respecting woman should find this report offensive .
I ask Members to dismiss it with their vote .
( SK ) In 1993 , the UN General Assembly in Vienna stated for the first time the principle that human rights include the rights of women , and that the protection of those rights was a priority objective .
The Beijing Platform for Action later recognised gender equality as a major objective and identified 12 critical areas of concern .
Let me mention but a few of them : women and poverty ; education ; women and health ; violence against women ; armed conflicts ; women and the mass media ; the participation of women in decision-making processes and in political and social structures .
Notwithstanding the multitude of institutions active in the enforcement of these instruments , including the UN , Council of Europe , OSCE and the European Union , one can conclude that today gender equality is only implemented de jure , not de facto .
We often seek an excuse in the percentages of women in various organisations .
What we fail to observe , however , is that those percentages primarily reflect a presence at the lower or lowest levels of an institution .
The higher up we climb the management ladder , the fewer women we find there .
I believe that the tried-and-tested principle applies in this case also : if we want to bring about change , let us begin with ourselves .
This is perhaps why the report drawn up by my fellow MEP , Mrs Záborská , is so important .
In the European Parliament we can also say that , percentage-wise , the representation of women has improved in comparison with the past .
We should realise , however , that women typically fill lower positions , be it in the European Parliament or the secretariats .
Moreover , I daresay that within the secretariats we have implemented the gender equality principle fully , as women enjoy a majority there .
But is it the case that in the European Parliament the old prejudices still prevail , according to which women make good wives , mothers , mistresses , secretaries , cooks or even cleaning ladies , but not senior executives ?
It is regrettable that the only speech made so far by a male Member of this House has been of the sort we have all witnessed before .
( SK ) Madam President , I too would like to congratulate you on your election to this position .
Thefact that you are presiding over this very debate may well be indicative .
I would like to express my admiration for the rapporteur for the clarity she brings to her description in the report of how equal opportunities are being implemented in this Parliament .
She does not claim that there is nothing left to be done in this Parliament regarding the promotion of equal opportunities .
On the contrary , she says clearly that gender mainstreaming has been well formulated and reflected in resolutions passed by Parliament , as well as directives adopted by the European Community , and it has also been institutionalised in the working groups and committees .
In terms of substance , however , interest in the topic has been confined to committees pledging to train their secretariats in gender mainstreaming .
It seems that some of my fellow Members are also in need of such training .
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that , in this Parliament , we often tend to underestimate the implications of the problem that remain to be resolved .
The ageing of Europe will be an impossible problem to solve unless we revise our approach to gender mainstreaming .
There can be no doubt that overhauling and modernising pension schemes will not in itself suffice .
At present the underlying problems appear to exist on two levels at the same time .
Firstly , the philosophical approach taken by political elites leads to indirect discrimination as a result of the application of the so-called civic principle , which clearly results in discrimination and a lack of equal opportunities .
Secondly , there are absolutely no practical initiatives aimed at reconciling the demands of work with those of family life , which creates dramatic differences in the opportunities that are available to men and women as a result of existing stereotypes which are difficult to overcome .
In view of the seriousness of the challenge that Europe is facing due to demographic changes , I strongly believe that the European Parliament should be working much more closely with national parliaments on matters of gender mainstreaming .
In my opinion , the European Year of Equal Opportunities for All offers an appropriate framework for that .
( DE ) Madam President , I , too , am glad to see you in the Chair today , and warmly congratulate you on your election .
So far , this debate has been conducted in the absence of the Commission and the Council , and that was only right and proper .
Its subject is the practical implementation of gender mainstreaming in the committees , and , more specifically , the first interim report following on from the report I produced and which was adopted in 2003 .
This report highlights very well how we should implement gender mainstreaming in this House , and , while it was right that we should concern ourselves with this , I do now rather fear that we have missed an opportunity , since we are all talking about everything under the sun except what we can do in this Parliament of ours .
What has become of its Paragraph 1 , with its action plan for a policy of gender mainstreaming , that is to say , equality in every evaluation and analysis and the new development of concepts for the equality of women and men in Parliament ?
There is still a very great deal left to be done , and no actual plan of action .
And what of the second , with its priorities for equality issues and a high-level working party ?
This working party has done its job very well , and the right procedure was followed , in that reports were produced by all the committees .
As we have heard from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , some of the Vice-Chairmen of committees have done very good work , but what they did was sometimes exposed to ridicule .
What has become of our demand for women in decision-making positions within Parliament ?
No definite action has been taken to make that happen .
The groups and the national delegations treated this demand with varying degrees of seriousness , but no proper strategy has been forthcoming .
What , then , of the analysis of the Budget procedure ?
Here , too , no definite action has been taken , although the policy of gender budgeting was meant to have been given tangible form .
What progress has been made towards achieving an effective press and information strategy - something else that we called for in 2003 - which is another area where there are still considerable deficits ?
Now that we are to conduct a proper analysis and evaluation , I very much hope that we will be helped , in the analysis of the committees , by the European Institute for Gender Equality , which we have recently voted to set up .
It is to be regretted , though , that the report has far from enough to say about the state of affairs in the groups , the delegations and the substance of policies , and so I should like to see us taking a more ambitious approach and managing , by 2009 - when elections are due - to achieve real agreements that make gender mainstreaming possible and put women in positions of leadership .
Grateful though I am for the work that has been done , we must still make very considerable effort to get anywhere near achieving the goal that we set ourselves in the 2003 report .
( LT ) Gender equality in the EU is one of the most important democratic values , enabling freedom of self-expression and interpersonal relations on the basis of full equality .
However , this value has not yet been fully implemented : women are discriminated against in recruitment for jobs , and they are paid significantly lower wages than men for the same work .
The issues of gender equality and an integrated outlook on gender equality are widespread and topical , both at the member country level and at the European Union level .
I congratulate the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality on having initiated this study and having prepared a report about an integrated outlook on gender equality in the work of the European Parliament 's committees .
The committees were assessed on the basis of a completed questionnaire , which reflected each committee 's outlook and activities in forming gender equality strategy , implementing an integrated outlook on gender , and implementing gender consultation and cooperation activity .
In the Development Cooperation Committee , where I am responsible for gender integration issues , there were no particular discussions .
The committee works more on gender expertise and consultation issues with NGOs and developing countries .
It is my understanding that the gender integration issue mostly encounters difficulties in the committee because of the d 'Hondt system used in the European Parliament .
When this system is applied , even when 30 % of parliamentarians are women , the women of the smaller parties realistically have very little chance of preparing a report or an opinion .
This also deprives women of the opportunity to demonstrate their abilities and to express their viewpoints on issues vital to their nations , the European Union and the world .
Even though the system itself is supposed to give small parties the opportunity to present legislative documents , in reality this is hard to put into practice .
When monitoring the implementation of an integrated outlook on gender equality , this issue should be looked at in a broader context - the context of the European Parliament 's work rules , which need to be improved .
( PL ) Madam President , nature determined that there should be two types of human being , the male and the female , though they are both of equal value and importance .
Whether we like it or not , every culture fashioned mainly by religion , be it Islamic , Jewish or Christian culture , understands the relationship between men and women in its own particular way .
These relationships are constantly evolving and improving as time goes by .
The existence of a Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality in the European Parliament and the report before the House today mark a high point in that process of evolution .
This evolution must not , however , be allowed to become a revolution .
We must not attempt to impose an artificial male-female relationship by force .
It is obviously important to ensure that men and women can enjoy the same opportunities for development , but it is not appropriate to impose artificial quotas of any kind .
I have in mind , for example , quotas for involvement in public life .
I believe the training and awareness-raising referred to in the report will prove helpful , but the introduction of quotas would amount to discrimination against better candidates in favour of worse ones , and could prove detrimental to the cause of women in the future .
There is nothing finer than the diversity of nature and culture we see all around us , and no greater source of inspiration for humankind .
I believe that the differences between men and women are the fount of life .
( DE ) Madam President , I warmly congratulate you on your election .
I wish to express my support for this report , which I do not believe contains anything that goes against this House 's Rules of Procedure , and my thanks to the rapporteur , Mrs Záborská , for the very good cooperation over the last two and a half years .
I was a member of the previous Bureau with responsibility for equality issues , and we joined in the Bureau 's high-level working party with Mrs Roth-Behrendt , Mrs Lulling and Mrs Gröner , as well as with Mr Friedrich and Mr Daul , in promoting gender mainstreaming in the work of our committees .

I should like to express my appreciation to you all , and it goes without saying that I would like also to thank the administration staff , in particular those in the department of DG Personnel responsible for equality of opportunity .
I am certain that the newly-elected Bureau will continue the work of the working party without interruption and with the same committed attitude , and it can do its work on a sound basis , for the former Bureau recently adopted , unanimously , my report on the development of equality of opportunity between 2002 and 2006 , which formulated ambitious objectives to be achieved by 2009 , including a marked increase in the proportion of women in leadership positions in this House , in particular in middle and top management .

We will be taking further steps to better enable our staff to balance work and family life , and will be more careful in future to use gender-neutral language in the conduct of this House 's business .

It was the Bureau that first took action on gender budgeting , which is to be a task for all of us in this House in 2008 .
I hope we will be able to arrange the necessary training and retraining for all Members .
( PL ) Madam President , I too would like to congratulate you as you take up such an important role .
Equality for women can never be guaranteed by legal provisions alone .
It stands to reason that discrimination against women on the grounds of their gender must not be condoned in any circumstances .
It cannot be allowed in the work of the committees or in any other context .
Left-wing and liberal groupings tend to focus unduly on the fine detail of such matters .
It must be borne in mind that respect for women is not achieved through legal provisions . It comes about solely as a result of family upbringing .
I belong to The League of Polish Families , and we are certainly aware of the problem of discrimination against women .
At the level of national legislation , we are putting forward a range of legal provisions to benefit women and mothers .
We support and promote the role of women in politics and society .
Women have an important role to play in this House too .
We also support the effort to eliminate all cases of violation of women 's dignity and freedom .
The debate on gender equality is an important one , but it cannot be allowed to lead to an ideological conflict in which men and women pit themselves against each other instead of working together , resulting in the emergence of a new kind of dogma .
There is a fundamental question that arises from time to time .
Is all this really about equality , equal rights and human dignity , or is it in fact about creating a new ideology ?
Is that what we are about in this House too ?
In my view and in the view of the League of Polish Families , special legal provisions are needed .
Such provisions should , however , be designed not only to ensure equal treatment for men and women , but also to protect the latter .
( SK ) Madam President , I would like to congratulate you on your election to this position , as well as on the fact that the first debate over which you are presiding happens to be about women .
Ladies and gentlemen , I congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Záborská , for her well-balanced report , and at the same time I would like to thank her for the excellent work she has been doing as chairman of the Committee for Women 's Rights and Gender Equality .
I agree that it is imperative for women to be represented in the executive bodies of the European Parliament which take political decisions .
I also welcome the efforts to incorporate gender mainstreaming into the practical work of all of the committees of the European Parliament .
It is important to encourage interest in the topic on the part of the committees , and to ensure that they pay adequate attention to gender mainstreaming .
Gender mainstreaming is not a strategy to be implemented in one fell swoop ; it is like a thread which should be woven through the entire political process in order to incorporate a gender equality aspect into all community policies on all levels .
The gender equality requirement should express itself in a practical approach that does not pit men and women against each other .
More emphasis on the importance of men 's engagement in gender mainstreaming will add to the significance of issues previously considered to be the exclusive domain of women .
The political groups in the European Parliament could play a very important role in the process by promoting women 's participation in public life , for example , by encouraging women to stand as candidates in elections for the European Parliament and national parliaments .
I strongly believe that in 2007 , which is the European Year of Equal Opportunities for All , the European Parliament should provide an example through its own organisational structures of how gender equality is part and parcel of the political routine pursued here for the benefit of society , based on non-discrimination , tolerance , equality and solidarity .
I trust that the Member States will subscribe to this appeal and will echo it through the implementation of gender mainstreaming policies .
( HU ) It is natural , is it not , that procreation , childrearing , caring for the sick and the elderly , keeping the family together , as well as health care , education and social services are unimaginable without the participation of women ?
This is true in almost every area of life .
How , then , can we take decisions on any question or pass any law or regulation without taking into account their distinctive points of view ?
It is an important goal for the policy of gender equality in the long term to be incorporated into all policy areas and to be present at all levels .
Mrs Záborská 's report is the first one to address an integrated approach to equal opportunity - many thanks for this .
Although the committees pay greater attention in their work to the perspectives of gender equality , yet to this day not a single body has laid down among the fundamental principles of its work the demands of equal opportunity .
The strategic basis is lacking : more women , but without more significant positions ?
In our parliamentary committees we need to take more seriously the need to fulfil the demands of equal opportunity for men and women , and for this to happen we need to ensure adequate training and information .
This must not be allowed to set men against women ; we must strive , instead , to make sure everyone recognises that the expression of women 's viewpoints is in the interests of men as well .
Madam President , I am very proud that we now have the first female first-Vice-President .
I wish to congratulate you , as we now have some women in the main body of the European Parliament .
I welcome this report on gender mainstreaming in the committees .
Is it unique ?
It is unique of its kind .
I should like to thank the rapporteur in particular for her excellent work .
It is of the utmost importance that the European Parliament uses its influential position in the Community to support and promote gender equality through healthy self-examination of its own methods of working .
The right to non-discrimination is protected by several European treaties , in particular the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Nevertheless , we need to continue developing the legal instruments in order to protect everyone - man or woman - from discrimination based on gender .
Coming from a country , Finland , with a long history of working for equal opportunities for men and women , I was very pleased with the findings of the report by the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality .
It showed that most of the committees , at least , attach some importance to gender mainstreaming .
However , I would underline that we still have a long way to go .
I support the ideas put forward by Ms Járóka , for example that all committees should have female members .
Even though the number of women in the European Parliament continues to increase , inequality continues to exist when it comes to the really important positions in the political bodies , such as committee chairs , etc .
I therefore urge each and every committee to put gender mainstreaming into practice in its own work , since this is one way of enabling women to take part fully in the decision-making processes of the EU .
Finally , I should like to emphasise the need for specific data broken down by gender . After all , that is the only way really to evaluate how we are doing and what still needs to be done .
Such gender-based statistics are very important for our future work .
( ES ) Madam President , I would like to begin by congratulating you on your election , and also Mrs Záborská on the work she has done on her report , which unfortunately once again points out that also in the public institutions there continues to be inequalities between men and women in positions of responsibility .
If our objective is to achieve full equality in society , we must offer an example of our own political commitment in the European institutions , and in the European Parliament in particular .
An integrated approach to gender equality in our work and more women in positions of responsibility are therefore two issues that should be taken very seriously by all of the bodies in our Parliament .
This report has the merit of being a document by our institution that takes one further step in this direction , but it should be followed up on , setting clear objectives to be achieved , the methods for achieving them , the people responsible for working towards achieving them , and carrying out periodic assessments that enable us to identify , on the one hand , any achievements , and on the other , the reasons why they may not have been achieved .
Only through constant and rigorous work by everybody in this institution will we be able create true equality between men and women .
( EL ) Madam President , I congratulate you and all your male and female colleagues on your new office .
According to the fundamental principle of Community law on equality set out in Article 2 of the Treaty and the ambition to wipe out inequalities between men and women on the basis of the principle of an integrated approach to equality laid down in Article 3 ( 2 ) , the European Parliament made a political commitment in its resolution to acquire an institutional framework for this purpose .
The momentum was created back in 2005 by the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equality and with the work carried out by the High-Level Group on Gender Equality .
Under the inspired guidance of President Záborská , and with substantial contributions from the representatives of all 21 parliamentary committees in charge of equality issues and their secretariats , today , in the Year of Equal Opportunities for All , the first document of the EP embodying its political commitment to self-criticism as regards the application of an integrated approach has been submitted for approval .
The findings were made using an unprecedented method for the European Parliament , an inventive method which was developed in order to map the current situation .
It is positive that , even though several committees laid down their priorities without a strategy on our issue , they are in favour of incorporating equality issues .
The report stipulates how mainstreaming will be achieved , in accordance with the plan which we are voting today to instruct the Committee on Women 's Rights to prepare by the end of this parliamentary session .
Of course , we shall all need to go to crammer school before then , both employees and parliamentarians , so that we can develop suitable evaluation mechanisms to take account of the peculiarities of each parliamentary committee and ensure that policies are complementary and consistent and combine Members ' responsibilities and interests .
Consolidating control of the integrated approach twice per legislative term will provide an opportunity for qualitative and quantitative appraisal .
It is a question of justice and I welcome the fact that the Commissioner responsible for justice is with us .
We must not criticise the failure to promote women to decision-taking positions ; we must criticise the fact that worthy women are prevented from competing with worthy men .
We are calling , Commissioner , for rights to be restored and for a meritocracy to be set up in which men and women are equal .
( PL ) Madam President , the European Parliament represents European society , which is made up of 492 million individuals and 27 countries .
The House does not accurately reflect the social structure of the society it represents , however , as the percentage of female MEPs is barely 30 % .
This is far too low .
Only 13 % of Polish MEPs are women , and there is not a single female MEP representing Malta and Cyprus .
The situation regarding administrative positions of responsibility in the European Parliament 's political decision-making bodies is equally unsatisfactory .
Most of the committees are favourably inclined towards gender equality issues , but in practice they fail to take them into account when setting their political priorities .
Against this background , it is worth highlighting the significance of the creation of a High-Level Group on Gender Equality .
This group is also charged with working beyond the European Parliament and encouraging Member States to implement gender equality policies effectively .
Political parties and groups have a vital role to play in enabling women to participate fully in political life .
Certain groups and parties have already successfully applied a quota system to lists of candidates for public office .
The remainder should follow their example , so as to ensure that gender equality will actually become a reality across the Union in the future and not remain merely wishful thinking .
In conclusion , I should like to congratulate Mrs Záborska on a very well prepared document .
I would also like to congratulate you , Madam President , on the occasion of your assuming your important role . As a woman , I am delighted to see you in office .
( SL ) A society where both sexes enjoy equality , develops more successfully than one controlled by the members of one sex .
However , as a result of natural dispositions , certain occupations remain that are better and more easily done by men and others by women .
However , we have known for a long time that men and women can prove themselves equally capable of performing leading jobs or carrying out political duties .
So why is it then necessary to adopt a report on gender equality when we live in the European Union , the most democratic society in the world and which has set itself the highest standards of democracy ?
It has been confirmed through my own experience that this work is more than necessary , even in the European Union .
In various documents we are imposing new duties on our citizens , but when it comes to the allocation of prestigious political positions in our Parliament , there is a ruthless struggle going on .
Gender equality and the equality of small and large States can easily be achieved with the d 'Hondt method .
I am happy to be a member of the PPE-DE Group , but I am not happy with the allocation of seats .
If a woman finds the courage to put herself forward for a leading position , she has to withdraw her candidature if another female candidate puts herself forward for the same position , so that at least one woman can get herself elected amongst the crowds of men .
We should not put forward female candidates just because they are women but because we have among us many capable women who have already and on many occasions proved their merit in practice .
I do not wish to lay all the blame on men .
We women , too , must become more ambitious and not merely be the performers of the tasks entrusted to us .
Before we impose legal obligations and recommendations on our citizens , let us examine how we are fulfilling them ourselves .
( SV ) Madam President , I wish to thank the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , together with Mrs Záborská , for an excellent initiative and an excellent report .
Following this debate , I have to observe , however , that the men who participated put forward some antediluvian views .
It really is very sad indeed .
A lot has already been said in this debate , and I want to spend the time I have on a number of issues of principle .
Parliament will never obtain integrated committees , half of whose committee draftsmen or chairmen are women , until half the Members of the European Parliament are women .
I speak from experience .
In Sweden , it was only when , in 1994 , we had a situation in which half of our politicians and Members of the Swedish Parliament were women that we were able to implement major reforms .
Many women in the European Parliament 's committees have problems combining parliamentary and family responsibilities .
As long as Parliament does not offer parents any opportunity of remaining at home , using parents ' insurance , and of obtaining benefits and people to replace them at work , we shall have a gender equality problem .
One of the strengths of the report is that it both discusses and proposes measures affecting officials and ourselves as MEPs , but I should like to see more targets and more measures affecting employees in the next report .
I should also like to see a debate on how and when we women are to comprise half the number of MEPs .
I should like to thank everyone for their congratulations .
I regard it as highly symbolic that the first debate over which I have presided is on the report on equal opportunities .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Law applicable to non-contractual obligations ( " ROME II " ) ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the recommendation for second reading , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , on the Council common position ( 9751 / 7 / 2006 - C6-0317 / 2006 - for adopting a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the law applicable to non-contractual obligations ( " ROME II " ) ( Rapporteur : Diana Wallis ) .
rapporteur . - Madam President , Commissioner , ROME II has been a long journey for us all and , whilst we might have hoped that this was the end , it seems likely that we are just at another staging post .
Let me start by saying that we appreciate that the common position took on board some of our ideas from the first reading .
Commissioner , I also want to emphasise the importance that we attach to this regulation , providing , as it will , the ground plan , or roadmap , which will provide clarity and certainty for the basis of civil law claims across Europe .
We need this , and we , here in Parliament , want to get it done , but it has to be done in the right way .
This has to fit the aspirations and needs of those we represent .
This is not just some theoretical academic exercise ; we are making political choices about balancing the rights and expectations of parties before civil courts .
I am sorry that we have not reached an agreement at this stage .
I still believe that it could have been possible , with more engagement and assistance .
Perhaps it is because both the other institutions are not used to Parliament having codecision in this particular area - I am sorry , but you will have to get used to it !
I also want to thank all my colleagues in the political groups in the Committee on Legal Affairs , who have stuck together with me on this long journey and supported a common view , which , subject to sufficient presence in this Chamber today , will be clearly shown in our vote .
Now let me detail the points that still separate us .
We have always made it clear that we prefer a general rule , with as few exceptions as possible .
If we must have exceptions , they must be clearly defined .
Thus , we have accepted the position on product liability .
However , problems still remain in respect of unfair competition and the environment .
With unfair competition , we also face a simultaneous proposal from Commissioner Kroes .
The two proposals must work together ; currently they do not .
We have tried to present a more acceptable formulation , which , sadly , I think is unlikely to succeed here at today 's vote , and I would therefore urge colleagues to support the deletion , to allow us to return to this at conciliation and do the work properly .
It is the same with the environment .
I know and deeply respect the fact that many would like a separate rule , but it should not be a rule just for the sake of a headline .
It should be a rule that is clear in terms of what facts it applies to .
Given that we already have several possible formulations , the safest course , again , I would urge , is the general rule .
This would also allow us to delete the separate rule today and return to the definition at conciliation .
Now I come to the two big issues for this Parliament .
The first is defamation .
Please understand that we know only too well how difficult an issue this is .
However , we managed to get a huge majority at first reading across this House , and you will likely see a similar pattern repeated here today .
That the Commission decided to exclude this issue before we could consider it again was disappointing , to say the least .
That it did so on the basis of a clear two-year review clause , which has now been abandoned , is unacceptable .
We know the issues surrounding this area of media and communication will only increase and continue to haunt us .
Maybe we cannot deal with it now , but we will soon be looking at Brussels I again , and it is imperative that jurisdiction and applicable law remain in step .
So , would we deprive ourselves of the opportunity to look at this again ?
Exclusion may truly be the only answer , but this Parliament wants to try a little bit more to see if we cannot resolve this .
I turn to the issue that my colleagues have been most tenacious in their support for ( and I am very grateful for that ) : damages in road-traffic accidents .
Commissioner , we have the support of insurers , the support of legal practitioners , the support of victims , the support of those we represent , but somehow we cannot transmit these concerns to the Commission or to the Council .
Even last week , I was confronted by a very senior justice ministry official who thought that what we were trying to do was the equivalent of applying German law to determine liability in respect of a road-traffic accident which had happened in the UK , where , of course , we drive on the ' wrong ' side of the road .
Do you really think we are that stupid ?
I wish people would have the courtesy to read and understand what we are suggesting : merely the accepted principle of restitutio in integrum - to put victims back in the position they were in before the incident .
There should be nothing so fearful in this .
Indeed , the illogical approach would be for a judge in the victim 's country to be able to deal with the case by virtue of the Motor Insurance Directives and Brussels I , and then have to apply a foreign , outside law in respect of damages .
This , indeed , would be illogical - and that is the situation we are currently in .
Please look at what we are saying and appreciate that , given the even the greater mobility of our citizens on Europe 's roads , this matter needs attention , sooner rather than later , and a four-year general review clause just will not do .
My last hope is that our debates will have brought the subject of private international law out of the dusty cupboards in justice ministries and expert committees into the glare of public , political , transparent debate .
Therefore , all we ask is that you bear with us a little longer so that , together , the institutions of Europe can get this right .
Mr President , I should first like to thank Mrs Wallis for her report .
As you know , we have been discussing this proposal for three and a half years , and I feel that , following the improvements made by Parliament and the Council at the two reading stages , this project has now reached maturity , if I may put it that way .
Firstly , it would appear that those working in the economic and legal fields are very much looking forward to this regulation that is essential for legal certainty , and secondly , it would appear that this text is of vital importance for the construction of the European area of justice and for the smooth running of the European internal market .
This is why your vote , ladies and gentlemen , represents a crucial step for the future of this issue .
The best solution would , to my mind , be to proceed without the conciliation procedure , although were this procedure to prove inevitable , the Commission would deem it essential for all the conditions to be in place after your vote for it to adopt a satisfactory text .
I remain confident that a favourable solution can be found with Parliament 's support .
Like you , Mrs Wallis , I regret the absence of special rules on defamation in the Council common position .
We reluctantly accepted the removal of that rule .
Why ?
Because it has not been possible to reach a compromise on a text .
I should like to point out that over ten different options were on Council 's table in April 2006 , not one of which has any chance of success , either now or , probably , in the future .
You will also know that the revision clause has no chance of success .
I firmly believe that to accept a provision that cannot obtain even the slightest consensus between the institutions , as several members of the Committee on Legal Affairs have stated , would be to reopen a can of worms .
Another important point is that the number of international lawsuits in this area is very limited .
Perhaps you know that even associations representing the press ultimately accepted this exclusion in a message sent to me a few days ago .
You touched on other key issues , for example the removal of other special rules on competition and the environment .
To be frank , I find it difficult to accept the removal of the special rules in these areas .
Special rules are not always appropriate for every situation , but when it comes to competition , the special rule is , in my view , vitally important , because it clarifies the general rule for locating the market concerned .
I therefore welcome the fact that the rapporteur from a major political group will now advocate retaining special rules of this kind and will support this drafting proposal .
As regards the environment , the special rule is aimed at preventing environmental dumping , and , in the current political climate , the Commission is the guarantor of a very high level of environmental protection .
I believe that Rome II can contribute to this .
As for the Council , you will be aware that most Member States that have codified private international law have special rules for these two issues , and the Council advocates not only retaining these two special rules but , like the Commission , its has in fact added further recitals .
We are of the same opinion : special rules must reinforce legal certainty .
As regards traffic accidents , I share Parliament 's concern to improve the situation of traffic accident victims .
This , at least , is one of the objectives contained in its proposal .
The Committee on Legal Affairs today proposed a new rule whereby the judge must ensure that compensation is provided for all prejudice sustained .
This is a very interesting idea , but I believe that that comes under harmonising the Member States ' material civil law and is no longer a matter of private international law .
Rome II is not , in my view , the right framework for such harmonisation , but I can confirm that I want to find a solution to the problem posed by the Committee on Legal Affairs and by Parliament , albeit in a different context of substantial harmonisation .
As regards the issue of whether the general rule can lead to satisfactory solutions in this area or whether a new special rule is required , I remain open to the idea of studying this problem in detail , as provided for in Amendment 26 of the Implementation Report .
This quickly leads us on to the issue of implementing foreign law .
This is covered by Amendments 12 and 21 , and is a vital component of the Hague Programme .
Let me reiterate that Rome II is not the right framework for such rules , which should apply to the entire commercial and civil field .
More generally , I am happy to commit to carrying out a detailed study of measures aimed at facilitating the implementation of foreign law .
The same indeed applies to the directive on the country of origin principle .
The Services Directive already preserves the application of the Rome II and Rome I instruments .
Accordingly , I do not feel that the rule proposed in Amendment 24 is necessary , not because this principle does not need to be clarified , but because there is already a guarantee .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I , too , wish to thank Mrs Wallis for having made some important points .
We have , this past week , heard much about the ' citizens ' Europe ' .
When one looks at the title of this document , one is inclined to assume that many members of the public would , at the sight of it , ' switch off ' on the grounds that they regard the law on non-contractual obligations as difficult , but it is the European issue par excellence , something to which most European motorists have given thought at least once , and along these lines : ' I am from country A , am travelling through country B and meet with an accident involving a driver from country C , who may well have a person from country D travelling with him ' .
Situations such as that are a regular occurrence , and we are , by means of this dossier , doing more work on a citizens ' Europe . The need to regulate such matters is made even more pressing as people become more and more mobile and borders less and less important .
There are still improvements to be made on this front .
It follows that the ' citizens ' Europe ' is at stake .
We have , today , already made reference to other aspects of the law that certainly come up less frequently than road accidents , namely liability for criminal acts , unfair competition and the complicated things to consider with reference to the environment .
My group will seek to keep this House 's options as regards this third reading and conciliation procedure as open as possible .
We believe that there is still a lot of scope for making the regulations more suitable to their task . I want to underline what Mrs Wallis has already said .
What this House is being asked to help decide on here is a new reality , one aspect of which will be that we will , once the outcome of the third reading is known , have to pay very close attention to those things that might well not have been legally approved , but did , at second reading in this House , gain the approval of a majority , and consider whether these things - which matter to this House - might perhaps be taken on board after all .
We have every right to await with tense anticipation what will emerge from the third reading .
We will try to get the options for a citizens ' Europe kept as open as possible .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , we are dealing with a rather complex text that has been subject to a series of amendments in the European Parliament 's Committee on Legal Affairs and with regard to which the committee is drawing up our position on the points of view expressed by the Council .
I believe that the rapporteur has done a good job , but the positions in the Committee on Legal Affairs were adopted by one group , with a majority in that committee but not in plenary , and the Socialist Group in the European Parliament is therefore expressing its disagreement with several of the amendments approved by the Committee on Legal Affairs .
I am referring in particular to the removal of the reference to ' special rules ' , for example those relating to television without borders , e-commerce and other things .
I am also referring to the issue of environmental damage .
Environmental damage is now such an important issue that we cannot possibly have legislation that does not take account of that special aspect .
There is another aspect : the issue of unfair competition .
Unfair competition also warrants some kind of detailed regulation .
A statement of a general nature is not sufficient , since it affects many aspects of the internal market .
In summary , we agree with the majority of the amendments presented by the rapporteur , but we disagree with several of the amendments approved within the Committee on Legal Affairs , which reflect a majority that I would describe as circumstantial , and which is probably not going to be reflected in this Chamber .
In any event , I have the feeling that we are going to have to examine this issue in detail in conciliation , depending on the result of the votes held here .
Given that different political groups have presented different amendments to several of the amendments approved by the Committee on Legal Affairs , until we have the results of the vote tomorrow , it is going to be rather difficult to know what Parliament 's final text will be .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( ET ) Mr President , Mrs Wallis , Commissioner .
While the draft legislation was in progress , my supporters and I planned to submit a motion to amend the Rome II report .
Unfortunately this was not successful .
For that reason I would like to present the content of the motion to you now .
Pursuant to the regulation 's general rule , the law of the country in which the damage arises is to be applied in the case of non-contractual obligations .
Article 9 , however , contains an exception , and requires the automatic application of the laws of the country in which the industrial action takes place .
I would recommend that Article 9 be removed from the draft legislation .
The exception in Article 9 does not give equal consideration to all parties in employment relations , and may place small and medium-sized companies providing services abroad in a very unfavourable situation .
Due to possible industrial action , companies cannot fulfil their contractual obligations , and are forced to return their employees , compensate the damages that have arisen and pay a contractual penalty , and thus the anticipated revenue is not obtained .
Thus the damages arising from the industrial action arise in the country in which the company is located , and not in the country in which the industrial action takes place .
In my opinion , an analysis of the effects of the introduction of Article 9 into Community legislation should have been performed before the article was introduced .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , ' Rome II ' is an abstract title cloaking issues that have a very direct , and very considerable , impact on the public , and it was for that reason that the arguments in committee on the various issues were so hard-hitting .
I propose to highlight three of them .
The first is the issue of the impact on the environment of damage from across borders .
Where the protection of the environment is concerned , the fatal tendency generally manifests itself that people try to ignore the problems of their neighbours , even when they themselves , by means of irresponsible action , are the cause of them .
We cannot but note with regret that it is turning out over and over again that people do not care and that installations emitting pollutants are being built very close to borders .
We have tried to come up with rules enabling victims of such environmental problems to enjoy the maximum protection possible and preventing the sort of environmental dumping to which the Commissioner referred .
It is regrettable that both the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe have decided not to agree to this , thereby opening the way to a retrograde step that I think would be fatal .
I look to the Council and the Commission to help us find a better way .
We have managed , where protection against defamation in the press is concerned , to come up with a compromise that I see as protecting and supporting press freedom , one of the European Union 's fundamental values , which we must treat with respect and which must be central to what we do , and which is best protected if the legal consequences can be discussed in the country in which the newspaper or medium is based .

I regard road accidents as particularly important , in that anyone can , potentially , be affected by them ; on this point we have arrived at a compromise , and I hope that it will be accepted in the course of negotiations with other bodies .
The public can expect us to take account of their day-to-day needs and to prioritise the interests of the victims ; that is what the people of Europe expect of us .
( PL ) Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking the rapporteur .
She has worked hard to ensure that this difficult and technical report reflects Parliament 's amendments after first reading as accurately as possible .
This is most important , especially as regards the article on defamation , which is of particular interest to the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
I appreciate the political difficulties that make it exceptionally difficult to reach agreement in the Council on the issue of the article concerning defamation .
We would do well to remember , however , that Parliament 's stance on this matter at first reading was very clear .
In my view , the solution proposed at first reading really was the best attempt at a compromise reconciling the interests of injured parties and publishers .
The Commission , in its amended opinion , and the Council , in its common position , rejected the idea of including in this regulation provisions concerning legislation to be applied in cases of defamation .
As stated in its opinion at first reading , however , the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs believes that this issue should not be excluded .
The stance adopted by Parliament at first reading is a sensible one and it is in line with the jurisprudence of the European Court of Justice .
Turning briefly to the remaining issues , it should be borne in mind that conflict-of-law rules tend to be governed by a logic of their own , and linking it with legislation concerning the common market may create problems through lack of consistency .
Nonetheless , the exclusions concerning unfair competition and environmental protection which result in these areas being covered by special provisions actually introduce unnecessary complications into European private law and run counter to the general effort to deregulate and simplify our legislation .
In conclusion , I should like to state that our Community now has an opportunity to lay the foundations of a common system of civil law .
Work on the Rome I and Rome III Regulations is under way .
I trust we have almost completed the work on Rome II as well .
Work on common reference frameworks is progressing too .
I hope all these projects will make a positive contribution to the smooth running of the internal market within our great European venture .
( PL ) Mr President , I should like to begin by warmly congratulating Mrs Wallis , the rapporteur , and thanking her for her work on such a key issue for the future of European integration .
This represents an important step forward towards the development of a common area of freedom , security and justice for Europe .
As we consider the draft regulation before us today , we should pay particular attention to the need for consistency between provisions in force and subsequent regulations .
It is important to ensure that the latter do not impose additional burdens and do not therefore hinder the efficient operation of the internal market .
On the contrary , they should stimulate its development .
Mr Medina Ortega has already referred to several specific issues , including those relating to environmental protection and competition .
I should like to state the importance of ensuring that issues pertaining to applicable law are considered appropriately , both by the parties and by the court , thus guaranteeing legal certainty .
Standardisation of provisions is called for in certain cases . These include issues relating to defamation , violation of the right to privacy and personal rights , and establishing the amount of damages in cases of bodily injury .
We should support Parliament 's position at first reading with a view to ensuring that the regulation covers situations in which a manifestly closer connection may be considered to exist with the country which is the principal place of publication or dissemination of information , for instance information constituting defamation of character .
This can be achieved by a single provision applicable to all publications including those on the Internet .
The position concerning the application of national victim law to determine damages in the case of accidents causing bodily injury should also be supported .
Such an approach will make the free movement of people within the internal market more attractive .
It will also avoid placing an unfair burden on the social security and assistance schemes of the country of habitual residence of an accident victim .
Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking Mrs Wallis for her pertinent work on this dossier and for her excellent cooperation as the ALDE Group 's coordinator in the Committee on Legal Affairs .
Together with the Rome II Regulation , the EU is establishing a coherent legal framework with regard to relationships between international private laws and other Community instruments .
This regulation should promote rather than hamper the proper functioning of the internal market , in particular the free movement of goods and services .
I was very unhappy to hear that the negotiations with the Council have been unsuccessful so far , but I am absolutely certain that Mrs Wallis will continue to raise the points of both our committee and Parliament .
I should like to raise two issues in particular .
Firstly , the violation of privacy and rights related to the personality , including defamation , should be excluded completely from the scope of Rome II .
In the absence of rules protecting editorial independence , exclusion would be the only viable solution that would not undermine press freedom .
It is regrettable that the Council did not give its support for this amendment at first reading .
The second issue is an important question of principle - as was the previous issue - notably regarding Article 9 of the proposal regarding industrial action and applicable law that raises specific difficulties for the European maritime and shipping industry .
The Swedish Government proposed this article in the spring of 2006 , with reference to the European Court of Justice judgment in Case C-18 / 02 .
This case concerns questions regarding jurisdiction and choice of law when a ship flying the flag of one Member State is being boycotted in another Member State .
Ships moving around are typically serving harbours of different countries .
If industrial action against ships were to be governed by the laws of the different harbours served during a voyage , the rules that would apply would vary all the time , i.e. different rules would form the basis of legality of industrial action taken against a ship .
This would both be impractical and create great uncertainty .
It is generally the case that all internal relations on a ship are governed by the law of the flag state .
Therefore , let us not give these powers to the labour unions , which would certainly use these provisions to blackmail our shippers and hamper the competitiveness of the European seafaring industry .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , infringements of Community competition rules have , or may have , effects in several Member States .
The possible application by legal authorities of the criterion of using as many legislations as countries affected may complicate actions for damages , hinder legal action and weaken competition .
As rapporteur for the report on private actions for damages deriving therefrom , I believe that they deserve their own treatment , and I would point out that the Commission has reserved the right to present proposals once the consultation under way has been completed .
The amendment that I presented , together with Mrs Berger , with which the rapporteur agrees - and I thank him for that - draws attention to this situation and proposes that the actor making the claim in the place of residence of the defendant should have the option of choosing the lex fori for their claim .
The conciliation will enable us to go further into the issue and decide how to deal with it appropriately .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place shortly at 12 noon .
Written statement ( Rule 142 )
In view of the progressive cross-border movement of people , products and information it has become essential to achieve a common identification of the law applicable in non-contractual obligations .
However , there appears to be a distinction with what is being proposed by the Commission and the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs .
The essence of this legislation is whether it can co-exist in harmony with existing national laws or it can supplant same .
The Committee believes that national laws and what is being proposed will not hinder but enhance national laws .
A clear distinction has to be made and once there is general agreement of more uniformity then this legislation should be all-encompassing and it is important that the possibility of ambiguity of the applicable law is resolved .
It is apparent that there is a lacuna in the Rome Convention of 1980 and that subsequently entered into in Brussels , and whereas the applicable law arising from non-contractual obligations has been adequately tackled , the relevant disputes still need to be addressed in full .
The second important distinction relates to the content .
There seems to be a different approach as to what non-contractual obligations should be included in the current legislation .
Such issues as environmental ones are to be left to national legislation , whereas the original proposal had a wider scope .
Communication of Council common positions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 11.35 a.m. and resumed for voting time at noon )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Committee of Inquiry into the crisis of the Equitable Life Assurance Society ( extension of mandate ) : see Minutes
Announcement by the President : see Minutes
1 .
Membership of committees ( vote )
2 .
Amendment of the ACP-EC Partnership Agreement ( vote )
3 .
Development of the Community 's railways ( vote )
rapporteur . - ( DE ) The third part is a free-standing question , and it is for that reason that it must be voted on separately .
It has nothing whatever to do with the second part .
( DE ) You have missed out one amendment - No 40 .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Since the first part of Amendment 16 has been adopted , Amendment 40 lapses .
4 .
Certification of train drivers operating locomotives and trains on the railway system in the Community ( vote )
5 .
International rail passengers ' rights and obligations ( vote )
- Before the vote on Amendment 22
( DE ) Mr President , over the last couple of hours there have been further discussions on two items , those being Amendments 22 and 47 , as a result of which my group will be voting a different way .
I would like to ask the rapporteur whether he is able to give us any further information on those two amendments .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Mr President , the original wording of Amendment 22 created problems for some railway companies in a number of EU Member States , because they work with very short notice periods for contracts .
In order to counteract these problems without necessitating fundamental changes , we have split the amendment into three sections , keeping most of the text but taking out the word ' existing ' after the second split vote , and removing the last sentence after the third split vote , as a result of which we have retained the essence but managed to do away with the practical problems .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
- Before the vote on Amendment 47
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Mr Jarzembowski had also asked why we had requested a split vote on Amendment 47 , the second part of which has to do with a second person travelling free of charge , and it is the huge number of objections to this system that have prompted me to ask for a split vote .
I would also like to know - hence the split vote - how many Members are backing this proposal and who are not , since this is something with which some Member States experience major problems .
Hence my request for a split vote .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
6 .
Law applicable to non-contractual obligations ( " ROME II " ) ( vote )
7 .
Imposition of the death penalty on medical personnel in Libya ( vote )
- Before the vote
Mr President , I would like to suggest a couple of minor adjustments for the sake of greater clarity .
In paragraph 2 , line 4 , I suggest replacing the words ' for itself and ' by the words ' of capital punishment in ' , and in paragraph 8 , line 3 , inserting the word ' affected ' in front of the word ' children ' .
( The oral amendments were accepted )
- Before the vote on paragraphs 6 and 12
( FR ) Ladies and gentlemen , certain terms concerning the Libyan authorities need to be corrected .
We have been somewhat European in our choice of words .
We should therefore replace ' President Gaddafi ' by ' Colonel Gaddafi ' .
I should also like to point out that in paragraph 12 ' Popular Assembly ' should be replaced by ' General People 's Congress ' because that is the right name , and ' government ' by ' General People 's Committee ' .
One needs to be precise when referring to the Libyan authorities .
( The oral amendments were accepted )
- following the vote
I will take this resolution as the occasion for once again calling on all those in positions of responsibility in Libya to spare these people 's lives and set them at liberty .
( Applause )
8 .
Seventh and eighth annual reports on arms exports ( vote )
9 .
European Road Safety Action Programme - Mid-Term Review ( vote )
- following the vote

( DE ) Mr President , it may be that we did not inform you in good time , but this report is the latest from Mrs Hedkvist Petersen , and its subject ma