Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament , adjourned on Thursday 20 September 2001 .
Statement by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , as you know , and as you can imagine , it is my sad duty to have to open this session of Parliament with the news of several disasters that have claimed the lives of many people .
When I have finished reading the statement , I would like to suggest that we observe a minute ' s silence to pay tribute to the victims .
On 21 September , Toulouse was struck by a disaster on an unprecedented scale , in which 29 people died and 2500 were injured .
We have all been concerned and deeply saddened by the suffering of the victims ' families , of the injured and by the grief of the people of Toulouse .
Following the explosion at the AZF factory , I sent a message on behalf of Parliament , and on my own behalf , to the Mayor of Toulouse , Mr Douste-Blazy and to his fellow citizens , to express our solidarity and deepest sympathy .
The exact causes of this awful disaster are still unknown , but one thing is certain : France , and all the countries of the European Union , must make a firm commitment to ensure that a tragedy like this never happens again .
It will be held up as an example of what we must no longer tolerate , wherever similar risks exist .
People ' s safety must never be compromised due to negligence , passivity or an overriding concern to save money .
In a repeat of previous incidents , this time in Northern Ireland , a journalist , Martin O ' Hagan , was murdered on European Union soil by terrorists with a single objective - to spread fear by firstly attacking those who work to inform others .
This appalling act is an attack by its perpetrators on the fundamental values of the European Union , namely the right to life , the rule of law and the freedom of expression .
Under no circumstances must these acts of terrorism call into question the efforts of all those who , in spite of the difficulties they encounter , are working tirelessly to finally achieve the goals of the peace process .
On 27 September , a mentally disturbed man carried out a horrific attack on the Parliament of the Swiss canton of Zug , tragically killing 14 members of the local Parliament and government and also injuring approximately 10 people .
As soon as I heard of these senseless murders , I sent , on behalf of everyone , our most sincere condolences to the authorities and a message of solidarity to the relatives of those killed and wounded .
Earlier this afternoon , we heard the news that a suicide attack was carried out against the Parliament of Kashmir in India , a despicable act in which 22 people have been killed so far and approximately 30 have been injured .
The explosion also caused very considerable damage to the area around the Parliament building .
We are all distressed and saddened by this attack .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to propose that we pay tribute to the victims of all these attacks by now observing a minute ' s silence .
( The House rose and observed a minute ' s silence )
Speeches relating to points of order :
Onesta ( Verts / ALE ) .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank you for your words of sympathy and solidarity .
On the morning of Friday 21 September , I was at home , less than two kilometres from the site of the explosion , and I can tell you that I now know what a tragedy really is .
We have , all of us here , seen the images of this explosion on the television .
I believe , and I can even be sure , that all my fellow Members from my region , such as Mrs Ainardi , Mrs de Veyrac , Mr Rod , join me in thanking all the Members who have expressed their sympathy and solidarity .
I would also like to show you a damaged and charred metal girder , which I found at the factory site , over a kilometre from where the explosion occurred .
Now you can imagine the state of the bodies that were found to the south of Toulouse .
Ladies and gentlemen , having observed a minute ' s silence at the beginning of today ' s debate , we must now try to restore the confidence of people everywhere who fear these bombs , and , as you have said , Madam President , we must ensure , with the votes we cast this week and by taking bold resolutions , that the disaster that occurred in Toulouse really is the last in a series of already too many incidents of this kind .
Ladies and gentlemen , with your agreement , I would like to propose to give the floor to the Members who have requested to speak . This is an exceptional case - and I do mean exceptional - and is on account of the scale of the recent disasters .
Madam President , what you have just said demonstrates that we must now be especially careful about the public statements we make and it is significant that you have spoken about four disasters : two of which have taken place in or around parliaments - in Switzerland and in Kashmir .




I want to say this because I wish to express my solidarity and that of my group with the statements by the President of the Commission , Mr Prodi , the Vice-President of the Commission , Mr Patten , the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Michel , the President of the French Republic , Mr Chirac , and in this case I regret that we have not heard him speak - since he always does so authoritatively , bravely and appropriately - in relation to the unfortunate public remarks of the President of the Council of Ministers of the Republic of Italy , Mr Berlusconi , on the supposed superiority of Western civilisation over other civilisations .
I believe it is especially important now for the European Parliament to state strongly once again , that this is not a clash of civilisations , but , rather , that we have to defend values that are shared by all humanity .
I therefore believe it is important that we , in the European Parliament , clearly express and demonstrate an approach , which is not just the approach of my group , and in this case I would like to address Mr Poettering to say that I was the first to applaud when , at the special sitting we held on the attacks of 11 September , he expressly cited the speech of Anwar al-Sadat in this Parliament .
I believe that remarks such as those by Mr Berlusconi must be criticised by all of us and I hope , because it is not the first time , that they will not be repeated , since they damage the European cause throughout the world .
( Applause from the left )
Madam President , to continue on the same theme , in the wake of the events of 11 September , Parliament gained a very broad consensus on the need to quash any equation of Islam with terrorism , substantiating the unacceptable and dangerous theory that this is a clash of civilisations .
On the other hand , we recall Mr Solana ' s words , spoken in the same spirit , who had advised - and I quote - that we must not create a rift , as this would be a huge mistake .
Mr Berlusconi ' s astounding and deeply shameful words show how important it is to issue a very clear response .
First of all , we must strongly condemn the age-old rumour of the purported superiority of Western civilisation and Christianity . Then , we must decide upon an initiative , along the lines of Article 7 of the Treaty of Nice , enabling the Council to determine that there is a clear risk of a serious breach by a Member State of the fundamental principles of the European Union and to address recommendations to that State .
I therefore suggest , Madam President , that the Conference of Presidents examines what significant political action we would be advised to take in this matter .
( Applause from the GUE / NGL Group )
Madam President , I would like to say again on behalf of our group what I said on 12 September - I believe with the agreement of all in this European Parliament - namely that the terror perpetrated by human beings must not be confused with the peace-loving Muslim faith .
I refer back to Anwar el Sadat 's tremendous speech to the European Parliament on 10 February 1981 - we were meeting in Luxembourg in those days - in which he said : " Islam is a religion of love and not of hatred " .
On behalf of our group , I wish again to observe that we oppose the rhetoric which speaks of a clash of civilisations and that we desire partnership and friendship with all peace-loving Arab and Islamic countries .
It is precisely for that reason , indeed , that I proposed that we should convene the Mediterranean Forum .
I am given to understand , Madam President , that you too have it in mind to submit a proposal to this end .
Having been addressed personally , I wish to point out certain misunderstandings which originate with a Member of the Commission .
We agreed in the Conference of Presidents - Mr Barón Crespo was unable to be there last Thursday - that we do not want to make this the subject of the debate here in the plenary sitting but wish , rather , in the Conference of Presidents on Thursday , to consult with the Member of the Commission about the remarks that have been made .
On behalf of our group , let me say here and now that we reach out our hands to all peace-loving Muslims , wherever they live throughout the world , be it outside the European Union , in the Arab and Islamic states or in a country of the European Union ; we want peace , partnership and friendship with all Muslims of good will !
Madam President , I would like to congratulate you on the speech you made the night the heads of government met in Brussels .
Parliament was represented , I was present , and I think you struck exactly the right note for Parliament .
Madam President , I think we have a huge responsibility after what has happened and our response needs to reflect the seriousness of these events .
And that , I think , applies not just to us but to the Heads of State who have applied to become members of the European Union .
That is why I should like , albeit reluctantly , to refer to the statements made by Mr Ecevit , who is trying to cash in on the terrorist incidents by levying accusations of terrorism against the Republic of Cyprus at a time when he , himself , is illegally occupying Northern Cyprus , as you quite rightly said during your visit to Athens .
Madam President , I want to say some words about Martin O 'Hagan , the journalist murdered in Northern Ireland a couple of days ago .
He was a fearless journalist who over many years tirelessly illuminated that twilight world where gangsters and political terrorism and political extremism intersect .
He has paid the ultimate price for his bravery .
It is an unfortunate fact of our life in this world today that many hundreds of journalists die virtually every year in pursuit of their vocation of serving and informing the public .
This does not happen so often in democratic societies and it is particularly worrying , therefore , that journalists in Northern Ireland are at risk in this way .
The few words I have said about Martin O 'Hagan are entirely inadequate to convey the shock and the horror that people of all political and religious persuasions in Ireland feel at this horrible deed .
I should like to link this with other matters we have debated at previous part-sessions - indeed I am sure we will be debating them again this week - and make an appeal about the language we use to describe these terrorists .
We should stop referring to them as Protestants , Catholics or Muslims : they are political extremists .
It is important that we make that distinction .
The individuals concerned adhere to one or other religion , or have no religion , but their objectives are political , and the one common thing that unites them is their contempt for democracy and humanity .
( Applause )
Madam President , as a parliamentarian I feel myself to be represented by the President of this House above all others , and so it is to you that I wish to address a very specific query relating to what was said by Mr Barón Crespo .
The Italian Prime Minister 's statement has been criticised by many , including - which may be surprising - by Mr Haider , who found it too xenophobic .
Madam President , you have always strongly advocated dialogue with Islam , and have also taken definite steps in the direction of such dialogue .
Your policy stands in contradiction to what Mr Berlusconi has said .
In view of the fact that you have had very forthright things to say in other situations - which I did not always find easy to defend back home , but I defended you because I have always valued your clear language - I think it important that you should find equally clear and unambiguous words in this connection .
It is this that I ask of you .
Perhaps these words have passed me by ; perhaps I have not heard them or not read them .
I would ask you to make this Parliament 's position in respect of these remarks quite clear .
This is a Parliament that has always promoted dialogue and has always engaged in it .
Our whole existence as a Parliament is bound up with the dialogue between religions and between cultures , and I believe that you , as President of this Parliament , should say so clearly and unambiguously on this occasion .
( Applause from the PSE Group )
Mr Swoboda , I must say that I am surprised to hear your comments , because I do feel that I have made my views well known since 11 September , whether in press releases , or with regard to Mrs Banotti ' s speech or what Mr Berlusconi said .
Had you closely followed your President ' s movements and official visits , you would be aware of my views .
I shall send you some press cuttings , which are extremely enlightening and will , I believe , bring you up-to-date .
I even believe that I may have been one of the first people - since you are giving me the opportunity to bring this up - to draw attention to the risk of an equation of Islam with terrorism .
This was a natural thing to do as President and I knew that I was repeating the views of the House by stating this , and I certainly made this very clear in my first statement .
Perhaps you also recall that I said this at the opening of the exceptional sitting that was held on the Wednesday , the day after the events .
I will , however , send you all the details .
Madam President , it is a matter of great surprise and regret to me that the Chairman of a major political group such as the Group of the Party of European Socialists should get caught up in the false , subversive controversy which originated in the Italian political debate and which it is absurd to think could be continued in this House . The issue has already been thoroughly addressed in Italy and it is certainly not evidence of a problem at European level but merely of a misunderstanding or , worse , the subversive interpretation of a phrase which could have been interpreted differently .
Moreover , the Italian Prime Minister , Mr Berlusconi , has provided ample explanation of what he meant by the statement , which he intended to be extremely positive .
The difference between the two civilisations is clear , and his intention was merely to highlight and emphasise that there is a great difference as regards genuine freedom , which exists in the West but not in the East , as regards equal opportunities for men and women , which are established in the West but denied in the East , and as regards all those differences in civilisation which - it cannot be denied - are there .
That was what Mr Berlusconi meant by his statement , but , of course , everyone has read and interpreted it in their own way .
Madam President , I would go so far as to say that it would be dangerous for this House to focus on a statement such as this now : at such a sensitive time as this , we need clarity , transparency and positive thinking - not a vitriolic debate - and , most importantly , we have to have the ability , which I do not see in the opposition , to extend a hand and interpret what people say in the positive sense intended rather than always placing a negative interpretation on things .
It is therefore our intention to oppose any initiative seeking to open an interim procedure in this House , as has been suggested .
Ladies and gentlemen , as I said , due to exceptional circumstances , I agreed to move the points of order because I thought that you would like the opportunity to speak about the awful disasters , which were , sadly , the subject of my statement .
Now that we no longer are speaking on points of order relating to the statement , we shall continue as usual , in other words , the remaining points of order shall be heard immediately after the agenda has been established .
A number of Members have just asked me about this and I believe that this is a perfectly legitimate request .
Agenda
Madam President , I believe that this Parliament is making a certain degree of progress in dealing with issues which concern our citizens and in which the European Union must have a political profile .
I believe that in the case of the Toulouse disaster the change to the agenda is perfectly justified .
I believe that the case of Afghanistan is highly topical for two reasons : the first is the humanitarian tragedy of the people of Afghanistan , who are the principal victims of the Taliban regime .
Every day there is more and more news about the desperate condition of millions of people . Almost a fifth of the population ( more than five million people ) have practically nothing to eat .
The European Union is contributing to the humanitarian effort , but I believe this is an issue on which we have to state our position .
Secondly , the political issue .
You yourself set an example , to a certain extent bypassing certain rules of protocol , international law and diplomacy , by bringing Commander Massoud here .
I believe that we are also currently committed to a political solution which will bring stability to Afghanistan , and it is notable that , when a person who could establish a degree of mediation in Afghanistan , the exiled ex-king in Rome , proposed the calling of a Grand Assembly , the Loya Jirga , which could bring the various tribes together , he did so together with American congressmen , but we were not involved , although the Community troika has visited more or less the whole region .
I believe that it makes sense for Parliament , with the current participation of the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Michel , and the Commissioner responsible , Vice-President Patten , to be able to hold a debate on such an important issue , which is not just one more urgent subject , but which is an absolutely fundamental issue in relation not only to the fight against terrorism , but also to the stabilisation of Central Asia and the fight to prevent a humanitarian tragedy .
These are the reasons why my group has proposed this change to the agenda .
Madam President , I have all due respect for Mr Barón Crespo ' s proposal and solicitude .
However , this week , we have a well-prepared debate on terrorism , the root of which can be found in Afghanistan , among other countries , under the guise of Osama bin Laden .
I would be surprised if Parliament were now to hold a less well-prepared debate on the issue of Afghanistan , also at the risk of mixing up the two debates .
I feel strongly about holding a clear debate on terrorism .
As a final point , for the resolution , we for our part have also drafted texts which give due consideration to the humanitarian problems that have now arisen at the Afghan-Pakistani border , and we also comment on the budgetary implications of our aid .
I hope that this text will receive broad support .
In my opinion , it is much preferable to deal with the Afghanistan issue at a later date , should this appear necessary , when we can prepare for it properly , for we are now dealing with an extremely important and complex problem .
I would therefore ask if we could this week confine ourselves to the debate on terrorism , and only briefly touch upon the humanitarian dimension to which Mr Barón Crespo referred .
We could then deal with the policy with regard to Afghanistan on a separate occasion , but not this week .
I shall now put to the vote the request by the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
( Parliament gave its assent )
Madam President , I would very much like to add to what has been said .
You win some , you lose some - that is normal .
But we need proper preparation in matters as serious as this .
Mr Barón Crespo , the right time for calm discussion of this would have been at the Conference of Presidents last Thursday , when you were absent - which is not an accusation , these things happen to us all .
It would be a good thing if this House were to have a joint ballot on such important issues .
I ask you to arrange things in the future so that we discuss such matters in the Conference of Presidents in the first instance .
( Applause from the PPE-DE Group )
Madam President , this is the second time that Mr Poettering , who has been absent from the Conference of Presidents more often than I have , has reproached me for not being there on Thursday .
I was in Budapest , I know , but it has to be said that Mr Poettering was the only Group Chairman present .
The others were replaced .
And the Socialist Group was duly and worthily represented .
There is therefore no place for this sort of argument .
Secondly , if this procedure exists at the moment it is because Parliament has sovereignty when it comes to deciding its agenda and in my speech I referred to information and events that have arisen since Thursday .
Since I do not have the gift of prophecy that Mr Poettering appears to have , I cannot know on a Thursday what is going to happen on the following Sunday and therefore I think it makes sense that Parliament should reflect and vote when the time comes .
Madam President , in reference to Wednesday 's agenda following the point made by Mr Barón Crespo , last Tuesday I and two other Members of this House had the honour of meeting with the former king of Afghanistan , Mohammed Zahir Shah .
At that meeting we discussed the possibility of his playing a role in some form of mediation in Afghanistan leading to the restoration of the democracy which he established in 1964 , and which involved free media , free elections and the involvement of women in politics - a very far cry from the current state of affairs in Afghanistan .

He also asked us to extend his respects to you , Madam President , and to the House as a whole , and hoped that in due course he would be able to visit the European Parliament .
Yesterday I spoke to Mr Patten on this matter and hope there will be some development in this regard involving not only Parliament but the European Union as a whole .
On the agenda for Wednesday , it seems to me rather sad that , in spite of the special nature of this international situation , reflected by our solemn sitting the day after the events in America on 11 September and the succeeding week , the Council has made a number of proposals for legislation following the terrorist acts which many of us consider as tantamount to an act of war .
In this regard , the European Parliament will no doubt be involved in the normal procedures .
It would be helpful to have a longer debate on Wednesday and not take the Ghent Council with the question of terrorism .
Secondly , could you give us some indication of when the House will know the procedures to be followed with its committees for the examination , with proper scrutiny , of the proposals now being made by the Council ?
Mr McMillan-Scott , we shall try to organise this as best we can .
As regards the former king of Afghanistan , I must also share some information with you . I actually met him on Tuesday 11 September when I was in Italy attending a meeting of 500 young people in Rome .
I made an appointment and , on behalf of the European Parliament , I went to meet the former king of Afghanistan .
I believe that everyone will see this as a step in the right direction .
We shall therefore try to organise everything properly and as you would wish .
Relating to Thursday :
I have three requests to add headings to the topical and urgent subjects of major importance and the item entitled ' Human Rights ' .
Madam President , last week , those of us in the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party were agreed that there is only one urgent subject that ought to be dealt with in Parliament in this plenary sitting , and that is international terrorism and the need to build an international coalition to combat this .
Unfortunately , we were unable to get anywhere with that point of view last week in the Conference of Presidents , and that is something we regret .
We shall naturally participate in this vote .
I requested the floor in order simply to emphasise that those of us in the ELDR Group think we should have focused our energies on the one urgent subject which we are all thinking about and which will cast its shadow for many years to come .
( Applause from the ELDR Group )
Madam President , I do not wish to waste Parliament ' s precious time on an issue which has already been addressed by Mr Santini and which has already been quite satisfactorily resolved in Italy .
I would just like to point out that , as always , where Mr Berlusconi is concerned , every event is prey to political exploitation .
This behaviour towards a Head of State is improper and inappropriate .
Madam President , I am one of those Members of this House whose cultural background is not exactly Christian .
There was a statement recently by a statesman , who should speak in a statesmanlike manner , but who , when speaking about Muslims and Christians , actually , in my opinion , dropped something of a clanger .
I deeply regret that we were unable to deliver a joint response , but had to have a discussion instead .
I greatly regret this , because we should be counteracting escalation .
A dialogue is urgently needed specifically between Muslims and Christians .
The Italian Prime Minister 's spoken contribution added nothing , but was highly counter-productive .
For this reason , I greatly regret that we were unable to counter it with a common response .
Madam President , I would like to go back to Mr Berlusconi ' s statements , not least because it is an issue which extends beyond Italian concern , as is indicated by the reactions of all the Heads of State and Government to these statements .
I have to say , Madam President , that we Italians - or at least the majority of the Italians sitting in this House - are particularly concerned by Mr Berlucsoni ' s statements because these statements , in addition to being in blatant conflict with the conclusions of the Brussels European Council , subscribed to by Mr Berlusconi himself , moreover , reflect the attitude - which I hope has ceased to prevail - of part of the majority supporting the Italian government .
In matters such as these which , regrettably , can carry such weight as to tip the balance towards war or peace , exploitation for political ends is unacceptable ; however , equally unacceptable are superficial expressions which , I am sad to say , appear to mask attitudes of intolerance which must be opposed .
Without wishing to exacerbate the issue , we cannot turn a blind eye to the fact that , after 11 September , a major government coalition party held public demonstrations with boards saying ' Immigrants = terrorists ' , and that , in recent days , two mayors of cities in Northern Italy from the same party have ordered the closure of the premises used as mosques .
That , Madam President , is why we will feel more reassured if you too , as President of this Parliament , particularly following Mr Santini ' s words , were to confirm a clear message of open dialogue , such as Parliament has already had occasion to send to the Muslim Arab communities and countries with which we intend to work to combat terrorism , together , openly and resolutely .
Madam President , Mr Berlusconi was certainly wrong to talk of superiority and a clash of civilisations . These are words which do nothing to promote dialogue .
Nevertheless , at this time when major alliances are being formed , I would like to send out from this House a personal message of great solidarity and support to the Afghan , Saudi , Iranian , Kuwaiti and Chechen women , to the women of all those countries who are currently fighting and will continue to fight in the coming years .
It is my genuine hope that the formation of this great alliance to combat terrorism will not mean that the issue of these women ' s rights will be relegated to second place yet again .
Madam President , in my view , we could have , when dealing with the points of order , quite legitimately gone back to the absolutely scandalous words of Mr Berlusconi , who has designs on being the future president of the European Union .
My colleague and the Chairman of my group , Mr Barón Crespo , and my colleague Mr Swoboda were demanding that you condemn outright the words of Mr Berlusconi .
Every Member of this House is aware that we had a very broad consensus on avoiding the risks of an equation of Islam with terrorism and condemning anything that could be seen to be a war between civilisations .
But we expect you to condemn outright what Mr Berlusconi said .
That is my point of order .

Madam President , Mr Poettering 's highly credible words show that he represents only part of his group , for hardly had he come to the end of his speech than Mr Santini asserted the very opposite of what Mr Poettering had described as being the position of the Christian Democrat Members of this House .



It would , then , be consistent of Mr Poettering to call upon the Forza Italia members of his group to fall in with the group 's position , for what Mr Fiori proceeded to say shows that what Mr Poettering expresses here is not the view of the Christian Democrat members , but only the opinion of some of them .

Madam President , I did not hear your radio and television statement myself , but many of those who were able to do so said that you had taken up an excellent position on behalf of the European Parliament in respect of Mr Berlusconi 's remarks and have told me emphatically that Mrs Fontaine 's position is exactly that which the European Parliament should take up .
Let me first congratulate you on it .
I would , though , also like to ask you to do the following : as your position is visibly the majority view of this House , you should again expressly communicate this position to Mr Berlusconi and , at the same time , ask him - in order to dispel any doubt - to make a statement in reply .
For if his cultural relativism were really nothing but a misunderstanding , your letter and an appropriate response from Mr Berlusconi would be decidedly helpful .
Mr Schulz , I shall certainly send Mr Berlusconi my press release of 11 September , as well as the statement that I made on 19 September following the meeting that I gave .
The Arab League ambassadors had wanted to meet me personally in order to outline their concerns to me and , at the end of this important meeting , which was both intense and worthwhile , I made a statement that could not be any clearer .
I shall also send my statement of 22 September , declaring that the European Council is firmly committed to the fight against terrorism , and in which I solemnly confirm the European Union ' s commitment to protecting democratic and multicultural societies .
And lastly , I shall forward my speech that Mrs Banotti referred to , which I gave to the Heads of State at the exceptional meeting of the Heads of State and Government , and which is very clear .
I could also add the statements that I made on Greek television , as I was on an official visit to Greece at that time .
Madam President , in my opinion , the words of the Italian Prime Minister have been misinterpreted by some , and exploited for internal political ends by others who have even used the platform of the European Parliament to exploit them for the purposes of European politics .
Over 200 Members of this Parliament from the European People ' s Party took part in the convention in Rome , which included the meeting with the Prime Minister , Mr Berlusconi , and they can testify that Mr Berlusconi outlined the government ' s positions and his own personal position on terrorism and the Middle East crisis .
The members of the European People ' s Party who do not belong to our coalition government in Italy can also confirm what the Italian Prime Minister ' s views are . They are not those reported by certain newspapers nor those described by the left in this House .
( Interruption by Mr Schultz )
Mr Schultz , I did not interrupt you .
I would ask you at least to be polite . Clearly , politeness was not part of your education .
Please would you refrain from interrupting and learn some manners above all .
Why are you getting so het up ?
Madam President , rather than concerning himself with the internal affairs of the European People ' s Party , Mr Schultz would do well to concentrate on those of his own group , which has a minority in Parliament and lost the elections in Italy .
Clearly , this irritable behaviour is evidence of the political difficulties currently being experienced by his group .
Madam President , the Italian Prime Minister has made a very practical proposal , and I would like the European Parliament to express its opinion on this matter .
As I said before , the hundreds of Members of the European Parliament from the European People ' s Party who were present at Rome can testify to this .
The proposal is for an incisive European Union economic intervention to support the Palestinian people , so that the economic growth of the Palestinian people can contribute to reducing existing political tension .
This is a subject for debate , a practical proposal made by the Italian Prime Minister to protect and defend the Palestinian people , who are experiencing economically difficult times , in the clear knowledge that it is only by defusing the crisis in the Middle East that the world crisis can be resolved .
And the Italian Prime Minister met with both Israelis and Palestinians .
I would like the Socialist Party to discuss this subject in this House rather than disseminating election propaganda .
The left-wing democrats are in trouble .
Madam President , the left-wing Members appear to be extremely restless .
As I said , they should discuss practical matters rather than using the European Parliament as a vehicle for political and election propaganda .
In Italy , the citizens decided : the centre-right won .
Silvio Berlusconi is Prime Minister and the left has lost .
Madam President , I do not wish to reply to Mr Tajani , but only to make two observations .
I had not interrupted him , but had listened attentively and - which is exceptional for me - had permitted myself to laugh at the particularly clever things he said .
God forbid that that should be prohibited in this House !
Perhaps the situation in Italy has got so that one is no longer permitted to laugh at the government ...
I had not interrupted him , and must moreover say that it would not have been worth it to break into his disquisition .
Madam President , on a point of order .
Following the tragedies in New York and Washington , many other aspects of our lives have inevitably been changed for ever and I would like to ask the Commission to make a statement on the issue of state aids to airlines .
In a small peripheral country such as my own , the survival of a national airline is of vital importance to the economy and already in Ireland over 700 jobs are threatened at Aer Lingus .
I would ask the Commission to lift its ban on state aids to national , particularly small , airlines .
Certainly , Mrs Banotti , thank you for what you said and we shall pass on your request to the Commission .
Madam President , Mrs Banotti has already raised the matter of the effect of the acts of terrorism on airlines .
It is more than airlines : the European tourism industry is Europe 's biggest industry , and the World Travel and Tourism Council estimates at the present time that two million jobs could be lost in Europe .
This is a very serious matter .
I hope the Commission and Council can address this and come forward with some proposals to try and alleviate the situation , because it could be quite drastic .
I have just returned from the United States where hotel accommodation is currently about 20 % of capacity and aircraft are operating at between 25 and 33 % of capacity .
There has been a huge reaction and I hope the Council and , in particular , the Commission can do something to help before matters get really serious in Europe .
Madam President , I have a point of order on the aviation industry in Europe , and in particular the national airline in Ireland which will be bankrupt within a matter of weeks unless the Commission relaxes its guidelines on state aid for the airline industries .
There is also a former state company in Ireland , now privately owned , which services and maintains airlines .
This company is also in serious difficulty .
As Mr Provan mentioned , the tourism industry is in further severe difficulty too after the crisis which followed the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease .
I appeal to you , Madam President , to use your good offices to impress upon the Commission the concern of this House about the impact of the atrocities of 11 September in Europe where thousands , if not millions , of jobs are at risk .
It is extremely important , if this House is to demonstrate its relevance to the lives of the citizens of Europe , that we should use our influence to save these jobs and to ensure that the Commission does not apply rigid , ideologically-based guidelines in the current situation .
Mr De Rossa , this is an extremely important issue and I shall of course forward this message to the Commission .
Mrs Wallström might also wish to give a brief response .
Madam President , of course this has already been discussed at a Commission meeting .
The Commission has been in contact with European and other airlines and there have been discussions about state aid or insurance and how these should be channelled .
I have to refer the matter to my colleague , Commissioner de Palacio , who will have all the details and can give you more information , but I assure you this has definitely been on our agenda and we are interested in finding a solution .
I will raise this issue with my colleagues in the Commission and I hope we can give you , as soon as possible , a complete answer to questions about the airlines and state aid , or help through other channels .
Thank you , Mrs Wallström .
I would also point out that the communication refers to the guidelines for trans-European transport networks and so this issue might also be dealt with tomorrow , when we are given the Commission communication .
Madam President , unfortunately most people have left at this stage but I want to draw the House 's attention to the murder by loyalist paramilitaries last Friday of Martin O 'Hagan , a journalist .
This is just one more example of the grave human rights situation in Northern Ireland .
Human rights lawyers have been assassinated as well by loyalist paramilitaries .
Only a few years ago , Rosemarie Nelson , the mother of a young family , was assassinated by loyalist paramilitaries because she was a human rights lawyer .
There is a serious matter .
We often debate resolutions in this House about human rights lawyers and journalists being assassinated in the exercise of their duty in other parts of the world .
Here is a situation within the European Union that has been going on for a long time .
The situation is extremely grave .
Journalists have the right to expose wrongdoings , human rights lawyers have the right enshrined in international law to represent people in courts .
Yet they are being prevented from doing so and in fact , those brave enough to do so have lost their lives .
It is a real tragedy .
Thank you , Mrs McKenna , for having added to what I said at the opening of the sitting .
Accident at AZF , Toulouse , and EU environmental policy
The next item is the Commission statement on the accident at the AZF factory in Toulouse and the rewriting of the European Union ' s environmental protection policy .
I shall now give the floor to Mrs Wallström .
Madam President , the accident in Toulouse occurred shortly after 10 a.m. on 21 September at the establishment Grande Paroisse in Toulouse .
This fertiliser plant is owned by Atofina the chemical branch of the Total / Fina / Elf group .
Amongst other dangerous substances it held important quantities of liquefied ammonia and chlorine , combustibles , solid ammonium nitrate and fertilisers , as well as methanol .
The effects of what seems to have been a mass explosion of ammonium nitrate were felt far outside the establishment 's boundaries .
According to the latest reports , 29 people were killed , 30 people are still in hospital in a serious condition and in total around 2400 people were injured .
The accident also affected two other chemical plants in the vicinity .
It rendered a large number of houses uninhabitable and affected the electricity distribution system .
Moreover , the psychological after-effects on the population that first believed it to be a terrorist attack are also important .
This accident is perhaps the worst of its kind in Europe since 1921 , when an explosion at the BASF company in Germany claimed the lives of 561 citizens .
Last week a representative of the Total / Fina / Elf group met with the responsible services of my Directorate-General in order to provide detailed information on the accident .
Furthermore , the French Ministry of the Environment has provided information to the Commission .
However , the exact causes of the accident are still unknown and the three investigations under way by Atofina , the Ministry of the Environment and the Attorney-General might take a long time .
AZF was fully covered by the Seveso II directive , which aims at the prevention of major industrial accidents and the limitation of their consequences for man and the environment .
Its classical field of application are chemical plants and storage facilities .
The directive obliges the operator of these facilities to put in place a major accident prevention policy , a safety management system and internal emergency plans .
He / she has to prepare a safety report and send it to the public control authorities .
These authorities have the task of inspecting the site at regular intervals and also of ensuring that its external emergency plans are put in place and tested periodically .
Furthermore , the public living in the vicinity of the plant must be informed of the risks arising from the facility and the behaviour in case of an accident .
The directive came into force in 1999 and replaced the original Seveso directive from 1982 that was adopted following major industrial accidents in the 1970s .
This was the first piece of Community legislation in the field of industrial risk management .
It is no secret that Member States were late with their transposition of the Seveso II directive into national law .
No Member State adopted transposition legislation in time or notified the Commission hereof in time .
Therefore the Commission started infringement proceedings against all 15 Member States for non-communication or incomplete communication of transposition measures .
In the meantime this resulted in the Commission taking five Member States to the European Court of Justice : Belgium , Austria , Germany , Ireland and Portugal .
For France , the Commission decided on 18 July 2001 to apply to the Court for incomplete transposition .
However , I want to make it very clear today that the reasons for the Court appeal being launched against France can in no way be related directly to the Toulouse accident in terms of possible infringement of obligations under the Seveso II directive .
At the moment , despite rumours in the press , the Commission has no indication that there was either a deficiency on behalf of the operator managing the plant and complying with Seveso II or on behalf of the French control authorities responsible for inspecting the site .
According to information received from the French Minister for the Environment , risk analysis , including possible accident scenarios , had been carried out by the site operator but these did not include a mass explosion of ammonia nitrate .
The last updates were made in 2000 and 2001 .
A safety management system was in place and the site was inspected about twice a year .
The last inspection took place in May 2001 .
Internal and external emergency plans were in place .
A land use planning policy established by the prefect imposed restrictions on all new construction activities in the vicinity of the plant .
Let me now come to the follow-up .
Just over a week after the accident it is still too early to draw any conclusions .
The regulatory committee established under the Seveso II directive , chaired by the Commission and composed of representatives of all Member States is going to meet on 10-12 October to discuss , amongst other things , the accident and its follow-up .
What is the repercussion of the Toulouse accident on the foreseen amendment of the Seveso II directive ?
You might recall that after the Baia Mare accident , the cyanide spill in Romania in January 2000 , I created a task force that presented its final report in December last year .
In parallel , after the disastrous fireworks explosion in May 2000 in Enschede in the Netherlands , my services organised two European expert seminars on pyrotechnic and explosive substances .
The expertise and the resulting recommendations went into a draft proposal for an amendment to the Seveso II directive , aiming at broadening the scope and covering establishments that were previously not covered .
The draft proposal has undergone a public consultation process involving all stakeholders and was foreseen for adoption by the Commission in September .
We should move forward with this amendment .
This does not mean we should not take due account of the Toulouse accident .
There is indeed one very important aspect that made the consequences of the accidents in Toulouse and Enschede even worse , that is , the proximity of the establishments to inhabited areas .
The new Article 12 on land use planning in the Seveso II directive aims in the long term at the separation of hazardous industrial establishments and inhabited areas or other locations frequented by the public .
Although the inclusion of such a provision in Community legislation for the very first time represents a major step forward , the Commission and Member States still have to gain experience with its implementation .
Moreover , this provision applies to the planning for new industrial sites , for new housing zones , and does not retroactively apply to existing situations , such as Toulouse , where increasing density of population has led residential areas to continually spread closer to an industrial site that has existed since the 1920s .
In order to assist Member States with the implementation of this provision , a guidance document on land use planning was published in 1999 and plans for a European seminar on land use planning to be hosted by France were already under way before the accident in Toulouse .
In the near future my services will increase cooperation with the Member States in order to develop an appropriate legislative and / or non-legislative follow-up to the accidents in the areas of land use planning , harmonisation of generic risk assessment methods and risk mapping .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on 21 September , Toulouse was struck by a terrible disaster which , as Mrs Wallström said , claimed many victims - 29 people died and more than 2 000 people were injured - and considerable damage was caused to housing , schools , hospitals and universities .
If I may , I would like to pay tribute to the victims and to express our sympathy and support to the injured , to their families and to all those affected by this disaster .
What helps most in a disaster like this is other people expressing their solidarity .
The people of Toulouse have been touched by the number and by the spontaneity of the messages that they have received from France and the European Union , from the Parliament and the Commission .
As Deputy Mayor of Toulouse , I would like to give my sincere thanks to all those who have sent these messages to us .
This disaster also compels us to consider a number of things .
The first is the action the European Union can take to help these towns or regions affected by the catastrophe .
The European Union budget used to include a heading for emergency aid to deal with these disasters , but this was withdrawn .
I am today requesting that this instrument , which helped to put affected regions back on their feet , be re-introduced .
Toulouse is a prime example of a European city with its aircraft and space industries and , in the last few days , I have heard many people asking , when they hear of aid being granted by various sources : ' And what about Europe - what is Europe doing to help us ? '
Since we constantly discuss bringing Europe closer to its people , one of the most obvious ways of doing this would be for Europe to help Europeans in their time of need .
Situations such as that which Toulouse has recently experienced require the use of human resources , such as the fire services , first-aid workers , doctors , hospital and voluntary staff .
Without going so far as to propose the utopia of a European civil protection force , I think that every effort should be made at European Union level , as Parliament recently requested , to enhance the coordination of civil protection expenditure .
We must improve how the system works .
For example , in the disaster in Toulouse , I would have been pleased to see the fire services and first-aid workers from other Member States supporting the remarkable work carried out by the Toulouse fire services .
These are distressing circumstances , admittedly , but this would have done much to help Europe ' s cause .
We often talk of ' zero risk ' .
The recent events , which have plunged the citizens of Toulouse and New York into mourning , show that this certainly cannot be achieved .
What we can do , however , is to reduce the probability of risk by taking careful action .
We must do this at a local level , at a national level , and we must ensure this is done at European level .
I therefore call on the European Commission to take into account the lessons of the disaster in Toulouse when revising the Seveso II directive .
Almost every day , many demonstrations take place in Toulouse , in which thousands of people take part , chanting ' Never again , never again ! ' I would like everyone in this House to respond to them with ' Never again in Europe ! '
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , before I begin talking about the substance of the matter , I would naturally like to express my solidarity with the victims and their families .
I believe that the House has today shown its solidarity , which , in my view , is also essential .
Secondly , my thoughts are also with those of my fellow Members who are more directly involved , due to their responsibilities in the region .
Nor should we forget to praise the efficiency of everyone who immediately rushed to the scene of the disaster to provide assistance , such as the fire services and hospital staff , and of everyone who played a part in organising the support network for the victims and their families .
We must also praise the extensive measures of solidarity announced by the Prime Minister during his visit last Friday to Toulouse , which will enable life to return to a normal footing - if that were at all possible - by re-housing those who have lost their homes and getting children back into school as quickly as possible .
There is also an inquiry underway into the causes of the explosion .
We must have confidence in the French authorities to carry out this inquiry carefully , with a desire for transparency and with a determination to succeed .
In addition to this , what can we do at European level ?
In my view , we must all shoulder our responsibilities , at our own level .
You mentioned this , Commissioner , and I would like to thank you for your comments about France ' s responsibility concerning its obligations under the Seveso directive .
What you said is important .
You also mentioned the debate that is underway on how to best reconcile land use planning , environmental risk , industrial risk and employment .
The work that you have carried out with the aim of revising the Seveso directive should take into account every aspect of this balance .
Many other Members , in addition to myself , will take part in this debate on additional measures which could be envisaged , including at a European level , particularly with regard to monitoring .
There is , nonetheless , a point that I would like to come back to , which is the issue of emergency aid .
Admittedly , we all know that this is a difficult debate , one that was opened during the re-negotiation of Agenda 2000 .
But can we just sit back and watch the disasters that have struck France - namely , the sinking of the Erika , the storms of December 1999 and now the explosion in Toulouse - without demonstrating some European solidarity ?
We must find a way to do this , if not through the use of a heading on emergency aid , perhaps we could see whether there is some leeway within the European Regional Development Fund ( ERDF ) so that , in addition to this strict set of zones that we have put in place , there may be room for a small solidarity package , so that Europe can also manage in difficult circumstances .
Secondly , I hope that the Commissioner will do everything she can at a European level and beyond to remind everyone of their responsibilities , in order to allow land planning policies to take into account , in their fiscal dimension as well , the difficult balance that we must achieve , and also so that the leaders of industry shoulder their responsibilities when compensating victims and repairing the damage .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , I would like to join previous speakers in expressing my group ' s solidarity with the families , the victims ' relatives and the people of Toulouse as a whole .
Given the latest legal information we have at our disposal , and whilst awaiting completion of the inquiry that is currently underway , which will determine the causes of the disaster , what lessons , Mr President , can we draw from this fatal explosion ?
First of all - and this is distressing , truly distressing - history is repeating itself .
It is 33 years since the Seveso disaster , not to mention the other disasters that have occurred , and two European directives seeking to provide the Member States with a harmonised policy in managing major industrial risks will not have been enough to avoid another human tragedy . This is a stark reality that illustrates the limits of a law , even where this is binding and transnational .
We should avoid responding to this industrial catastrophe with a Seveso III directive .
The Liberals consider it imperative , and the Commissioner reiterated this , that , first and foremost , all Member States strictly apply the provisions of the existing legislation , particularly the Seveso II directive , which dates back to December 1996 .
And we still have a long way to go before this can be done , with infringement proceedings launched against six Member States , one of which is France .
You also stated , Mrs Wallström , that all Member States were behind in the transposition of the directive into national law .
So , did the manufacturer , the owner of the site , update the safety report at any point in the last five years , as specifically laid down in one of the articles under the Seveso II directive ?
It is worthwhile asking this question , since at a seminar held in France in 1999 , the European Union network for the implementation and enforcement of environmental law ( Impel ) discussed the causes of a massive ammonia leak at the ' Grande Paroisse ' factory , which is in the Seveso II category , and the finger of blame was pointed at design faults and equipment reliability .
We must conclude that the precautionary principle did not prevail in this case .
Must we reiterate that this risk assessment provides an essential basis for any strategy to prevent and avert all types of disaster ?
And now I come to the key point of this debate , which is , as Mrs Berès has already said , the monitoring of land use planning in areas surrounding these sites .
Employees of the factory are of course affected but everyone living nearby is also a victim of the massive chemical explosion .
The AZF factory was nothing more and nothing less than a time bomb situated less than five kilometres from the centre of Toulouse , a city with a population of 400 000 .
This is not the only example of a city in Europe that has seen a population explosion .
If you draw two lines on a map of Europe , one from London to Milan and the other from Copenhagen to Barcelona , and 200 kilometre corridors along each side of the lines of this X , you will have 65 % of Europe ' s population and 80 % of Europe ' s manufacturing sites , including the dangerous ones , within this restricted area .
In France , there is a national debate on the issue of risks to the urban population .
Three hundred and sixty million citizens of Europe expect , here and now , to see a genuine land planning policy resulting from the unprecedented disaster that struck Toulouse .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank all the speakers who have taken part in this debate , as I believe that , despite our political differences , we know that we must pull together in the face of tragedy .
Mrs Wallström , the title of the statement that you made to us today obviously referred to the accident at the AZF factory , but it also referred to the rewriting of the European Union ' s environmental protection policy because , in my view , this is what poses the challenge .
The accident that occurred at Seveso gave us the Seveso I directive .
This was insufficient .
The accident at Bopal was followed by the Seveso II directive .
I do not wish to see us simply come up with a third Seveso directive , a point that my fellow Member , Mrs Ries , made very well .
In my view , we must change the way we approach these problems as patching up after each successive tragedy can only achieve so much .
Obviously , I agree that we need to further strengthen what already exists , but we must also know when to change tack .
Since today we know that ' zero risk ' is impossible - what has happened recently illustrates this , tragically - and so it is also impossible for people to live alongside a chemical time bomb .
We must therefore move away from risk management towards risk removal .
The removal of risk will not be an easy thing to achieve , let us make no bones about this .
We will not be able to do everything in one fell swoop .
Several things will need to be implemented .
First of all , we need resources .
European resources , resources from other Member States , which will be crucial and which must obviously supplement the resources that the manufacturers themselves will have to provide , because these large international firms are making a profit , because the land that they own , due to their proximity to built-up areas , is worth a great deal on the property market , and also because if they relocate , they will undergo restructuring and will make substantial operational savings .
We need resources , therefore , but we must also avoid causing social problems .
Over the past few days , the people who worked at the AZF factory have been burying their colleagues .
I do not wish to add unemployment to their list of problems - let us not add social crisis and social problems to the environmental and human tragedy .
We therefore must use all our resources to help these people to relocate if the site is sealed off , or help them with retraining if jobs are retained in Toulouse .
We must also be very careful with regard to relocation .
The European Union has always been very sensitive to the question of solidarity and I believe that the large corporations are quite prepared to relocate , but they can quite easily contemplate relocating to the developing world , where there is no environmental protection and no social protection .
In this respect as well , the European Union must make every effort to avoid this type of relocation .
Let us avoid sending our time bombs and dangers to other parts of the world .
Lastly , now might be a good time , when discussing relocations , to consider the purpose of the products that are manufactured in the companies concerned .
The factory that exploded produced fertilisers .
Is there still a need today for us to flush more nitrates into the groundwater of Europe ' s soil ?
It may also be the time to question whether some production methods are not perhaps obsolete .
I am calling upon you , Mrs Wallström , and via you I call on the Commission as a whole , because it is Europe ' s turn to speak .
Defining this general framework clearly falls within Europe ' s remit .
Due to the scale , frequency and almost unavoidable nature of these accidents , I believe that a pact of confidence has been breached between the people of Europe and the regulatory framework that we are supposed to implement .
I think that we must restore this confidence as a matter of urgency .
We are , I believe , now awaiting specific and firm proposals from the Commission .
We should not be satisfied with purely cosmetic measures .
We need political measures .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , like other Members from the region , I was in Toulouse at the time of the explosion .
Since then , I have met with several employees , residents and friends who have been affected by this disaster .
I wish to point out that when we talk about suffering , trauma and shock , we are talking about men and women whose lives have been deeply wounded and their anger is in proportion to this shock .
I wish to pay tribute to the memory of the victims and also to the local authority workers , the emergency and medical teams , the Electricité de France employees and all the men and women who , with their skills and goodwill , gave their energies to serve the general interest .
It is also at times like this that we rediscover the importance of public services and their staff as a tool for serving the general interest .
Many political leaders have spoken of the absurdity of locating this type of chemical plant near to large urban centres .
It is worth making the point that wherever this type of industry is located , there are men and women working .
In a far-off desert or in the centre of Brussels , if the factory blows up , scores of workers will lose their lives .
The first question we should address is that of making these industries as safe as possible .
Admittedly , the debate on the location of sites has been opened , but this aspect cannot be considered unless there are major improvements in inspection and safety conditions .
The entire situation has changed .
It is my view that the Seveso directives need to be reviewed .
Let us use what we learn from this disaster to improve regulations on safety and on respecting the environment .
We must come up with new , much more restrictive regulations on the way these plants are run and , above all , on the resources available to inspection bodies .
By way of anecdote , a terrifying one , the inspection body responsible for the Midi-Pyrénées region has 17 inspectors to inspect over 2000 companies .
Amongst the first factors thrown up by the investigation , I know that the investigation is not over , but nevertheless , there are many indications that the company ' s management took a rather irresponsible approach to risk management .
We must draw the obvious conclusions from that .
Following the disaster , we are discovering serious safety lapses in the chemical industry in other parts of the country .
This review process must be undertaken in tandem with a mission whose work is open to the whole of Europe and which has the task of carrying out an assessment of European safety .
Inspection bodies must publish their results .
The investigation in Toulouse must be transparent and must involve employees and local residents .
I therefore call on Parliament to state its support for an exceptional risk assessment procedure in Europe and to review the directives .
Toulouse is today a city in shock , in terms of the physical environment , psychologically and in terms of the direct and indirect consequences for employment and for businesses located near the site .
Toulouse needs financial and logistical aid .
The Union must demonstrate its capacity for solidarity at times of crisis .
Will this require exceptional emergency funds ?
I am not sure , but the European Commission could , for example , contact the city , the département and the region to sound out their logistical needs .
In this situation , the mobilisation of European engineers and support teams could , in symbolic terms as well as being effective , demonstrate the commitment of the European Union .
' Never again ! ' ' Never again ! ' is what tens of thousands of Toulouse ' s citizens are shouting and calling for .
' Never again ! ' was what the communities affected by the oil slick from the Erika shipwreck , demanded .
Once again , the approach of profit , job cuts and investment has led to a lapse in safety and has caused an ecological and human disaster .
In order to confront this , we need further public regulation , more rules on inspection and more resources .
We know that people are initially angry with the company ' s bosses , but they will turn on us next and this fury will be unleashed on us , the political leaders . And they would be right to do so .
Our task is to produce rules that benefit the community , not to bow down to the dominance of private interests .
Mr President , as our fellow Member , Mrs De Veyrac , deputy Mayor of Toulouse , sadly stated , on 21 September 2001 , the ammonium nitrate warehouse in the AZF chemical factory in Toulouse exploded , causing the death of 29 people and injuring 2 500 .
A disaster of this scale requires the competent authorities to provide information on the exact causes of the explosion , out of respect for the victims , their families , and for all communities living near a site with a Seveso classification .
Was this an accident , a malicious act or a terrorist attack ?
Before accusing the chemical industry of failing to comply with the precautionary principle , let us consider the results found by the chemists and specialists in ammonium nitrate , which confirm that there is no basis for the theory of a gradual decomposition of the product that caused the explosion .
Ammonium nitrate is a stable product , and the investigators make the point that this type of product cannot explode unless it comes into contact with intense heat , as proven by the very serious precedents in Silesia in 1921 , in Texas in 1947 , in Brest , in France , in 1947 .
Furthermore , the staff representatives at the AZF plant vigorously repudiate the description of a sink-factory .
Whatever the cause , it would be wise to produce a list of the most dangerous sites and to relocate them away from housing .
On the other hand , it is , of course , inconceivable to prohibit by law the establishment of high-risk chemical industrial plants .
These would be forced to locate abroad with foreseeable consequences for the economy and business confidence .
We would certainly have to amend European legislation which , although dating from 1982 and 1996 , is not retroactive . We would have to increase the vigilance of inspection services and authorities over industrial sites with a Seveso classification , or even make access to dangerous sites more secure .
The approach to adopt will depend on the outcome of the investigation , which we hope will be completed with complete frankness .
Mr President , I would like to join other Members in expressing my condolences to the families involved in the tragedy that has taken place .
I also share some of the opinions of previous speakers .
I would like to insist on one point , however : I believe that the system based on prohibition , the Seveso system , is not sufficient .
The tragedies taking place recently are demonstrating that we are experiencing phenomena which can only be reduced , if not eliminated , by means of integrated treatment .
The issue today is town and country planning .
Europe has an old and antiquated system in which all towns wanted to have their industries and it seemed that quality of life was linked to everything being together .
A town with many shops , many industries and all within an accessible area .
Nevertheless , the scale , the risk and the dimension of our companies today demonstrate the serious problems that this entails .
We cannot continue to allow town and country planning to be completely subsidiary .
We must be capable of selecting basic elements in order to create a European area of security , in the way that is being done in other areas , such as food safety .
We must recognise the need for an area of security in the field of town and country planning .
And the countries must accept it .
And in the same way that any town and country planning accepts protected natural areas , measures of this type will also have to be accepted .
In this respect , I regret the fact that , in the version of the environmental action programme which we have received from the Council - the sixth - with regard to which we presented proposals on the urban environment and inhabited areas , certain aspects have been removed which our group considers important .
We believe that it is a matter of urgency to establish environmental strategies , to implement risk studies , also in industrial areas , to create specific industrial areas far from towns , to penalise those builders or local authorities who allow anything for the sake of construction , and of course establish risk indicators which are incorporated into a European policy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I should like us , through our fellow Members from Toulouse who are with us today , starting with the President of the sitting , to express our condolences and our solidarity with all the victims of the tragedy in Toulouse .
I , like other speakers , would also like to pay special tribute to the marvellous chain of emergency aid workers , both professional and voluntary , that was put together in Toulouse and , in particular , to the enormous dignity shown by the people of Toulouse in these extremely difficult circumstances .
What happened there is unimaginable .
The death toll is indeed terrible , but is much lower than it might have been , given the unbelievable force of the explosion and the huge damage caused by this explosion in a heavily populated area .
I agree with Mr Onesta when he says that , since there is no such thing as zero risk , especially in industry , we must now take stock and change our approach .
In other words , we must apply the precautionary principle in land use planning . This means , whenever possible - and it will , unfortunately , only be possible in very limited cases - relocating businesses that are at risk , whilst protecting jobs .
This is a concern that other speakers have also expressed . It would be particularly unfair for workers in industry to face an added risk - a social risk , that of losing their job - in addition to risks at work .
The problem is also , and , perhaps , mainly , one of controlling urban development because , and we must be honest about this , in many cases , residential areas have merged with industrial areas .
Near to the site in Toulouse , there was a major shopping centre .
In my municipality , which has a factory just like the one in Toulouse , building permits are still being issued for communal housing , less than 800 metres from the site .
Mainly , Commissioner , I would say that the draft amendment to the Seveso II directive must take account of these problems of urban growth , not least by increasing the responsibilities of businesses but also of the elected authorities that issue building permits .
Lastly , I should like to echo the feeling of helplessness that I experience as a Member of the European Parliament every time that we have the misfortune to encounter this type of event .
The European Union does not do all it can when faced with disasters of this scale .
Every time we give the commitment to move closer to the citizens of Europe , we must remember that we are not there when they go through distressing or intensely emotional times .
I asked Commissioner Barnier this question after the storms in 1999 , and it has come back to haunt us .
I know that the credit line has been discontinued , but since this is the case , let us at least imagine the Utopia , as Mrs de Veyrac said , of a Eurocorps for civil defence , which is happening for the army .
In other words , a rapid action force could also quite easily exist in the field of civil defence .
For years we have been warning about risks of accident . For years we have been afraid that a disaster would happen and for years we have fought against the establishment of these plants in the Toulouse area .
And now , when the explosion occurs , we have the sudden shock that stunned us at a distance of twenty kilometres , the contradictory information , the toxic cloud , a prefect who is asking to have his house proofed for leaks , all the windows shattered , the reflex to go and pick one ' s children up from school , the anguish of seeing cars upside down , windscreens shattered , bloodied drivers wearing masks , the joy of finding one ' s daughters , terrified and sheltering in the only classrooms whose windows remain in tact , relieved to see us .
Going home , unable to telephone , no means of communication and finally hearing about friends who are in shock , injured or in hospital .
Then , after the anguish , the fear and after the suffering comes the time for anger .
More than 5 000 of us gathered on the streets of Toulouse on Tuesday and more than 30 000 on Saturday , all shouting ' Never again ' .
The disaster in Toulouse is hugely revealing .
First of all , it shows the limitations of local democracy and , in particular , of land use planning policies .
Town councils have not used their land use plans to keep residential or commercial areas away from danger .
There is no safety programme in place . There has been no consultation with local associations or with residents , despite the dangers .
Locally elected representatives are equally responsible for what has happened .
The disaster also lays bare the policy of industrialists who , for the sake of profit , make not only their employees run risks , but also the surrounding community .
Lastly , the disaster has shown up the loopholes in the Seveso directive and in the policies implemented by the European Union .
This disaster has shown the limitations of risk management policy .
An overhaul of European legislation is essential .
We can no longer put up with the existence of such huge risks .
We must have a risk prevention policy .
The legal liability of industry in the event of an accident must be better defined and increased .
Member States must transpose European Union directives , and also comply with existing directives on environmental protection .
The liability of policymakers must also be confirmed .
Inspections must be stepped up and the responsibility of inspectors , who must be trained to European standards , must also be laid down .
Chemical as well as nuclear bombs are located near to most European cities and yet no assessment of the risks has been made .
I do not want to play the role of Cassandra , but I would not wish anyone to experience what we in Toulouse went through on 21 September .
My thoughts go to the victims of the explosion , to the men and women who died working at the AZF factory in Toulouse and who join the ranks of all those who die every day in a work-related accident because their companies have given priority to profit over safety .
My thoughts also go to the men and women who died in the street or at home because the government and the town hall did not want to impose the necessary measures to ensure that the factory was not a bomb waiting to go off , a danger to everyone working there and to everyone who lived nearby .
Whatever the initial cause of the explosion , it is unacceptable that it should have turned into such a disaster , all because precautions were not taken .
To bring down costs , expenditure on maintenance and storage was reduced , jobs were cut and with complete disregard for safety , work was given to sub-contractors who employed under-trained temporary staff .
The TotalFinaElf Corporation , which already bears guilt for the Erika shipwreck , is fully responsible .
Putting the requirements of profit before those of safety is a crime . It is murder and the authorities that have allowed this to happen share the guilt for this event .
TotalFinaElf , which last year made the greatest profit ever seen by a French company , has the cynicism to toss FRF 20 million to the victims to cover damages that are estimated at FRF 8 billion at the very least .
Not to mention the pain of the victims ' families , which cannot be compensated for .
The material damage must be paid for in full by the Elf Corporation and above all , this must never happen again , in Toulouse or anywhere else in France , or Europe . This will require very strict inspection measures for these types of companies , with the participation of the workers and under their supervision .
Mr President , the Erika , storms , Toulouse , I hope that we will not have to add Carling to the list , a chemical plant that is 50 km from here as the crow flies and near to my home in Lorraine .
How many more deadly signs do we need , Commissioner , before we agree to discuss our society ' s future ? Our society is adrift , like a wayward ship set to a faulty automatic pilot .
Are we still going to accept as inevitable , in the name of employment and the all-powerful economy that communities should continue to live at risk , as they do in Toulouse and elsewhere ?
Were these communities informed of the risks that they faced ?
It would appear not .
On the other hand , the communities that are aware of the risks , with ecologists at the top of the list , have been calling for drastic measures for years , such as improving factory safety and of course , the closure of the most dangerous ones .
Unfortunately , in Toulouse , the worst imaginable scenario occurred .
Of course , no chemical factory , no nuclear power plant , particularly following 11 September and the appalling terrorist attack on the United States will be out of bounds , the appalling now having become possible .
This must by no means prevent our countries , with the European Union leading the way , from being able to adopt the measures necessary to guarantee the citizens the highest level of safety in their workplace and in their everyday lives .
The Seveso I directive represented a huge step forwards .
Seveso II is an improvement on this but has yet to prove itself , since it has not yet been fully implemented .
The investigation will tell us whether , in Toulouse , its provisions were being implemented , but this looks unlikely .
Did those responsible not consider such a disaster to be highly improbable ?
What Europe needs today is more than just a Seveso III .
First of all , however , I hope that we do not give in to populism by giving the impression that with one wave of a wand , we could transfer these high-risk factories to another place , a more distant and safer place .
No high-risk factories should be relocated to developing countries , in the same way that it would be a mistake to consider transplanting these factories into the countryside .
Secondly , specific industrial sites must be defined , while - let us remember , Commissioner - large amounts of money and European funds have been provided to regenerate industrial wasteland and convert some of it into theme parks .
It would have been more appropriate to use these places to build factories with stricter regulations .
Thirdly , it is absolutely crucial that the Commission present , as rapidly as possible , its draft directive on environmental responsibility , which is the only solution that will force negligent or even unwilling factory owners to comply with restrictive regulations .
Lastly , we need to ask : what kind of society do we want to build ?
If we carry on as we are , we will be authorising production of chemical molecules whose impact on health or potential risks when transported or manufactured we do not know .
This is our social model , which must be completely changed in order to guarantee future generations a life free from terrible accidents and danger .
Mr President , the Total / Fina / Elf group is already guilty of committing a crime against the environment through the shipwreck of the oil tanker Erika and has acted criminally , once again , with the explosion of the AZF factory in Toulouse : 29 people are dead , more than 2 500 injured and a whole community ravaged .
Like my fellow speakers , I fully share the pain of all men and women in Toulouse and most particularly , the pain of the victims ' families .
It is our duty , however , to ensure that everything is done to clarify responsibilities .
First of all , the responsibilities of TotalFinaElf , who allowed the stored fertiliser to turn into a chemical bomb by cutting costs on production , inspections and safety .
TotalFinaElf must pay . It must compensate the victims and guarantee the salaries of its employees given that it has the cheek to announce aid for the community that totals one year ' s salary for just one employee : its managing director .
Next , there is the responsibility of the public authorities , the local council which , for the sake of business taxes , allowed a chemical plant to exist in a working class residential area .
Also the government itself , which waited until 1999 to implement the Seveso II directive , which was voted for in 1996 , and was a clearly inadequate directive .
Legislation must be strengthened and its implementation must be verified by independent inspectors from within the public service .
The safety of people and the environment is too serious a matter to be left to shareholders and speculators .
It is for communities , employees , unions and workers ' associations to determine , through a public and democratic debate , which types of production are socially useful or are considered to be too dangerous .
This kind of choice cannot be left to the discretion of people who have proved to be unable to guarantee people ' s safety .
It is the responsibility of a public system of management , under the control of the community at large and the employees .
Let us not allow the law of profit to pollute and murder again .
Indeed , Never again !
Mr President , firstly I have to remind you that we do not yet know the exact causes and the series of events .
It is estimated that it may be a year before we know all the details relating to the causes of this accident .
It is important to remember that first of all we have to look at exactly what happened and what caused this terrible accident in Toulouse .
Secondly , I would like to talk about responsibility , which , first and foremost , lies with the operators of hazardous facilities .
Legislation cannot solve all of these problems .
Responsibility here has to be clarified - and it lies with the operators of this plant .
One of the basic problems is the so-called urban sprawl - the problem of land use planning .
This plant was established in the 1920s .
As you know , the Seveso II directive concerns new facilities , as well as the rules on informing the public , etc .
You also know that this is an extremely sensitive issue with the Member States , and until now responsibility for land use planning has rested at national , regional and local level .
This is , then , a very sensitive issue and we are not yet empowered to take decisions on all relevant aspects .
So what can and must we do in a situation like this ?
We have to ensure that our legislation is updated and try to make provision for and anticipate the improvements required to our legislation in order to prevent these accidents from happening again , although we are aware that we will never be able to prevent all accidents .
Unfortunately , we will probably be faced with accidents again , but everything we can do we must do .
That is why , once we have established the causes of this accident , we will also enter into an open and transparent process of consultation and discussion with Member States and with all involved stakeholders in order to see what we can do to improve our existing directives and make them more effective in trying to prevent this type of accident .
We should also move ahead with what is already on the table - the amended Seveso II directive - because of previous accidents .
We should not delay in moving forward with the amended directive , but we should definitely be involved in following up this accident to ensure that we have done everything to our existing legislation to prevent it from reocurring in the future .
Mr Savary 's idea to employ the precautionary principle in land use planning is an excellent starting point , and we will definitely follow up that particular proposal .
I should also like to inform you of what happens when an accident like this occurs in one of the Member States .
As you know , we have a Civil Protection Unit that is immediately activated to offer the Member State in question the help and assistance of the network of different experts in all Member States .
France did not ask for any such assistance from our Civil Protection Unit .
We have tried to bolster our civil protection activities in order to have , for example , joint training and a much more effective network of experts of every kind .
For example , I was in Brittany after the Erika oil spill , when France needed help with bird cleaning .
Cooperation in such a specific area in Europe to establish such a unit that can be activated immediately is possible .
In an accident like this , France was offered all possible expertise from other Member States .
If we use a strengthened Civil Protection Unit in the best possible way , it can play the so-called ' green-helmet ' role as a force that can be put in place immediately to help and act when accidents like this happen .
So we will definitely follow this up in a careful and coordinated way , in cooperation with the Member States , in order to see what more is needed as regards prevention .
As you have all said , our thoughts are with the victims , rescue workers , relatives and people in the Toulouse area .
We will continue to offer our help and assistance .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
Environmental noise
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0296 / 2001 ) by Mr de Roo , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive relating to the Assessment and Management of Environmental Noise [ 6660 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0245 / 2001 - 2000 / 0194 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , our citizens are increasingly affected by noise .
Ten years ago , the European Commission estimated that the lives of a quarter of our citizens were disrupted by it .
These days , the European Environmental Agency notes that thirty percent of Europeans suffer from noise pollution .
That is an increase of twenty percent over a ten-year period .
In my own country , the Netherlands , the number of people burdened by noise is as high as forty-three percent .
More than ten million citizens in Europe have sleeping disorders .
All citizens in Europe are entitled to the same protection against unhealthy noise levels .
Unfortunately , our Environment Ministers do not share our opinion .
Unfortunately , the Council has not backed the proposal of the huge majority of the European Parliament at first reading to establish four daughter directives .
These daughter directives pertain to motorways , air traffic , railways and factories .
That is why the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy proposes four daughter directives yet again .
What the European Parliament wants is an all-round approach .
The intention is to reduce aircraft noise at European level and to prescribe the same noise standards around busy airports in order to protect our citizens .
To bring down the noise of lorries and cars at European level and prescribe the same noise standards along busy roads .
To curb the noise of trains at European level and prescribe the same noise standard along busy railway lines .
To decrease noise in factories and ensure that only a small proportion of this noise penetrates into the outside world .
The Council has adopted the same opinion as the Dutch Environment Minister , Mr Jan Pronk , namely that noise is only a localised problem .
Our Environment Ministers expose our citizens to increasing levels of noise .
With regard to noise generated by road traffic , aircraft and trains , the Environment Ministers propose only a weak declaration but no binding legislation .
There are now only a few European noise standards in place which relate to , for example , household appliances , lawnmowers and high-speed links .
We desperately need European noise standards pertaining to aircraft .
Far greater steps are possible technically speaking , and Europe must render these compulsory .
European standards for lorries and cars are either non-existent or far too weak .
The tyre directive is a case in point .
Low-noise tyres may be available on the European market , but they are not yet a compulsory requirement .
By means of low-noise asphalt , an enormous noise reduction of ten to thirteen decibels can be achieved .
These technical advances must be incorporated in European policy .
In addition to European standards for high-speed trains , we also need standards for ordinary passenger trains and for goods trains .
The Council did agree to harmonising the measurement and calculation of noise .
There are currently fifty-one different methods used in Europe .
These are reduced to two by means of the same directive : Lden and Lnight .
Unfortunately , the Council dropped a few stitches in the process .
The Environmental Committee has offered to pick those up .
Similarly , most members of the Environment Committee have dropped a few minor stitches .
That is why the Group of the Greens , in tandem with the Socialist Group , is tabling four extra amendments .
Somewhat less high noise levels should also be measured .
The European Commission shares that opinion , and I invite the Commissioner to confirm this in public .
The common position states that the goal of the action campaigns is to mitigate noise .
In plain English , this means noise screens and double-glazing .
But that is not enough .
The action campaigns must also aim to reduce noise .
The majority of the Environmental Committee have adopted the Council ' s position that a Member State must be able to establish its own noise indicator Lden .
That means that measurements no longer need to be harmonised but that the extra protection of the night can be reduced by a factor of ten , namely from eight to six hours .
That is pandering to the lobby and has nothing to do with the cultural discrepancies that exist between our peoples .
Precisely that eight-hour period of sleep is essential to everyone .
That is why we have tabled another common amendment in this instance .
I call on all my fellow MEPs to give this matter some more thought , and not to allow themselves to be used by the lobbies on Wednesday but to give priority to the health protection of our citizens .
Mr President , environmental noise is a very old problem that for a long time , has not in fact been taken seriously .
But it is a problem which is affecting many European citizens on a daily basis .
Furthermore , the economic damage it incurs is enormous , running into the tens of billions of euros annually .
I therefore welcome the proposed directive with open arms and certainly also embrace the rapporteur ' s suggestions to turn it into a framework directive .
There has been much debate about the directive in this House , and unfortunately I have recently doubted on occasion whether all those taking part in the debate had actually read the proposal properly .
Indeed , and I will repeat it once again , this is not about laying down the same noise standards in Europe .
It is true that Europe boasts great cultural diversity , which means that what is experienced as disturbing in one country is not necessarily considered to be troublesome in another Member State .
I do not want to go into that diversity , for that is not what today ' s debate is about .
So what is it about ?
It is about measuring noise .
That should be done in a uniform way across the European Union .
For that purpose , a formula will need to be established on the basis of which maps can then be drafted .
The population will subsequently need to be informed of what would come under noise pollution .
On the basis of that information , which is measured everywhere in Europe in the same way on the basis of the same formulas , action campaigns can then be developed at local level .
I therefore repeat once again , and I would like to cite the European Commission in its explanatory statement , it is not the intention to establish limiting values which apply to the entire European Union .
What we will need to do , however , is to avoid situations we have at the moment , for example , in my own living environment .
For surely it is unacceptable that in one part of Europe , my region of Maastricht , an airport is not allowed to expand , while less than thirty kilometres down the road , in Belgium , based on more flexible requirements , a new airport is being opened without the slightest problem .
The population has everything to do with this .
In my opinion , ' shopping ' distorts the market and should be prevented by the European airline companies .
Measuring methods are harmonised on the basis of a formula which takes into account - and that is something that needs to be explained to my fellow MEPs once again - the differences between ' day ' and ' night ' , the population density , but also the cultural diversity , which means that in Portugal or Spain , different ' day ' and ' night ' hours can be established .
The people in the south worry about the disturbance of the pace of life , but that is not a constant .
I should like to express a personal opinion on one other point .
All the other opinions I have expressed were on behalf of the group .
A great deal has been said about whether military airbases should or should not fall within the scope of the directive .
Although that aspect has meanwhile been removed from the directive , it has been revived by the rapporteur .
What I need to get off my chest - and I cannot explain it in any other way - is that I believe that military airbases should also be measured .
Especially in this day and age , everyone is of the opinion that military aviation should be given free rein .
I , too , am in favour of this , but that does not mean that they should not be subject to measurement .
That has nothing to do with offering slots .
Most proposals have been re-instated from the original Commission proposal .
That should in itself not be problematic .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my group supports the line taken by the rapporteur , as indeed it did at first reading and also in the discussions and votes in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
The most contentious points , namely environmental noise around airports and also military airbases , are no longer on the table at this reading .
The Joint Statement lags behind the precise formulations of the Commission 's proposal , but a long way behind Parliament 's requirements for the European noise abatement policy .
For example , the Joint Statement has deleted all the fixed dates indicating the deadlines from which the noise maps have to be worked out and approved .
The same applies to the action plans .
My group therefore considers that all amendments which reintroduce these precise dates should be agreed and accepted as a matter of urgency .
Information is another point .
Amendment No 22 says that the Member States must ensure that the noise maps and action plans are posted on the Internet two months at the latest after being approved .
We think this is very important .
I believe that we can have general debates about how we bring Europe and its citizens closer together if we do not then shy away from very definite political proposals for putting information policy into action .
It is my view - one shared with both the speakers who preceded me - that the key question is whether any request by us for subsidiary directives will be successful .
I consider it to be progress in itself that there are harmonised methods of noise measurement and common noise indicators .
Such things can , though , be only the beginning .
What are we to say to people if we point out the problem but take no definite steps to solve it ?
I believe that a time limit is needed here .
We cannot wait indefinitely for the next steps in this field to be taken .
It is for this reason that my group has joined with the Greens in signing the request for such subsidiary directives to be presented within three years .
Mr President , it may well be that 100 years ago our cities resounded to the noise of iron wheels and iron hooves bouncing off cobbled stones .
I suspect that made a hell of a din .
Nonetheless the impression is that our society has become noisier with more machinery , hi-fis and stereos , planes , trains and , above all , motorways .
I am all in favour of cutting noise and making life more pleasant , peaceful and calm .
I support the Commission 's proposals for common measurements so that we all know what we are looking at and what we are hearing across the European Union .
I support the idea of noise mapping and I support legislation under single market rules to introduce limits on noise from new equipment being introduced and sold throughout the European Union .
But I am opposed to the Union seeking noise limits on installations in any individual Member State .
I do so , as I have argued strongly in committee , on the grounds of subsidiarity , in the belief that decisions should be taken at the lowest practical level .
In almost every case in the Committee on the Environment , we deal with issues which should rightly be dealt with at European Union level , because they concern matters which affect more than one Member State - transboundary issues .
But today I arrived in Parliament , I opened my window in the office in the Tower and I could not hear Strasbourg airport , I could not even hear the railway .
All I could hear was someone shouting down in the courtyard .
I do not regard noise from airports as a transboundary issue and I am pleased that the committee rejected a number of the amendments which were tabled .
I will be urging my group to reject Amendment No 34 here because it still implies that noise limits should be introduced .
Mr de Roo commented on Amendment No 36 that the eight-hour sleep limit is essential for everyone .
That may be the case .
It may also be the case that a cup of cocoa and a bedtime story are essential for everyone but this is not something which should be done at EU level .
We should not be setting standards for these things .
What is fascinating about this debate , as it was in committee and here now , is that for the best possible reasons - the improvement of health and enhancing the environment - measures have been suggested to us which represent a sort of creeping centralisation which , at the end of the day , makes the European Union seem bossy and interfering to far too many of our constituents .
We should take this opportunity , and indeed every opportunity , to put into practice our belief that wherever possible we should be applying strictly the principles of subsidiarity and making sure that when we take measures on behalf of the environment at European Union level it is because they will genuinely make a difference to individuals and cannot be done by individual Member States .
Mr President , European policy that tackles environmental problems is justified since air and water pollution are issues which extend across our national borders .
Fortunately , that is quite a different story for noise pollution .
I am pleased that I , in the Netherlands , am not affected by the noise produced in Milan or Athens .
In other words , noise pollution is a local , or regional , problem .
The internal market justifies environmental policy at European level , in order to promote fair competition .
This means , therefore , that European requirements can be prescribed for the safety and environmental friendliness of products and processes .
Clear examples of products are emission requirements for cars , lorries and machinery , while waste incineration and energy generation typify processes .
In relation to fair competition , European noise standards can also be prescribed for products , such as cars , motorcycles , lorries , machinery , trains and aircraft .
This is not appropriate for processes since the effects do not transcend borders .
In other words , I am in favour of European standards for low-noise tyres but am opposed to the requirement that the cobblestones be removed from the streets in Brussels on account of European policy .
The Council has already taken things very far in the environmental noise directive .
Parliament ' s amendments , however , go even further , and I cannot back most of these as a result .
In addition , I cannot see the additional benefit a European noise pollution map would afford .
The Member States can map out noise pollution themselves if they so wish .
Moreover , if such a map were to exist already , I would still be opposed to a European policy on environmental noise .
A separate problem is aircraft noise .
Last week , I attended the ICAO Conference in Montreal on behalf of the European Parliament .
Unfortunately , it appeared that outside European , there is little support for stricter noise standards for aircraft .
Stricter noise standards for airfields are also a moot point .
Nevertheless , I remain of the opinion that airfield authorities must be able to pursue a powerful policy of their own by refusing large noise-makers .
Noise pollution caused by aircraft is mainly a problem for people who live near the airports .
In principle , this problem should therefore be solved locally , that is to say by the competent airport authority .
In various airports , this is already the case in that flight bans are issued for the noisiest aircraft or for certain night flights .
The disadvantage in this respect is that the problem could be transferred elsewhere .
In addition , airports in border regions can cause extra problems .
The latter must be solved mutually by the relevant Member States .
In this matter , I should also add that we must not inflate the issue .
If I want to fly to Strasbourg , I do not drive to Rome first because , due to competitive advantages , the flights there are cheaper than from Amsterdam .
As for the aircraft themselves , the problem is not that major technically speaking .
Thanks to modern technology , it is possible to produce aircraft which produce six times less noise than aircraft built thirty years ago .
Since the life of aircraft is about thirty years , the effects of these technical improvements , however , are taking a long time to kick in .
The question is whether this long wait is desirable .
I do not think so .
If we really want to do something about aircraft noise , technical improvements must be carried out more quickly .
The extra cost this entails obviously falls to the traveller who must be fully aware of the actual cost of flying .
Noise policy is a very new thing in an industrialised society that moves ahead simply by means of a great deal of technology and a lot of noise , and , as for the question as to whether noise policy is a subsidiarity issue , one is in two minds when answering it .
Mr Davies and Mr Blokland , if I were from your countries of origin , I too would adduce the argument from subsidiarity , but , my dear Mr Blokland , I know only two airports in the Netherlands whose flight paths , however , are located above my constituency .
All this is relative , and so I believe that we here must talk about whether we can find an air corridor to serve as a model for the compilation of fundamental criteria , and I believe that our views on noise maps are by no means so divergent .
I advocate comparable rules of measurement within the European Union as a matter of principle , and I also believe it to be self-evident that the action plans we arrive at on the basis of these measurements must be drawn up by the member countries , which must also implement and supervise them .
I take a great interest in the question , at what actual point such a regulatory mechanism takes effect , and here the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy has without any doubt gone too far .
One could get the idea from reading the Committee on the Environment 's text that , in future , every country lane will have to have its own noise map .
The wording is doubtless much too vague , and what the Council proposes is quite simply boring .
If you are only to draw up such a noise map when the figure of six million cars per annum is reached , then I suggest you abandon the whole operation .
So , in my view , a good mean value would be a good solution .
As far as the measurement of noise from railway lines is concerned , it would have been good if we could have had another parameter for this , as noise from railways is perceived differently to that from motorways or airports .
Unfortunately , that idea foundered at the committee stage , something which I particularly regret .
I wish to contradict Mrs Ria Oomen , whom I otherwise greatly respect , by saying that I think it almost courageous to state the belief that politicians like us , who concern ourselves with the environment , can decide in an environmental directive whether military pilots fly or not .
Quite apart from the present situation , this Parliament does not have the right to regulate the times of practice flights by the French or the British .
I believe that military aviation should have no place in this directive and nor will it find its way into it .
In other respects , I believe this debate to have been basically necessary .
I wish we could take this document to the Conciliation Committee ; then , Mr de Roo , we would get away from your rather exaggerated demands and arrive at realistic ones that would get us somewhere in the overall scheme of things .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Florenz , I think these directives require us to consider in principle whether we want further exemptions for many governmental bodies , as the individual citizen does not , of course , care whether the aircraft causing the noise are civilian or military .
This is not , then , about ruling on what measures in terms of military tactics should be under discussion , but only about arranging flights in the context of a noise indicator and an action plan in such a way that overall noise does not exceed the level tolerable by individuals .
I believe that we should steer our joint efforts towards finding out what people find acceptable or intolerable and decide on that basis what steps to take .
There is a need for more research on this .
It has , for example , not yet been ascertained whether an average noise level is dangerous , or individual very high levels .
We therefore need even more understanding of causes , effects and connections .
Hence , too , our demand that we should not immediately announce a framework directive to which we attach specified noise indicators and limit values . Rather , we should say that we want to obtain the land registers first and then , in three years ' time , to adopt appropriate subsidiary directives with quality standards for noise policy .
Secondly - and in my view this is at least as important - we should also be carefully re-examining individual noise emission sources in order to find out how , at European level - and perhaps more quickly and more effectively than by means of local action plans - we might achieve a reduction in the noise from aircraft and motor vehicles caused , for example , by their tyres .
So we also need noise reduction at the emission sources .
Mr President , noise pollution is , of course , a reality . Furthermore it is increasing in most countries of the European Union .
It is aggressive not only to the hearing but also to the whole nervous system of citizens and in many cases it alters not only the personality , through reactions such as irritability and insomnia , but it also produces pain in the auditory system .
I come from a southern country and to tell you the truth I have very often thought : ' Who could silence that lawnmower next door !
Who could make the traffic on this street quieter !
Who could stop the music coming from that discotheque on the other side of the block from reaching my windows ! '
And on all those occasions when a citizen such as me has said , ' Why is there nothing or nobody that can stop this noise ? ' , it should be possible for most cases to be regulated , either by the local council , the residents association or the regional authorities .
In other words , at a local level rather than a national level .
As numerous speakers have said , realistically speaking , it seems to me that there are practically no cases in which noise , at the level most citizens suffer it , should be dealt with in a cross-border fashion .
Airport noise has been mentioned , but it apparently affects 1.7 % of the population of a country , while road traffic noise affects far more .
It seems to me that to concentrate on airport noise and not deal on a local level with road traffic , in particular , is a rather absurd form of discrimination against airports .
I am not going to go into that , however .
Above all , I wanted to make it clear once again that there is a difference between the various countries of the European Union in terms of noise and perceptions of it .
In this respect , Mediterranean countries are more noisy , we have a climate which allows us to be outdoors and , in this sense , eight o ' clock in the evening is for us a time for socialising , to be out and to be professionally active .
We could never approve or support a directive which discriminates against other people ' s cultures in this way .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I should like to congratulate Mr Alexander de Roo on his tenacity in the fight against noise pollution .
Noise pollution is very disturbing and can form a threat to health .
Health is tied in with the environment and with the way in which we pollute the environment .
The Sixth Environmental Action Programme is right to devote much attention to this aspect .
This attention must lead to specific measures .
The guiding principle is to reduce noise to a level at which it does not threaten public health .
In this connection , the guidelines and opinions of the World Health Organisation should be taken into consideration .
Noise pollution is local and certainly does not transcend borders .
Solutions must be found by local , regional and national administrators .
We should be careful not to regulate too much at EU level .
Excessive ruling from Brussels is in most countries not appreciated - with good reason - but in few cases , European attention is certainly justified .
First of all , Europe must step in when the noise source exceeds limits , for example in the form of products .
There are already European rules in place for noise pollution , for example pertaining to the noise standards for lawnmowers .
Noise emission standards for certain products , such as cars , pleasure boats , lorries , trains , aircraft and industrial equipment are essential .
A second reason for European intervention is the making available of reliable and verifiable data .
The European Parliament pointed at the lack of data on various sources of noise a long time ago , and a common method must be found for measuring and assessing noise .
And this forms the very essence of the Commission ' s proposal .
Thirdly , general principles must be formulated , such as : the polluter , or noise-maker , pays .
This kind of principle must be transposed in our legislation .
Citizens must - and that is , in fact , the most important point , in my opinion - have clear rights .
In the case of serious complaints about noise pollution , the right to investigation should exist and , if necessary , action should be taken .
Mr President , we all agree that noise pollution disturbs the everyday lives of the people of Europe .
I am however , rather surprised .
We are simply asking Europe to compensate for errors in land use planning that have been made in all of our Member States .
Why , then , should we appeal to Europe , since each Member State can decide for itself what it should do on its own territory ?
We have already adopted measures on tyres and aircraft engines and we can do the same for road surfaces .
This is indeed a huge task , but why should we lay down regulations which , in reality , concern not only Member States but must also take account of differences between these countries and , above all , encourage local authorities to adopt the necessary measures in line with their local situation rather than us deciding for them ?
This is the principle of subsidiarity and I am particularly keen to see it implemented in this area .
Locally elected representatives are responsible for deciding on what needs to be done in each town , county or region .
These are decisions for locally elected representatives .
I am one of them and I know very well what is involved in drawing up a strategic noise map .
We are told about airports , for example .
There are international airports , and there are national airports and there are considerable differences between airports .
The impact of noise is , therefore , different .
Why , then , should we impose standards that will not apply to all of them ?
It should not be forgotten that airports are crucial to the areas in which they are located .
Infrastructures for air transport are a crucial factor for industries , which often choose where to base themselves on the basis of communications links and airports .
Is it worth emphasising that an exception absolutely must be made for military airports ?
I agree with Mr Florenz .
The current situation clearly shows the importance of this provision .
I shall conclude by reminding you that the title of this directive is ' Assessment and Management of Noise ' .
Management is , therefore , preceded by an assessment .
How can we attempt to set limits without a detailed and wide-ranging study , based on commonly established assessment criteria ?
We would need to have precise maps on noise and then ask every Member State to implement effective action plans .
It is also crucial that we involve the public in these exercises , although this can only be done with the agreement of each country and each local authority .
Mr President , Commissioner , it is no exaggeration to say that a significant proportion of the inhabitants of Europe are forced to live with levels of noise which have a serious impact on their health , which is why I think it is important for the Union to launch an integrated strategy to combat noise .
We are currently at second reading and we need to focus on the main issues , as set out by the rapporteur .
If specifications are to be introduced for noise , a matter that concerns the Member States and industry , the Union needs to make specific proposals on broad guidelines , technical assistance for research and exchanges of information , on how to raise the awareness of the various parties and on how the proposed measures are to be applied and controlled .
As far as noise indicators are concerned , I agree with the Council 's position allowing the Member States to move the night period by up to two hours because the southern countries have a different climate from the northern countries and I think this arrangement is essential .
As far as the proposed timetable is concerned , I think the Commission 's initial proposal is feasible and that the Member States should set the administrative process in motion as quickly as possible so that the proposed directive can be put into practice .
Finally , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on his sterling work .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , more and more Europeans are affected by environmental noise , but despite this , the European Union has been slow to implement a common policy in the field of noise .
I therefore agree with the ambitious options proposed by the rapporteur , Alexander de Roo , and I congratulate him on his work .
I supported his report in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy and I support it again now .
I should like to highlight a few aspects in particular .
Firstly , I agree with the idea of transforming this directive into a binding framework directive to be followed by specific directives on noise caused by cars , motorcycles , trains and aircraft .
Secondly , I also agree with setting common noise limits in the areas surrounding all of the European Union ' s civilian airports .
Not only because the noise caused by night-time air traffic is more responsible than any other for depriving the general public of sleep , but also because , as a result of the lack of common regulations in the European Union , we have seen terrible distortions of competition between airports and a lack of fairness towards the citizens of the various Member States .
Thirdly , I welcome the amendments proposed for the joint position on noise indicators .
With these amendments , the Member States can move up to two hours of the evening schedule to the daytime or night-time period , which will enable legislation on noise to be implemented without this affecting the habits and traditions of each country , especially , those of southern Europe .
This new legislation must be implemented as rapidly as possible , but in order to ensure that it is complied with , Member States need to invest very quickly in the technical and human resources that are essential to monitoring and supervising its implementation .
Unless this is done , we will have yet another law that is good , but ignored .
Mr President , this is the first directive that deals with ambient noise , as distinct from noise from a particular common source .
Indeed it is to be welcomed .
I also welcome the recent decision of the Committee on the Environment to restate that this draft directive should be strengthened into a framework directive out of which further , more detailed and specific legislation can follow , in other words , daughter directives .
A one-size-fits-all policy in relation to environmental noise and the different transport sectors , not to mention differing circumstances in Member States , is not satisfactory legislation .
I would like to mention another point .
I do not agree with the views of my colleague , Mr de Roo , in the specific amendments he has introduced on noise at airports and in the environs of airports in this piece of legislation .
That will be for another day as far as I am concerned .
I would like a response from the Commission in view of the opinion of the Advocate-General , delivered on 20 September last , on the preliminary ruling on the invalidity of Articles 2 and 3 of Regulation ( EC ) No 925 / 99 on restricting the use of aircraft at European airports in the interests of protection against noise .
This regulation was based , curiously and questionably , on design criteria rather than performance criteria .
I am referring to the controversial hushkits legislation , an example of how not to do something .
I would appreciate a Commission response .
Could the Commission indicate whether it will be proposing the repealing or amending of this regulation , because this is a most important issue .
We cannot pursue design criteria , as distinct from performance criteria , which favour one jet engine manufacturer over another .
That has got us into difficulties on this issue .
I would appreciate persistence in pursuing the issue of Mr de Roo 's amendments .
In the light of what has happened with the hushkits legislation I would like a response from the Commission .
Mr President , I should like to make a couple of general points and a couple of specific points about this report .
Firstly , generally , I support the common position - it is a useful compromise - but I would not support going any further than that .
This is useful as a framework directive but I would not like to see lots of further directives springing from it .
We need to be very careful in applying the principles of subsidiarity , a view which is being widely expressed across the Chamber .
I am not sure that we would have any credibility whatsoever as a Parliament or as a European Union if we started to dictate to our citizens what hours they can or cannot sleep .
This is a matter that should be determined for them at a local level .
If an airport , for instance , is located in the centre of a city , then the limit values that should be acceptable there are completely different to those at an airport located out on a peninsula in a quiet rural area .
Why should not a particular community seek to set up an airport , for instance as a cargo hub , that can experience noise pollution in excess of what a large city should produce ?
This is a matter for local authorities and for national governments and should not be a matter for this Parliament and for Europe .
I should like to ask those people who wanted to include military aircraft and military airfields within the scope of this directive , whether they are really saying , as Europe is , at the moment , in a state of war , that our airforces cannot operate at night or with planes that are too noisy , that they cannot defend our freedoms against terrorist attacks if their aircraft are too noisy .
I suggest that if that proposal is being made seriously , it would be laughed out of court across Europe .
I am in favour of legislation laying down noise limits for specific projects , but we really are going far too far in many aspects of the amendments proposed in this directive .
Mr President , first of all I should say that we are not trying by any means to suggest that people across Europe should go to bed at a certain time or laugh in certain places only , or to harmonise any of the different customs and cultural traditions in Europe .
The proposed directive on the table today , following on from our 1996 Green Paper , aims to develop a new noise policy to tackle noise which affects people , and not only noise from individual sources .
This will be done by drawing up harmonised noise maps to assess the noise exposure situation across the Community ; informing the public about noise exposure and its effects ; requiring authorities in Member States to develop action plans to achieve the required noise levels ; and providing the European institutions with information on environmental noise , in order to assess the situation and develop further action .
There are 51 different ways to measure noise , but could we not agree on the means of measuring it within the Community ?
That is the first step - actually drawing up these noise maps .
With regard to this last topic , I understand the concerns expressed by some Members who have tabled amendments making the case for proposals for daughter directives as of now to set new limit values for sources and environmental noise .
However , the success of the innovative noise policy we wish to develop relies notably on the quality of the data we will be able to gather .
At the moment , the lack of such information is obvious , notably due to the lack of harmonisation of the assessment of noise exposure within Europe .
The Commission believes that it would be premature at this stage to come up with proposals setting new limit values for noise .
We already have a raft of market access legislation which sets limit values for different kinds of road vehicles , for example .
It will be simpler and quicker to tighten the noise standards in existing legislation than to introduce new daughter directives .
We will consider what these standards need to be once we have the evidence from strategic noise maps and will , of course , report back to the Council and Parliament .
For these reasons , we cannot accept the amendments introducing daughter directives and limit values , but we are willing to propose further actions as soon as possible , which is why we wholeheartedly accept amendments strengthening the timetable .
The directive does not concern specific sources such as aircraft engines and hushkits .
The Commission has not yet had time to reflect on the ICAO decision last week , but we will of course come back as soon as we have had a chance to do so .
Moving on to the detail of the 36 amendments adopted by Parliament 's Environment Committee , we are able to accept 28 of them , in full , in principle and / or in part .
We can accept Amendment No 1 , which alters the title , to make the proposal a Community framework for the assessment and management of environmental noise .
However , as I said earlier , we believe that it would be premature to set new limit values , and thus we cannot support Amendments Nos 2 , 3 , 6 and 33 .
As for the timetable for implementation of the proposed directive , we welcome Amendments Nos 10 , 13 , 17 , 18 , 19 , 21 , 23 and 25 , which propose restoring the dates of the original Commission proposal , and in line with these amendments we can also accept in principle Amendments Nos 15 and 16 , which seek to reinstate tighter deadlines , although we would have more reservations on the deletion of the two-phase approach for roads and railways .
In this respect , we cannot accept Amendment No 20 .
Several amendments also help clarify the text , and , furthermore , we accept Amendments Nos 4 , 7 , 8 , 14 , 27 , 28 and 29 .
We can accept in principle Amendment No 5 , which introduces four important principles , though we would not wish other principles to be excluded .
With regard to Amendment No 9 , which seeks to reinstate the definition of human health , we support the first part of this amendment , while the reference to the World Health Organisation seems superfluous at this stage .
On the harmonisation of the common noise indicators , Lden and Lnight , Amendment No 11 makes the case for the compulsory use of these indicators for acoustical planning and noise zoning , while Amendment No 34 reintroduces the definition of an action plan being ' designed to reduce noise where a limit value in Lden or Lnight is exceeded ' .
Within the Council an agreement was reached to use common indicators only for the purpose of strategic noise mapping , while the need for further harmonisation of indicators was postponed for consideration in the review proposed in Article 11 .
Therefore , I am afraid we cannot support Amendments Nos 11 and 34 .
However , since the directive now limits itself to strategic noise mapping , it is logical to support the principle of Amendment No 12 .
Besides this , we also welcome Amendment No 36 , which seeks to reduce the flexibility and the definition of the Lden noise indicator , thus making for more comparable results .
On public information , Amendment No 22 requires that the information to the public be published on the Internet within two months .
We welcome the principle of this amendment , but the dissemination of information to the public should not be limited to the Internet .
As for the review clause under Article 11 of the proposal , Amendment No 24 seeks to delete the reference to ' different climates and cultures ' .
Owing to strong concerns expressed in the Council by Member States , we cannot support Amendment No 24 .
In the annexes , we can support in part Amendment No 26 , which seeks to make compulsory the provision of financial information on action plans .
Of the three types of financial information concerned , we would support the provision of budget information being made compulsory , while the others are more difficult to obtain .
Finally , we support Amendments Nos 30 , 31 , 32 and 35 to Annex VI , which partly restore the original provisions proposed by the Commission on the technical specification of strategic noise maps .
I thank the European Parliament and the rapporteur , Mr de Roo , for the detailed consideration given to this proposal and the helpful amendments which have been contributed .
They have undoubtedly strengthened the proposal and also improved its quality .
Mr President , I should merely like to clear up a misunderstanding .
An amendment to measure military noise has not been re-tabled , as was wrongly assumed by some MEPs .
That is therefore no longer a point of discussion .
We have taken note of this .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12 noon .
Pollutants from internal combustion engines to be installed in non-road mobile machinery
The next item is the report ( A5-0287 / 2001 ) by Mr Lange , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Directive 97 / 68 / EC on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to measures against the emission of gaseous and particulate pollutants from internal combustion engines to be installed in non-road mobile machinery [ COM ( 2000 ) 840 - C5-0742 / 2000 - 2000 / 0336 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this very long title essentially covers machines with which we are all familiar , such as lawn mowers , chain saws , hedge trimmers , drills , all of which are mobile and to which environmental legislation has perhaps given too little attention in recent years .
We know , for example , that nowadays a four-stroke lawn mower emits exactly as much in an hour as a car in European category 4 travelling at 150 kilometres per hour .
Or we know that , on some days in June this year , 40 % of carbon monoxide emissions originated from these mobile machines , 40 % of the ozone precursors .
That is why we have to do something about this .
The proposed directive is all right in so far as it goes , but we made a number of critical observations in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
One point was that we wanted to move the timetable forward a bit , in much the same way as legislation in the United States takes place .
We wanted to see if the ' averaging and banking ' model was perhaps after all unjustifiable in European terms , being something of a bureaucratic monster that would be hard to keep a check on in Europe and which , to that extent , would tell us little about whether we could achieve the reductions we were aiming for .
We tackled this issue very ambitiously in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
As the decision was made in July - in other words , quite some time ago - we were able to negotiate with the Council about this legislation .
I can now present a compromise package which the Council is prepared to accept by a large majority , if not unanimously .
It is my opinion that we should in this case go down this route and complete the legislation in its entirety in one reading .
On the one hand , that would help take the burden off the bureaucratic processes here in the European Parliament and in the Council , and on the other would also , of course , help the environment if the legislation could enter into force more quickly .
What is this compromise about ?
Firstly , we want to move the date of entry into force forward for certain categories .
It is about midway between what was decided by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy and what was proposed by the Commission .
Secondly , we want to dispense with the ' averaging and banking ' system because of the bureaucratic difficulties involved in it .
In order , however , that environmental legislation should not produce distortions in competition which are not justified in terms of environmental policy , we want to make exceptions possible for small manufacturers producing 25 000 units per annum , and we also want certain products , the SH2 and SH3 machines , to be subject to transitional rules for a period of five years , for example certain chain saws used high up in trees or certain two-stroke motors that drive drills .
That is contained in Amendment No 30 , so that these machines can be granted extra time - something which , incidentally , corresponds to what industry too has suggested .
I cannot therefore go down the road of excluding certain machines from the directive altogether , but I will say : let us give these machines more time if this is justified on technical grounds .
I would again remind you how , when we were very ambitious in legislating for cars in categories 3 and 4 , we ended up in the Conciliation Committee reaching a reasonable compromise which , of course , met with little approval from the industry at first but which in the final analysis is now appreciated by everybody , because it improves air quality in Europe .
I think that the compromise package that I am able to present to you today points in the same direction , the only difference being that it is on the table already and not only after a conciliation procedure .
In this respect , what lies before us on the table today is not a ' chain saw massacre ' , which one newspaper called it but , rather , a durable compromise to improve air quality in Europe .
Mr President , a rhetorical question often rhetorically asked is : which came first , the chicken or the egg ?
In the case of new clean air technology , it is usually the case that government must first lay the legislative egg from which is hatched the technology to give us cleaner cars or lorries .
In the case of this report , however , the situation is reversed , because in the main the technology is available to clean up the small engines which , as Mr Lange says , can produce more pollution in one hour than a car travelling 150 km .
In many cases cost is the only reason for which we do not have cleaner engines already .
In fact , Honda can produce overhead valve four-stroke engines that easily meet these requirements .
However , there are some important exceptions to this general rule .
I am pleased that Mr Lange has withdrawn his suggestion that the small-producer exemption should be set at 10 000 units per year - which would not have covered any European manufacturers - and supported the Commission 's position of 25 000 , which covers 7 manufacturers .


However , we have some particular problems with this piece of legislation , and in particular with chainsaws and the like .
These are machines which have to be light because they are carried by people ; they cannot be hot , to avoid burning the user ; and they have to be multi-positional - in other words they have to work when upside down .
For those particular uses , two-stroke technology is the only viable option .
We remember seeing those Trabants and Wartburgs coming across East Berlin ; these types of two-stroke engines are dirtier but , in the case of chainsaws , there is no alternative .
The solution put forward by the Commission is to use a system of averaging and banking , whereby dirty engines can be set off against clean engines and clean technology can be saved up for the next year and used to produce some dirty engines the following year .
I do not like this system .
In many ways it is dishonest , because people will be buying engines which they think meet the regulations , when in fact they are dirtier .
Only the big manufacturers who produce a wide range of engines can benefit from this .
This system should not be supported .
However , we need protection for these particular applications and that is why I have tabled my amendment - No 29 - giving a detailed list of exemptions : strimmers , chainsaws , brush cutters , machines for drilling holes in the ice and so on .


I am very disappointed that Mr Lange has not seen fit to support that amendment , because without the protection of this detailed list of exceptions , Mr Lange 's amendment - No 30 - does not go far enough , relying only on some technical committee , some Commission assessment of the alternatives .
Mr Lange should think very carefully about my amendment , and then we would have a deal that both sides of this House could accept .
Mr President , this legislation has often been referred to as the lawnmowers directive .
The fact that MEPs are spending their time discussing lawnmowers will no doubt confirm the impression which too many of our constituents have about the value of our work .
If so , they should think again .
The blue smoke from generators , lawnmowers , pumps and so on tells its own story .
The cumulative effect contributes significantly to air pollution .
So , in contrast to the last debate where I argued strongly that we should emphasise the principle of subsidiarity , this is a matter which is clearly trans-boundary and for both environmental and single market reasons should be dealt with by this Parliament .
On the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy we all get used to industry representatives coming up to us and saying ' don 't do that , the time-scale is too short , the technology is not available ' .
So it has been a pleasure while this directive was passing through Parliament to be lobbied by one company - Honda , to which Mr Goodwill referred - which believes that the standards being proposed by the Commission do not go far enough .
I realise it has its own reasons for this position .
It has made the investment .
It can meet the standards and it wants a competitive advantage over those who have not done the same .
But is that not what we want overall ?
Is it not a good thing for manufacturers to be competing on the basis of setting the highest possible environmental standards ?
I am sorry the committee has not accepted some of the amendments I tabled at an earlier stage .
I am sorry also that too many companies in my own country have failed to look to the future and want to continue producing dirty , polluting equipment instead of investing in the future and setting the highest standards so that they can compete properly across the world .
Here in Europe we should be aiming to set these higher standards subject to the available technology .
I agree with what Mr Goodwill said about chainsaws and the difficulty of reaching those standards insofar as that piece of equipment is concerned .
But I also want to resist , as Mr Lange said , the Commission 's proposals for averaging and banking .
So far as I am concerned it allows manufacturers to continue to produce engines which do not meet the highest air quality standards and perhaps to even put new ones on the market .
After all , we are not saying that the changes have to be made now .
A transition period is built into the proposal to give time for re-equipment .
Amendment No 18 suggests that some financial support and incentives might be given to manufacturers .
I look forward to hearing the sound of my neighbour mowing her grass - and indeed my grass too , I hope - knowing that the air will be free from pollution and that the birds will not cough and splutter in the trees around my home .
Mr President , I wish to express my concern about the Environment Committee 's amendment , listed as No 2 , which seeks to remove what seemed to be the rather sensible averaging and banking option .
Now I note that the committee believes itself to be tackling pollution from leisure machinery which , it claims , accounts for a considerable proportion of the output of ozone precursors , especially on Saturday afternoons in the summer months .
Does the committee understand that a whole range of professional equipment is involved here ?
We have heard about chainsaws , but there are many other examples .
Chainsaws are vital for managing woodlands .
Manufacturers say that if this amendment goes through , they will no longer be able to manufacture these goods .
The net effect of this , according to the practitioners , would be an adverse effect on the environment , and so I urge the House to reject the amendment .
However , knowing how enthusiastically this House embraces all or any legislation , no matter how insane or restrictive , perhaps I will not be sorry if the amendment is actually accepted because , given the amount of damage it will do , it will at least show Parliament and the European Union to be the mad legislative machine that it really is .
Ordinary people have suspected this for many years .
Perhaps in this case you will prove it to them .
Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking Mr Lange and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy for an exhaustive and comprehensive report .
I also want to express my gratitude for the amendments tabled .
We have a basis for achieving a rapid and effective agreement .
Emissions of pollutants from normal motor vehicles have , of course , been subject to regulations within the European Union for more than three decades .
As a result , emission levels are now less than 10 per cent of those that existed before we introduced these limits .
Consequently , the relative importance of other emissions has increased and , at the same time , we can see , as we also can from the Commission ' s Auto-Oil programme , that the problems of air quality in the Community require further measures .
The proposal we are discussing today concerns emissions from engines used in lawn mowers , power saws , leaf collection machines , pumps , generators and similar equipment .
Approximately 25 million machines of this type are manufactured in the world each year and , even if the statistics are rather unreliable , it seems as if such machines account for approximately 10-15 per cent of total emissions of hydrocarbon within the Community .
We have already heard this expressed in another way : that one hour ' s use of a power saw releases as much hydrocarbon as does driving a modern private car more than 2 000 kilometres .
These emissions contribute to ozone formation , which is one of the air pollution problems we have still not solved .
Obviously , we must do something about the emissions from machines of this type .
Products of the type affected by the proposal are sold to the very largest part of the world market , and more than 90 per cent of them are manufactured by large companies active in this market .
It has been important to the Commission to bring about a harmonisation of the legislation so as to make it easier to introduce the legislation quickly , provided of course that this can be done in a way that is in keeping with a high level of ambition in environmental terms .
The only existing legislation in this area is that in the United States .
We consider that this legislation effectively satisfies the environmental requirements , and it has also been a big influence on the way in which our proposal is designed .
At the same time , I must alert you to the fact that there exist not only these big companies in the world market , but also companies which are not active in that market .
Even if these companies account for only a small part of total production , the products are often used in small specialised areas .
Many of the companies are small and therefore have limited resources for developing the technology needed to comply with the emission limits .
We have therefore proposed certain special rules exempting these products and companies , and these are the same types of exemption found in the American legislation .
In my view , the Commission ' s proposal is an excellent example of a win-win situation since we are meeting the needs of industry at the same time as having brought about environmental benefits which would not have been possible if industry had needed to divide its resources to take account of different forms of legislation .
The Commission is able to accept those amendments which enable the Member States to mark products which meet the stage II requirements and to use economic instruments of control to stimulate production and sales of such products even before the limit values become compulsory .
The Commission is also able in principle to accept an earlier time for introducing stage II but is opposed to introducing stage I any earlier because it would put unreasonable pressure on small manufacturers who do not sell their products on the world market .
The Commission is also opposed to changing the definition of small manufacturers .
With regard to the so-called averaging and banking system , we are broadly sympathetic to the questions that have been raised concerning how this is to be used in practice .
However , we think that it is an important feature of the attempts to harmonise this area and that , if it were abolished , European legislation would differ from American legislation .
The reason for introducing such a system is that , where certain products are concerned , it is difficult to comply with the stage II values and that the particular products concerned vary from manufacturer to manufacturer .
In this context , it is important , if the necessary environmental impact is to be achieved , not to exempt products which in reality could meet the requirements .
Through averaging and banking , we have therefore introduced a flexible system which places the administrative burden on those manufacturers who wish to use it and which has a sound impact upon the environment .
If , on the other hand , use is made of the facility to exempt certain products , there is a risk of drastically reducing the impact upon the environment because these exemptions are not offset , as is the case with the averaging and banking system .
We must also be clear that the exempted products we are talking about are equipped exclusively with two-stroke engines , which are the most polluting .
The Commission therefore wishes to emphasise the importance of retaining this instrument as a part of the legislation and opposes the amendments in question .
At the same time , I wish to emphasise that what is essential is not the averaging and banking system as such but bringing about the flexibility , harmonisation and environmental benefits provided by the system .
Exemptions of certain types of equipment should therefore be accepted only after a careful analysis of the consequences , environmental and otherwise .
For that reason , the Commission is opposed to introducing exemptions right now but is able to accept that this will become a possibility through making use of a committee procedure in the future .
We also oppose amendments that exclude the use of two-stroke engines for generators and snow-blowers .
The Commission is prepared to look into the need for further legislation in this area , especially when it comes to particle emissions from two-stroke engines , and wishes to coordinate it with corresponding demands concerning particle emissions from motorcycles and mopeds .
The Commission is able to accept , or in principle to accept , Amendments 1 , 10 , 11 , 13 , 14 , 18 and 28 inclusive , together with Amendment 30 .
The Commission is not able to accept Amendments 2 , 3 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 12 , 15 and 17 , but is open to studying solutions that can bring about flexibility , harmonisation and environmental benefits .
The Commission is not able to accept Amendments 4 , 5 , 9 , 16 and 29 .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.30 p.m.
Expiry of ECSC Treaty
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the framework proposal before us establishes the succession of the European Community to the ECSC .
According to the proposal , the net revenue deriving from the investments of the assets of the Coal and Steel Research Fund would constitute revenue in the EU budget .
This revenue would be earmarked for a specific purpose , namely for financing research projects in the sectors related to the coal and steel industry .
The Research Fund would be managed by the Commission . Out of the amounts yielded by the Fund , 27.2 % would be allocated to the coal sector and 72.8 % to the steel sector .
This breakdown could be modified only by a unanimous decision by the Council .
Lastly , the proposal states that the administrative expenditure resulting from the liquidation , investment and management of the Research Fund will be covered by the general budget .
Ladies and gentlemen , in this brief summary I have not forgotten our role : quite simply , in its future form , what was the first European Treaty , the first stone set in place for the creation of a united Europe , completely abolishes our institution .
I am firmly opposed to the approach of the Commission , whose framework proposal provides for Parliament merely to be consulted on matters concerning the fund ' s financial and technical guidelines .
Such a passive role is envisaged for us that it is completely contradictory to the present-day requirements of transparency and accountability , and Parliament would have even less power than it does in budgetary matters .

In my report , I made a number of demands to the Council : firstly , I asked for the codecision procedure to be applied ; secondly , I requested the full budgetisation of the annual interests of the fund as preallocated revenue , through the creation of a specific budget line in the revenue and expenditure side of the budget following the principles of budgetary specificity and neutrality , in line with the provisions of the Interinstitutional Agreement and the Financial Regulation ; thirdly , I requested that the related administrative costs , estimated at around EUR 8.4 million , should be included in this budget line , for otherwise they would have to be met from the general budget .


In addition , I included the possibility of revising the ratio of appropriations dedicated for coal and steel research respectively , as production will increase as a result of enlargement .
I have noticed that the resolution tabled before the House still contains a reference to the ECB , which I would ask you to disregard : this is an amendment which I have withdrawn and which has remained in the resolution due to a technical error .
With regard to the request for the codecision procedure to be applied , I would stress that the Commission ' s legislative proposal is based on the Treaties and on the Nice Protocol , which states that the Council , acting unanimously on a proposal from the Commission after consulting the European Parliament , is to adopt all the necessary provisions for the implementation of this Protocol .
In practice , Parliament is deprived of any power , despite the fact that the administrative expenditure of the Coal and Steel Fund would have to be met from the general budget .
This means that Parliament would have to approve this additional expenditure and give discharge to the Fund without having any influence at all over the implementation of its activities .
My request for the codecision procedure to be applied is not , therefore , a request for a different legal basis to be used , just for reference to be made to a different article .
Indeed , the Commission ' s document refers to the Treaty establishing the European Community , without specifying any particular article , and to the Protocol annexed to the Treaty of Nice , Article 2 - under which the European Parliament has consultation powers only - a Treaty which , however , is not yet in force and which it is highly unlikely will become effective before July 2002 .
Consequently , we are in a very fluid situation which has never occurred in the past and will never occur again , since the ECSC Treaty is the only Treaty to have an expiry date , and I would stress this .
Moreover , even if the Protocol annexed to the Treaty of Nice does come into force , it only refers to the procedure for approving the package as a whole and makes no mention of the multiannual decisions .
I therefore propose to request that the codecision procedure be applied , as laid down in Article 2.5.1 of the Treaty establishing the European Community , and in this I believe and hope I can count on the same support from this House that I received in the Committee on Budgets .
Then , with regard to the full budgetisation of interests and the possibility of the administrative costs being met from this budget line , Parliament gave its consent in 1998 for all the interests of the Fund to be used for research .
Ladies and gentlemen , as I said before , the situation which we have to address is highly unusual and will certainly never be repeated : we are dealing with the only Treaty to have an expiry date , the succession of the European Community to which depends largely on a Treaty which has not yet been ratified and may well not be ratified in time .
In my opinion , and in this I am supported by the coordinators of the political groups in the Committee on Budgets , if the line I have taken in the legislative amendments is endorsed by this House , before expressing the European Parliament ' s opinion , we should enter into negotiations with the Council and the Commission , seeking to increase our institution ' s role .
Therefore , when we have voted on the legislative amendments , I will ask the presidency to postpone the vote on the legislative resolution until the possibility of an agreement with the Commission and the Council increasing Parliament ' s role can be verified .
I hope that you will agree with this line of approach .
Mr President , Mr Turchi deserves our agreement .
What the Council is offering us is a bit rich .
In Nice , fundamental democratic values were invoked , and in the same breath the ECSC Treaty is annulled and a research fund established , without the possibility of Parliament having any part in deciding the matter .
I must say , they really have a nerve !
Back to the matter in hand .
We are , in fact , funeral orators here , for we are burying a treaty which , almost fifty years ago , was the prelude to the European Union , but whose death is a remarkable one .
It is a death and a rebirth together , for other treaties arose from this one , and at the end of the day , the European Union is based on what it had in mind .
In this context , I would like to point out that Robert Schuman at the Paris Conference in 1950 - held on 9 May , which is of course our Europe Day - observed that this was the first stage of European federation .
He did not speak in terms of a coalition of nation states but of a European Federation , showing himself to be much more far-sighted than many of our statesmen and stateswomen and , indeed , than those among us who cannot yet bring themselves to utter the word ' federation ' .
I am just pointing this out ; I assume that it will be mentioned in the history books .
Secondly , this treaty is now to give birth to a research fund .
Mr Turchi has pointed out that the money is not simply being returned to the Member States , but is being invested in a fund which is in future to finance research into coal and steel .
This is sensible , but it does create problems .
One is that Parliament has no control over this fund .
I mentioned this contradiction at the outset .
A second is that it creates difficulties for the research framework programme .
What demarcation is there between the research framework programme , which we decide on democratically , and the Research Fund ?
Thirdly , what is to happen to the acceding countries ?
Every one of them wanting to belong to the Research Fund must in fact make an initial contribution to it in order to take any part in it .
Even that creates more than one class of research in the European Union .
What I suggest - something which has been taken on board by the Research Committee - is that we should resolve this conflict , and , moreover , in a positive way by , in the course of the next few years , creating from this Research Fund a Research Foundation which would develop alongside the research framework programme . Funds could be paid into it by Member States , but also from private sources - it is above all the private sources I am thinking of - in order to finance research projects other than into coal and steel .
In the meantime , we are fortunate in having many affluent people who do not know what to do with their money when they reach a certain age , and who make donations .
Trust funds come into being , and this Foundation can be built up by donations of this sort and so be able to concern itself with subject areas far more wide-ranging than coal and steel .
I hope that Parliament will agree to this recommendation .
The consequence would be that the Commission would reconsider and would perhaps present a report on how this could be translated into action .
We have some experience of this in Germany .
Parallel with State support for research , we have a research foundation which has functioned well ever since the 1920s and uses a minimum of bureaucracy in putting wind in the sails of German research .
It would be no bad idea to do that on a European scale .
Let me finally observe that proposals 1 to 5 in my report are founded on an error .
I recommend that we should not vote on them .
They are in any case covered by their inclusion in the Turchi report and in the amendments .
I therefore recommend that there should be no vote on them .
I might add that they were not voted on in committee either .
This really is a mistake .
Apart from that , I hope that this research fund really will give rise , in the next five to ten years , to a second support for research in the European Union .
We would thereby be making good this undemocratic error which is , in this day and age , really intolerable .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the PPE-DE Group is going to vote in favour of the Turchi report on the two amended proposals for Council decisions and the communication from the Commission on the financial activities resulting from the expiry of the ECSC Treaty and those resulting from the creation of the Research Fund for Coal and Steel .
We also agree , like all the other coordinators of the political groups - we have already done so in the Committee on Budgets - with the strategy proposed by the rapporteur .
From a budgetary point of view , the report proposes certain innovations which , after discussion in our parliamentary committee , have been accepted by all the political groups in that committee .
In particular , the rapporteur accepted the suggestion to extend the list of advisory bodies by adding the European Central Bank , the European Investment Bank and other European institutions that are relevant and competent in this field .
Furthermore , the original conditions on the financial programme which should be presented to explain the activities of the Research Fund were also relaxed .
The original idea of producing annual financial plans seemed excessively restrictive .
Basically , however , the Turchi report requests parliamentary control of the Research Fund for Coal and Steel and that request is totally coherent with this Parliament ' s role .
We would not be representative of European citizens if we accepted being left out of the control of research funds .
We in the Committee on Budgets do not question where the ECSC reserves should end up , and neither do we enter into whether or not those companies maintain differential treatment in relation to other strategic sectors .
We simply ask that co-decision be applied here , which the Council is repeatedly denying us .
If , as Mr Linkohr said , a European policy on coal and steel is going to continue to exist after the expiry of the ECSC Treaty and if that policy is going to be developed largely by means of this Research Fund , the European Parliament must naturally be involved in the processes of management and control of that fund .
We therefore ask that the income of the fund be included within the general budget of the Union .
More budgetary control , more parliamentary control , means more transparency and more responsibility .
We cannot understand why our institution should be left out of such an important area .
We are therefore voting in favour of the Turchi report and the whole strategy it proposes .
Mr President , I support the proposals in the Linkohr report .
The situation in which we are seeing the Commission and Council fail to give Parliament codecision in relation to this Fund and the technical guidelines which will be produced in relation to it is not acceptable and there should be a change of attitude in relation to that .
It is a great pity that we are moving away from the social policy aspects of these Funds , which provided some relief for companies and , in particular , the workers of companies who were being restructured .
ISPAT in Cork , Ireland , which was formerly a state company , was bought over some years ago by a private company and is now in liquidation .
The 400 workers there are in receipt of statutory redundancy - a few thousand pounds for literally a lifetime 's work - and yet when government and trade unions sought support from the social policy aspects of this Fund they were refused .
It is quite extraordinary that we have this situation .
It is even more extraordinary because ISPAT was a plant which recycled scrapped steel : the objective of the new Research Fund is to improve environmental standards and the impact of the steel industry on the environment , and here was a company that was actually doing that .
It must be emphasised very strongly that , insofar as this Research Fund has any impact , it must be on safety at work .
In January this year there was an unfortunate case where a man lost his life in this steel factory .
The company had failed to invest in fire-fighter training and to provide for escape hatches and this man lost his life as a result of the company 's negligence .
We need to ensure that health and safety regulations are strictly enforced .
Mr President , I would like to welcome and endorse my colleague , Mr Linkohr 's report , particularly his comments on the involvement of Parliament and on the evolution of European Union democratic structures .
This Treaty , along with the Euratom Treaty , remained outside the treaties establishing the European Union and therefore outside democratic scrutiny and control .
This is totally unacceptable , particularly at a time when energy installations , both nuclear and non-nuclear , could be a focus of terror attacks .
Therefore health and safety should be our foremost concern .
As other colleagues have pointed out , the lack of parliamentary scrutiny has made the Commission 's proposals unacceptable and the Greens cannot , therefore , agree to the Commission 's proposal on the expenditure for the research fund .
For how could Parliament 's Committee on Budgets discharge the budget without exercising its function to scrutinise the financial management and allocation of funds ?
Finally , the expiry of the ECSC Treaty after 50 years reminds us that the Euratom Treaty , which has also existed outside the democratic scrutiny and control of this Parliament , is an anomaly as more and more Member States are moving away from nuclear energy and towards new forms of energy and that this anomaly , which happily will end with the Coal and Steel Community , still continues with the Euratom Treaty .
Mr. President , over the previous decade the European Coal and Steel Community has borrowed money from the markets and in turn has loaned funds for research activity in the coal and steel sector .
With the Coal and Steel Community now ceasing its operations , it was found during the winding-up proceedings that it still has a surplus of 1.1 billion euros .
Now , rules of the game are being created to govern how the yield on this money will be used for research activity in the coal and steel sector .
I regard the setting up of the Research Fund as a positive thing , while on the other hand the ending of funds for use in combating social ills is a bad thing .
According to the Commission proposal , the management of funds investment activities is being handled and research projects are being prepared by an army of about thirty officials , the maintenance of which will cost three and a half million euros ; this gives the impression of an oversized bureaucracy , and therefore Parliament must take another look at the matter when it discusses the questions of releases of liability .
According to the revisions contained in Mr. Linkohr 's report , a special European Research Foundation should be set up ; the activity of the Coal and Steel Research Fund should be extended to other areas ; and funding from the private sector should also be accepted .
Mr. Linkohr , this is a dubious proposal .
We already have the EU 's Joint Research Centre and a framework programme for science and research .
I understand Mr. Linkohr 's positive approach to research activity , but we must not create a new bureaucracy .
It is necessary to set up a Coal and Steel Research Fund , since the ECSC is winding up its operations .
It is justified that its funds be ploughed back to the sectors from which they were accrued , but the idea of a Research Foundation which would be funded by the money of the EU 's taxpayers and of firms will increase the amount of inefficient bureaucracy .
It would be better for Parliament to demand the codecision procedure for the science and research sector , and to leave all aspects of implementation of the programmes to the Commission .
We do not question Mr. Linkohr 's good will towards science and research .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a treaty expires , but the foundations remain , for the foundation , the ECSC Treaty , has long been part of the structure of the European Union .
We still , too , have the day of commemoration of 9 May 1950 , that day when Robert Schumann presented the brilliant plan of Jean Monnet from the South of France and thereby laid the foundations of what we today call the European work for peace .
The ECSC Treaty has two successors : the subject of our speeches today and , as regards future coal mining , the aid issues with which we will deal later on .
I would like to make four brief remarks about the two reports before us .
First , the procedure proposed here is distinguished by pre-democratic conceptions .
This was tolerable in 1952 , but it is of course no longer acceptable to let the Council alone decide when , in the meantime , the Union 's citizens have elected us to be their fifth democratic Parliament .
We must be clear about that .
Second , it is right to use the annual revenue of EUR 45 million to support coal and steel research .
One could say in legal terms that it is an anticipated form of reinforced co-operation among a few .
It is of course just as right to consider how the committee recommends , on the basis of Mr Linkohr 's presentation , to progressively make the fund into a foundation , because then the problem of new members will be easier to solve than if they had to have a share in the old members ' contributions .
Third , the Commission has done the right thing in subordinating the Research Fund to fundamental rights , for the Charter of Fundamental Rights recapitulates the laws in force .
That means that everything that is to be organised at a European level must be measured against the yardstick of fundamental rights and is bound by them .
I find it objectionable that the Council , in its deliberations , struck out these three proposals by the Commission and wants to remove the text 's reference to the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
That constitutes an incredible legal scandal , which we must denounce , and for that reason I call it by its name .
So I come to my fourth point , and am particularly curious to know how you , Commissioner , will respond to it .
Your Commission originally rested on a different legal foundation .
You now refer to the protocol to the Treaty of Nice , and that is pretty breathtaking , as the Treaty of Nice is not expected to enter into force before 23 July 2002 .
On that day , however , the ECSC Treaty ceases to have effect , and we can hardly allow a lawless state of affairs .
So I would very much like a reply from you as to how you intend to proceed and as to what you intend to propose , so that there will be no state of lawlessness from midnight on 23 July 2002 , for then the gripping question would arise of to whom this money , which would then no longer have an owner in law , actually belonged .
Mr President , I agree with the many speakers who have criticised the lack of democracy in the continued administration of the funds .
As has been pointed out , the treaty expires on 23 July of next year .
This treaty formed the basis for the European Union as we know it today .
It launched the concept of the ' Common Market ' and , with the introduction of the High Authority , a common assembly , a special Council of Ministers and a court , those institutions were established which now operate as the Commission , the European Parliament the Council and the Court of Justice .
I think it is worth mentioning this .
Where the political objectives are concerned , it has of course to be said that these have been fulfilled in many areas .
When we debated the future employment of the funds to be administered , it would have been desirable if a larger proportion of the budget could have gone on coal , and I am certain that the Commission will bear this in mind when the future arrangements for the Research Fund are discussed .
I think there is cause here today for expressing appreciation for the work done in those institutions , bodies and companies which , for 50 years , have been responsible for the ECSC ' s activities and , specifically , for the contributions from the Commission and the advisory committee .
As has been said , more research will take place , and this research will be of benefit to the environment , industry and our electorate in the European Union .
First of all I thank Parliament 's responsible committees and their rapporteurs .
These proposals are the final product of a long discussion process initiated by the Commission ten years ago .
The concept proposed by the Commission is to revert the ECSC assets to the remaining Communities upon expiry of the Treaty and to use the resources produced from these assets for the sole purpose of funding research in the sectors related to the steel and coal industry .
This concept has been discussed with industry , the social partners , the European Parliament and the Member States .
Eventually all stakeholders endorsed it .
The Member States have been very closely associated in this discussion , which is completely justified since together they are the owners of the ECSC assets .
If there were no agreement on the Member States ' side these assets would simply revert to them , in line with the principles of international law .
The European Council has provided us with detailed guidance on the subject , firstly at the Amsterdam European Summit in 1997 and more recently at the Nice intergovernmental conference last year .
On this latter occasion the Member States adopted a protocol attached to the Nice Treaty which details the arrangements regarding the expiry of this Treaty .
The Commission is bound to respect the decisions taken in Nice .
It is in this context that the Commission has to address your amendments .
You have requested that all three decisions should be adopted through the codecision procedure .
I regret to say that the Commission cannot accept this request .
In the case of the framework decision , the decisional procedure has already been agreed upon by the intergovernmental conference in Nice .
For the two decisions on the financial and research guidelines respectively , the Commission has followed the same line as for other , similar proposals in research policy or regarding our financial regulation .
For example , the specific programmes of the European Union Research and Development Framework Programme are submitted to Parliament for its opinion , as is the case for the Financial Regulation .
If the Commission departed from this line it would not be consistent .
On the other hand , I would like to stress that Parliament 's involvement in the proposed arrangements is much stronger than it was under the ECSC Treaty .
As regards the budgetisation of the funds after the expiry of the Treaty , the Commission agrees that the resources and the expenditure will be incorporated into the general EC budget .
However , they will consist of earmarked revenue which , according to our Interinstitutional Agreement , is not covered by the financial perspectives .
Therefore we could not go along with the proposal to simply incorporate the resources and the expenditure into Chapter III , internal policies of the budget , and to delete any reference to earmarked revenue .
You also suggested that within two years , by 24 July 2004 , the Commission should make proposals to enlarge the post-ECSC research fund into a European research foundation covering all research sectors over and above steel and coal .
Indeed , I am aware that such a foundation has been suggested to us on several occasions .
I have noticed that the corresponding amendment refers to the draft decision on the research guidelines only .
From a legal point of view the research guidelines lay down the technical provisions related to the implementation of the research activities , but they cannot cope with an issue of an institutional nature like this one .
More generally speaking , the proposal to set up a research foundation has already been made to the Commission on several occasions , in particular in the course of the discussion in the Council , but it was rejected .
The first reason is that the management of the ECSC funds after 23 July 2002 will involve three aspects : firstly , the management of the ECSC commitments existing on that day until their expiry - and in some cases they will continue for 20 years or more ; secondly , the financial management of the ECSC assets ; and thirdly , the management of the research fund financed from the resources produced from this financial management .
The three elements are therefore closely interlinked and it is not possible to isolate any one of them .
Furthermore it is clear that a majority of Member States oppose the implementation of the research fund through a foundation .
Finally , the very small amount involved in the proposed research fund would not justify the creation of a foundation .
Therefore the most sensible solution is that the Commission , which has managed all ECSC operations so far , should continue to manage them all .
Finally , I have taken note with particular interest of your request that environmental considerations should be given priority in the operations of this coal and steel research fund .
I am pleased to say that current research projects financed under the ECSC Treaty already put much emphasis on cleaner technologies , energy saving and the protection of the environment in both the coal and steel sectors .
I can assure you that we will continue to attach great importance to these considerations , as well as the issue of safety at work , in the research guidelines which we are now proposing .
To conclude , let me answer Mr Mombaur 's question on the specific issue concerning the legal basis of the three-year Commission proposals .
As you know , they are based on a protocol annexed to the Nice Treaty and we will now have to reflect on how to deal with the uncertainty surrounding the entry into force of the Treaty .
The Commission 's services are currently exploring this issue and considering alternative scenarios .
So the answer is that we will have to continue to look at that particular issue .
Thank you once again for the careful analysis of the Commission proposals , your contributions to this debate and for your attention .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.30 p.m.
( The sitting was closed at 8.55 p.m. )
Decision on urgent procedure
White paper on reform of European governance
The next item is the statement by the Commission on the White Paper on Reform of European Governance .
Without further ado I will give the floor to the President of the Commission , Mr Prodi .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , on 4 September , I presented to this House the White Paper on Reform of European Governance .
Some Members gave me their immediate reactions then , and the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market have started to analyse our proposals .
Today ' s debate is therefore taking place within the context of a wider discussion that is already well under way .
I would like to make a few preliminary remarks in order to clear up some misunderstandings that have emerged during this debate - and I will , of course , be happy to reply to any further comments you may wish to make during this morning ' s discussion .
As you know , the overriding aim of the White Paper on Reform of European Governance is to renew and reinvigorate the institutional triangle , which operates according to the Community method under the present Treaty .
This complements and reinforces the Commission ' s and my own ongoing commitment to institutional changes that will strengthen the role of the European Parliament .
Indeed , the Commission has always maintained that this House , which directly represents the people of Europe , should play a central role in the institutional triangle , on an equal footing with the Council , representing the Member States , and the Commission , which represents the European public interest .
The Commission also supports the work of the Court of Justice to ensure that the European Union is based on the rule of law and respect for human rights .
We have been pursuing this commitment constantly and consistently .
It remains our objective to strengthen the legitimacy of this House and thus to consolidate representative democracy .
It was this same desire to consolidate representative democracy and to ensure that it functions correctly and efficiently that inspired our White Paper on Reform of European Governance .
In the past few weeks , a number of people have criticised that part of our proposals that seeks to clarify the distinction between the legislative and executive functions . These criticisms are , it seems to me , the result of a misunderstanding .
I have , for example , heard it said that the Commission is asking for a ' blank cheque ' so that it can perform its executive tasks without the legitimate scrutiny of Parliament .
This is simply not true , as is clear from the White Paper itself .
What the Commission is suggesting , in fact , is that Parliament , the Council and the Commission should all take a step backwards and start concentrating once again on their institutional tasks .
The Commission , for its part , should table fewer proposals and target them better , concentrating on its executive function .
The Council should play its legislative role and not become an executive .
Parliament has primary responsibilities in monitoring the way policies are implemented and with regard to the Community budget .
It is thus much more than simply the co-legislator .
The White Paper ' s proposals are , therefore , ambitious .
Their aim is to ensure that the existing rules are fully applied at last , and to give Parliament an equal role with the Council . This goes far beyond the power to ' call back ' responsibility for executive decisions , on which some Members of this House have focused much attention .
The ' call-back ' option is too limited , in that it merely allows Parliament to partially change the current system - which , we all know , is seriously deficient - but without making good the deficiencies .
As the White Paper shows , what we really need is a structural change that clarifies who is responsible for putting policy into practice .
This is vital if we are to know who is to be held answerable for policy implementation . After all , the principle of accountability is an essential part of the way democratic institutions operate .
The White Paper contends that the Commission should be responsible for implementing policy . It questions the need for the current system of regulatory and management committees .
The prospect of enlargement makes it all the more urgent to review our commitology .
However , the paper also states very clearly that the terms and limits of the Commission ' s executive role must be laid down in the new legislation that you will discuss on the basis of the Commission ' s final proposal .
It also states that we need a simple legal mechanism to allow Council and Parliament , on an equal footing , to monitor and control the actions of the Executive .
We are already giving thought to how this mechanism might work , but at this stage , before proposing anything , we want to listen .
We are expecting a major contribution from the Member States ' advisory committees as well as from this House .
In the White Paper , the Commission has also committed itself to improving its consulting procedures when drawing up policy proposals .
Some have suggested that this would undermine the role of Parliament .
I sincerely believe this is not the case , and it is certainly not our intention .
Quite clearly , we have never proposed - and we never will propose - that Parliament or other democratically elected institutions be replaced by the voluntary civil associations we call ' non-governmental organisations ' .
These associations play an important role in raising public awareness and integrating our society , and we therefore wish to enjoy a useful relationship with them .
This relationship , which , I repeat , has absolutely no connection with the role of democratically elected institutions , is , at the moment , unclear and lacking in transparency .
We therefore need to bring some order to current practice .
In particular , we need guidelines that make it transparent and more structured than now .
We also need guidelines on how to use expert advice in formulating public policies .
All this will improve the way in which the Commission exercises its right of initiative .
What we want , then , is a more structured and comprehensible system for interacting both with democratically elected local authorities and - in a quite distinct way - with civil society . This will ensure our consultation practices are more open and efficient than at present .
In any case , the Treaty will remain unchanged , all the decisions will continue to be taken by the appropriate institutions in accordance with the current democratic rules .
The White Paper thus opens the way for an inter-institutional dialogue on how all the institutions can improve their consultation .
We do not consider our proposals to be final and we are open to alternative suggestions , provided they are intended to achieve the same results .
I also understand there is some anxiety about the new forms of regulation proposed in the White Paper .
Some people fear they might weaken the role of Parliament .
A closer look at the White Paper should , however , convince you that , like you , the Commission is determined not to diminish but to increase Parliament ' s role .
That is precisely why the White Paper proposes new forms of regulation such as self-regulation , among principles and practices that ensure democratic control .
The creation of regulatory agencies - which can only take technical decisions on a case-by-case basis - will , of course , need a legislative act .
Parliament will thus be fully involved in drawing up the rules and the necessary guarantees for adopting such an act .
We therefore have to find the right balance between the need to lay down essential elements and objectives in European legislation and the need to remain flexible and able to react to rapid social and economic change .
So the White Paper proposes , for the first time , to involve Parliament in the complex process of introducing the open method of coordination .
These forms of inter-governmental cooperation on matters that lie on the fringes of Community law must , of necessity , follow a logic that is compatible with the way the institutional triangle works .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the main challenge facing the Union today is political .
The Laeken Summit is approaching , and it should give us a roadmap towards the next IGC .
Governance is already a part of that debate .
Changing the way the institutions work ( which is the subject of the White Paper ) and changing the institutions themselves ( which is the subject of the future proposals to amend the Treaty ) are obviously two different issues which are , however , closely related .
That is why I have said that the debate on the options set out in the White Paper on Reform of European Governance is the first phase in the debate on the future of the Union .
This phase - which will take place within the current legal framework and thus within the restraints this entails - must not be reduced to a mere academic discussion . It must lead to specific proposals for action .
This is the way to give the citizens of Europe greater confidence in the way the EU works .
This is essential . We urgently need to win back the trust of our fellow-citizens by applying the present rules correctly and efficiently .
If we do this , we shall have greater legitimacy when it comes to asking for the necessary Treaty changes later on .
However , swift action does not mean rushing . We need the kind of mature reflection that is characteristic of this House .
Clearly , therefore , I do not intend to make proposals until you have drawn up your opinions on the subject .
The Commission realises that the renewal process the White Paper has begun can be brought to a successful conclusion only if the European Parliament and the Council find the political will to start changing the way we work under the existing Treaty through a collaborative effort .
I would therefore welcome dialogue of different sorts between the European institutions , if necessary by setting up a joint working group Commission , Parliament and Council working group to look in greater detail at our proposals on governance .
I would like to thank you , most sincerely , in advance for your commitment and support .
Madam President , Mr Prodi , ladies and gentlemen , in the 51 years of its existence , since the beginning of the European unification process and since the Robert Schuman Declaration , the European Union can lay claim to a considerable success story .
In addition to establishing the common market , the single currency and the beginnings of a common foreign and security policy , we have also become an area of peace , justice and security , and in this we are a model for many regions of the world .
But why is it that our citizens do not see the actions of the various institutions of the European Union in a proper light , as we might expect ?
Why is it that they so often fail to evoke a positive response ?
The question that immediately comes to mind is of course why the European Union has such a poor external image and why it is so bad at initiating and implementing its policies .
These questions of course provide the basis for the Commission 's White Paper of 25 July of this year , and we are delighted that the Commission President , Mr Prodi , is here to discuss this issue with us for the second time today and has just offered us cooperation within an interinstitutional working party .
I think this is an excellent suggestion that we should accept promptly and in a constructive spirit .
Another question is why our public image in the EU Member States is so patchy - I do not wish to say dismal - yet it cannot really be said that the European Union stumbles from one failure to the next .
I think that a key point here is what the Commission says at the beginning of the White Paper : it should go back to concentrating on its core activities .
The Commission should not allow itself to get tangled up in a mass of individual proposals and decisions so that in terms of overall policy strategy you cannot see the wood for the trees .
As I see it , there are a few more questions that we need to consider in some depth before we will find the appropriate answers .
We certainly recognise that the Commission - and I think that all the institutions need to do this - has subjected and is continuing to subject its actions to a critical review process , after which it can then adopt any changes necessary after discussion with us .
We also support the Commission 's intention to focus on particular areas , but we have to say that the Commission should in that case undertake appropriate work with the press .
It should make it very clear to the public what European legislation consists of and how it has to be implemented .
There is also a second important issue here .
There is no point in the Commission setting up its own substructures in various fields , and I believe that it has in fact largely ceased to do this .
It should make use of existing public agencies at national , regional and local level to implement Community legislation .
There is no need for the Commission to arrange direct involvement in every local district and in every medium-sized town .
Although it is important to keep citizens informed , suitable forms of interaction should be used .
Framework legislation produced by the Commission should provide for implementation at regional and national level , and it seems to me that the Commission 's first proposal in the 25 July White Paper blurs the distinction between the various levels too much .
So what is needed ? Joint regulation ?
Open coordination ?
To what extent are European agencies needed ?
We need to address all these questions in our interinstitutional working party .
Madam President , Mr Prodi , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I am very grateful for today 's report .
We are moving ever closer and our views have more and more in common , but there is still a way to go , and there is one particular point on which I believe that we still differ .
Firstly , you have today clearly declared your faith in a form of parliamentary democracy that of course has important consequences for our work as a whole , and in particular for the role of ' civil society ' .
That is another of those rather nebulous concepts rather like ' governance ' , but ' governance ' is used in contexts where there are no parliamentary democracies or cannot be , as in the case of ' global governance ' .
In the case of civil society , and I think you were very clear about this , we need to stress that although it has a consultative role and a supporting function , it is the European Parliament and of course also national parliaments that are at the heart of democracy as we know it .
As you said yourself , they are an expression of the will of the people , and we must insist on that point .
The key point on which there are still differences between us is the issue of alternative forms of regulation .
We are not so presumptuous as to think that only Parliament can regulate and that only Parliament can create appropriate regulations , including detailed regulations .
However , the difficult thing is to decide on the framework , details , a political objective and technical implementation .
So I must insist that this Parliament is always consulted on this issue and that it is not the Commission that decides , but that there should be a joint decision , a kind of Interinstitutional Agreement between the Council , Parliament and the Commission .
This applies in particular to the issue of call back that we have also been discussing today .
Let me make this crystal clear : we need both things .
We need a Parliament call-back procedure in connection with alternative forms of regulation , and we need to reform comitology .
We have nothing against the reform of comitology proposed in the White Paper , but it is not enough .
It is necessary if the decision-making process at parliamentary level is to become more democratic , but it is by no means enough .
Mr President , I hope I have understood you correctly in understanding that you will not present anything to the Laeken European Council unless it has been discussed with this Parliament beforehand and the views of this House have been sought .
You said this in general terms , and I welcome that , and I can see from your nodding that that is indeed your intention .
That represents a great step forward compared with the last time , and I would like to thank you very much indeed for that .
By way of conclusion , I would like to make one more thing clear . This is not about Parliament getting involved in the Commission 's executive powers .
However , we very much reject any attempts on the part of the Commission - and they have been made - to get involved in the legislative process and to arrogate legislative powers to itself .
This emerges from many sentences and passages in the White Paper , and we must reject this .
The Commission has executive powers , but legislative competence is a matter for the Parliament and the Council and we absolutely insist on that !
Madam President , support for the European Union is decreasing in just about every Member State .
In the candidate countries , enthusiasm for enlargement is in decline .
There is little confidence in the European institutions , and the individual citizen can feel that the gap between ' those in Brussels ' and ' those of us at home ' is extremely large .
We are all painfully aware of this , and I am very pleased to find such a large measure of self-criticism in the Commission ' s White Paper .
The Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party welcomes the White Paper on Reform of European Governance .
These changes are an important part of the major work of reform we are facing over the next few years to make the EU more easily accessible , efficient and democratic .
We are very well disposed towards the start made by the White Paper .
It points out the problems and shows where changes are required .
Some of the overarching proposals are entirely in line with what the Liberals have been pressing for over a period of quite a few years .
There must be an increase in openness and public control .
The new rules adopted earlier this year in accordance with Article 255 are a first step on the way .
The decision-making processes must be simplified and made clearer .
There must be regional , as well as local , involvement at an earlier stage of the decision-making process , and we must discover mechanisms for regular consultation at these levels for it is , after all , regional and local authorities that will be implementing the majority of the EU ' s decisions .
It is also very encouraging that the Commission wishes to work more with framework legislation and strengthen the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality .
There is little that is very specific in the White Paper , however .
What , precisely , can be done about this ?
How is the individual citizen to be made to feel more involved in decision-making ?
And how , in particular , is the Commission to set about promoting the change of attitude or cultural revolution that has to take place in the Commission if all the reforms are to become a reality ?
We are aware that many of Mr Kinnock ' s proposed reforms have come up against pretty formidable resistance .
Bureaucracies - and the Commission is a large bureaucracy - change slowly , and many people are impatient to see results .
We cannot afford to fail .
The White Paper is now under consideration .
I hope that many will feel prompted to respond and present their views before part two appears .
Parliament will produce a report .
In this connection , it was , moreover , extremely encouraging to hear Mr Prodi propose a joint working party , made up of representatives from the institutions .
I hope that the Commission , together with Parliament , will also be active in making the White Paper more widely known and not expect people just to find it accidentally on the Internet .
Thank you for this first part of the White Paper .
We look forward to seeing part two .
Madam President , Mr Prodi , almost everyone who has spoken has asked - as you yourself have also done - why the EU 's image is not what we expect , and why people have ever less faith in it .
I am always surprised that this is commented on in a wounded tone as if we were misunderstood , as if all this were unfair , and even the answers on this subject have a very paternalistic ring about them .
They say that it is all about explaining things better to the public and presenting our policies to them more clearly .
Unlike Mr Swoboda , I do not think that we have really made any progress in this area .
The concept of good governance is very vague , and people do not really understand what you are promising them .
You are promising transparency , openness and consultation , but that is not what is at stake here , Mr Prodi .
The major misunderstanding - I might almost say a misunderstanding of historical proportions - is that this Commission does not have any conception of European democracy .
It has no conception at all of democracy at supranational level .
All these paternalistic ideas that you have presented here miss the point that you do not have the courage - and have not had the courage for years - to highlight the democratic deficits of the European Union with sufficient clarity , and to recognise that the Commission must forego some power if such a thing as European democracy is to exist , and that you need to work alongside this Parliament on many key issues , for example on preparing a constitutional process and the main elements of that process .
No , genuinely tackling the dissatisfaction that exists would mean addressing the state of crisis which exists as regards legitimacy .
We govern people with regulations because we do not have the courage to say that we have been making laws for years now .
We call them regulations because the democratic legitimacy of these laws is very fragile , because the separation of powers has not been achieved , because the principle of openness of legislation has not been achieved , because the process of committing the administration to laws has not been achieved , and because instead there is disproportionate scope for discretion , which cannot be reconciled with democratic principles , because we have an irregular administration in many areas , such as the committee structure . It is not regular , there are no staff regulations , there are no clear loyalties , and the processes for appointing staff in these areas are by no means transparent and are easy to manipulate .
Mr President , you cannot reconcile the idea of a good technocracy with a debate on democracy . Just as there is no such thing as a good dictatorship , there is also no such thing as a good technocracy .
You will have to address the issue of a European democracy and the position of the Commission in this process .
Madam President , Mr Prodi , I am very pleased that we have another opportunity today to discuss the White Paper together , because European governance is indeed a pivotal theme and I would like to make it very clear that I believe that the whole future viability of the European Union depends to a large extent on this issue .
I am bound to agree with Mr Voggenhuber on this point : as far as I am concerned , the issue at the centre of the whole debate around governance is the question of democracy - strengthening democracy and above all strengthening the public 's rights , especially under the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
I say that because one thing is clear : the very best policy will achieve nothing if it does not impact on the public or if the present state of affairs continues , in which the public believes that what happens in Brussels is far removed from them and their day-to-day concerns .
I believe , Mr Prodi , that the public quite rightly expects two things : the first is transparency in decision making and the second is clarity as regards political responsibility for decisions .
I believe that this has to be the focal point from which our joint deliberations start , both for the Commission and of course also for the other institutions .
I would like to talk about transparency for a moment .
The White Paper talks about a cumbersome system of almost 700 consultative bodies supporting the Commission .
If I remember correctly , you yourself picked up this point in the White Paper on the reform of the Commission , and announced back in June that a list of these consultative bodies would be published .
In the White Paper before us , you promise that details of these bodies will be published by the end of the year .
I am very much in favour of that .
This is a question of transparency , and it could help to remove some of the prejudice against the work of the Commission and the other institutions .
However , publishing details of consultative bodies is one thing , and , as I see it , accepting political responsibility for decisions is quite another .
A second point in the White Paper that I would like to mention is the ' culture of consultation and dialogue ' .
I certainly regard that as a very good proposal .
I think that the Commission on the one hand and the Council and Parliament on the other would be well advised to jointly consider how a new culture of consultation and dialogue can be achieved in terms of greater involvement for civil society .
I think it would be better if the Commission did not propose a code of conduct on minimum standards for consultation for itself , but rather if we could jointly consider whether there is not some scope for all three institutions to make a joint commitment under an Interinstitutional Agreement .
You spoke earlier about a dialogue of this kind , about the possibility of setting up a working party , and I am keen to accept that suggestion .
Madam President , President Prodi , I speak on behalf of the radical Members .
Mr Prodi , what impression do you think the citizens of Europe can have if , after the attacks on New York and Washington , they have seen Chirac , Blair , Fischer and all the European leaders marching off to Washington , and then the President-in-Office and President Prodi a good last , or nearly so - through no fault of their own , of course - and it even seems on Monday - and that is saying something - even Berlusconi may go ?
All this in itself reveals a deep-seated problem for as long as we give that impression ( and we either give it or not ) .
Therefore , in my opinion ( and here I agree with Mr Voggenhuber ) , the Commission should stop talking so much and risking being misunderstood , especially in view of the Convention - which we hope will be a positive step and will give a boost to this Union . Instead , it should concentrate on crucial problems like representation abroad , which is its own role ; it should reassume its role as the driving force behind European integration , something it is losing and may lose forever .
It should also be daring and make ambitious proposals , such as asking , for instance , what face Europe is showing to the outside world , since we cannot really have ten different faces on such international matters .
This , then , is my message to you , Mr Prodi : more concrete proposals , stronger proposals , particularly in view of the post-Laeken meeting .
Madam President , is not the real reason for this glossy brochure and this debate today the fact that the Treaty of Nice is dead ?
The Irish people saw to that , and you know that if you ask them again they will reject it a second time .
It is interesting to note that they were the only people who were asked whether or not they wanted the Treaty .
That is why we have European governance and why you are seeking to push through the institutional changes , choosing a different method .
The only way that you will achieve the participation in this European project that you want is through consent .
By that I do not mean the consent of a House like this , but of the ordinary voters in Europe .
Let us have more referendums in all Member States .
That is the only way to achieve democratic legitimacy .
The way to address the democratic deficit is to give people a chance to express their opinions .
Madam President , there is every reason for developing ideas around the subject of how Europe is to move forward , but there is also a need to know what it is that has to be developed .
Not everything has to be included , but just those things that cannot better be taken care of at national , local or individual levels , such as the internal market , the common currency , external and internal security , borders , customs and certain environmental issues .
So far , the proposals relating to democracy are not sufficiently concrete .
We therefore need cooperation across the institutions in order to move forward .
We must build upon a clear division of power in which political responsibility can be insisted upon .
The objectives need to be clarified and the initiatives adapted accordingly .
It is necessary to be able to hold people to account in a democratic system governed by law , and the prerequisite for this is a common basis of values with clear guidelines .
An effective European democracy requires discussions across linguistic and national borders , together with an education system and media adapted in the light of these .
The proposed multi-level democracy can contribute to legitimacy and greater confidence in the institutions , but it must not degenerate into a democracy characterised by bargaining or corporatism and which is so often marked by corruption .
Cooperation with civil society can make political measures better suited to their purpose , but the role of politicians must be clearly distinguished from civil society .
We now hope that the Commission will in future comply with the values in the proposal and , faced with each new initiative , ask four questions : Is the measure proportionate , that is to say appropriate to the problems that are to be solved ?
Is the solution in keeping with European democracy ?
Is the proposal in line with the EU ' s vision and basic principles ?
Can people be held to account ?
The more people are involved in European cooperation , the better .
Do not imagine , however , that legitimacy in itself creates democracy . Rather , it is democracy which creates legitimacy .
Madam President , Mr Swoboda has clearly formulated the stance of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , and has presented a clear proposal to the Commission .
In my capacity of shadow rapporteur for the PSE Group for the White Paper on Reform of European Governance in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , I would now like to explain our position from my point of view .
We welcome your proposal for efficient governance by setting up autonomous agencies , the proposals facilitating co-regulations and self-regulations , the will to consult representatives from specific sectors and the proposal on citizens ' and the civil society ' s right to information , participation and consultation .
We object , however , to a deal between the interested sectors and the European Commission without any parliamentary control .
That is not our idea of democracy .
We want to decide beforehand , in tandem with the Commission and the Council , when detailed legislation is necessary , when framework legislation suffices and when we can sanction a form of co-regulation or self-regulation .
It goes without saying that in many cases , it will be useful to delegate technical details to the comitology procedure , provided they are technical details , and the political component has been extracted completely .
Furthermore , the call-back mechanism , to which the European Parliament can refer , should this prove necessary , must be regulated in advance .
It is possible that the deployment of the social actors in the case of self- and co-regulation is a much more efficient way of working .
Not only should we consult the sectors about the decision-making process .
In certain cases , even social non-profit organisations could also play a role in the implementation .
But if the sectors are allocated certain tasks , the monitoring role by the European Parliament must always remain clear , and the European Commission must carry its responsibility .
Clarity always remains condition No 1 .
The dialogue with social actors must be concrete and yield results , and must not become a talk shop which thrives on repetition .
For what the citizen and the PSE Group want is result : democratic control and recognisable political priority by the European government .
At present , decision-making in the EU is too diffuse and too sluggish , which leads to alienation .
The PSE Group , also in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , is now offering to break this cycle .
That is possible and should be done before the Laeken Summit .
The Commission should then reach an agreement with the European Parliament which can be implemented by the end of the Spanish Presidency .
The ball is now back in the court of the Commission .
We count on you , Mr Prodi .
Madam President , President Prodi , at first sight the White Paper might seem tied down to its essentially technical content .
If , instead , we consider the reasons why it was drawn up - reasons that should have been given greater coverage in the text itself - we realise that it has a very solid and highly relevant political core .
In the G8 debate here in this House , I pointed out that , while globalisation is proceeding apace in all fields , it is hard for it to involve politics , which thus remains inadequate and slow compared with what is happening in other sectors .
This is undoubtedly one of the basic reasons for citizens ' widespread mistrust of institutions at all levels , from local to European to worldwide .
Besides , what do the people of Seattle , Gothenburg or Genoa , leaving aside the more extreme positions , want of politics , if not to control globalisation ?
What answer are we in a position to give , today , apart from our own inadequacy ?
The European Union project is , of course , still the only concrete example that can meet these demands , but it has not yet expressed its democratic potential to the full .
The White Paper is thus a valuable instrument , provided Parliament shows the same willingness to specify those substantial organisational reforms that will enable it to reconstruct and revive European democratic citizenship .
Madam President , I would like to move the debate on to ground which has not been much talked about and to the remarks Mr Prodi made in his introductory statement about the regional element .
I would like to do so particularly from the standpoint of my own constituency , Scotland , but not only from that point of view .
It is interesting to note , when you reflect on Scotland , that about 80 % of the competences exercisable by the Scottish Parliament concern domains in which the European Union has a shared competence .
When we make laws here , the Scottish Parliament and government are bound by them and have to put them into effect ; that is quite right and it is the same across other similar regions .
But sometimes it can produce ridiculous results , for example when environmental laws are too detailed to allow sensible local discretion in adapting common principles to local situations .
The water problems of the Island of Islay or the Glen of Strathspey are hardly comparable with those of the Rhine basin .
A one-size-fits-all approach to water law can have absurd results , for example in respect of the Scotch malt whisky industry , despite its established environmental friendliness over 200 years .
The White Paper says , as did Commissioner Prodi this morning , that the Commission will consult regional and local government early in the policy-formation process and will seek to legislate so that local knowledge is effectively deployed in the implementation process .
That is quite right and very welcome , though it was a pity he only devoted one sentence in his opening speech to it .
Many of us had expected that the White Paper would contain a far stronger statement , especially in relation to the so-called partner regions exercising their own constitutional powers of legislation .
Europe will fail to regain or retain the affections of the citizens of the Union - and that includes the people in Scotland and our counterparts in many similar lands such as Catalonia , Flanders , Wales , Galicia , the Basque country - unless the regional and local governments with whom people there finally identify are fully respected partners in the governance of Europe .
We are the same size and population as many of the existing Member States , the same as many of the adjoining States and we are bigger than quite a few of them .
It is often said that big , important regions of large countries do better in the Union than small Member States .
I doubt it and nothing in the White Paper has yet persuaded me that is true .

Mr Prodi , your paper on European governance is an important milestone , but on a technical issue my colleague , Mr Dell 'Alba , pointed out to you in a previous debate that , while the word ' governance ' may be very common in the English and French languages , in Italian political culture it is to some extent opaque .
If that is the case , it may well be that we have to get the message through in each of the EU languages .
Perhaps attention could be paid to those languages in which the word ' gouvernance ' , first used by Sir John Fortescue in England in the fifteenth century when the English political class spoke French , is less clearly understood than in English and French .
We ought to look at that point .
Reading your paper , it struck me that in a sense the first stage of recovery in the building of Europe is for the Commission itself to recover its self-confidence and poise .

I pay credit to you Mr Prodi , and to your colleagues Mr Patten , Mr Barnier and others , for having succeeded in restoring this poise after the resignation of your predecessors .
However , as you know - and you drew attention to this in your speech - there is concern in Parliament about giving respect to the institutional triangle .
There are fears about your use of civil society , which we all know really means consulting lobby groups .
The most effective lobby groups do their job , which is not to represent society at large - that is this elected Parliament 's duty - but to represent their own vested interest .
So I am afraid the fact that you drew attention to this concern has not allayed our fears and we will continue to insist that it is we , the elected Members of this House , who represent the interests of society at large and you should not set up groups meeting directly with the Commission , evolving policy and then handing it down to us to rubber-stamp .
That is not our understanding of parliamentary democracy .
I am sorry that Mr Farage has left .
He obviously does not believe in parliamentary democracy .
He wants a referendum every five minutes .
It is absurd that in my own country , once the Prime Minister , Mr Blair , summons up the courage to confront the Chancellor , Mr Brown , we will be asked in a referendum to decide whether or not to join the single currency .
Can you imagine our financial and economic future being discussed in public houses up and down the country ?
This is a job that elected politicians should do .
As regards your paper , the European Parliament and the Commission should be partners in the construction of Europe , not rivals .
If we remember the days of Jacques Delors , your predecessor , he had a clear programme , a vision : the 1992 single market .
He set out a time frame and turned that vision into reality .
We must do the same with enlargement and constitutional reform , widening and deepening .
Lastly , Mr Prodi , will you organise a public platform for the leaders of the candidate countries that will be joining the EU ?
I know you have already met the new Polish leader , but the public at large needs to be able to see in practice that we have a vision of a fully complete , united Europe and that you , Parliament and the Council are working together to achieve this .
Madam President , I would first like to congratulate Mr Beazley on his excellent speech .
Mr Prodi , I would like to thank you for making it clear here today that you will not be bringing forward any proposals to amend the constitutional position unless you have the consent of the European Parliament and without a clear vote by Parliament as a directly elected body .
That is more than we have been told so far , and I am delighted about that .
At the same time I would like to thank you for trying to clear up any misunderstandings .
However , there are some things I am still not clear about .
I hope that you will be able to deal with those in your reply as well .
You said that fewer proposals would be emanating from the Commission .
There can be no objection to that , as long as you can tell us how this new vacuum is to be filled , because you know - just as my fellow Members and I do - that the Treaties of Maastricht , Amsterdam and Nice stipulated very clearly the legislative role of the European Parliament and the roles of the Commission and the Council .
If you are now telling us that the Commission will be making fewer proposals , one of the implications of that is that you will be presenting framework proposals .
If that is what you intend , Mr Prodi , then you will have to ensure that there is a call-back mechanism and a comitology reform .
This is not just a drawback of the present system , as you just suggested , but rather an absolute necessity in the context of the ideas or proposals that you have for the future .
No one in this House wants framework proposals , but if you want them , then you must make sure they go hand in hand with proper democratic measures that do not adversely affect Parliament 's rights .
You say that you want more modern measures such as voluntary commitments ; no one in this House wants that .
However , if you still want that , you will have to protect democratic rights within the European Union and ensure that there is an Interinstitutional Agreement that leaves the rights of Parliament , the Council and the Commission intact .
You also said that the White Paper opens up the way for an interinstitutional debate .
It certainly does that .
But I would ask you , Mr Prodi , to state clearly before us that you do not intend to go back on the Treaties of Maastricht , Nice and Amsterdam , and that you share the views of the majority of the Members of this House about what I have said .
Not a single piece of legislation should go through without the European Parliament being involved .
There should not be any voluntary agreements and there should not be any framework agreements unless democracy is protected .
Mr President , I have three points .
Firstly , this paper is slightly more modest than its title suggests .
When you first titillated us with the prospect of presenting this White Paper over a year ago , we were all very excited at the idea of having some great constitutional blueprint .
In fact , you have very wisely produced a paper on good administration rather than a blueprint on governance or constitutional government as a whole , and that pragmatic and focused approach has much to commend it .
Secondly , I very much welcome your announcement today that you wish to establish an interinstitutional working party .
I have always felt it was a mistake to try to treat governance as if it were a piece of legislation which was first presented by the Commission and then batted between the institutions .
This is not normal legislation , but an intensely political debate that requires an intensely political and cooperative approach between the institutions .
My final point is one that you touch upon quite politely in the White Paper .
I will be less polite : we can do as much as we like at European level - in Strasbourg and Brussels - to improve administration and governance and make our decisions more comprehensible , legitimate and understandable .
However , as long as national political institutions and national political cultures remain frozen in the 19th-century mould and pretend that either the EU does not exist or is some far-off spaceship , we will never make great advances in this honourable enterprise of improving governance .
Governance can only be built brick by brick from the bottom , from the ground floor , from our nations and regions .
That is where we should all start .
Mr President , I think that Mrs Roth-Behrendt has expressed Parliament ' s concerns in her main point .
Parliament does not think it is a bad idea for the Commission to set up all the consultative bodies it wants , that it should meet with all the non-governmental organisations it wishes , that it should consult everyone through the Internet , or that it should talk to all citizens on a personal level .
This seems like a good idea to us and we should probably do the same thing .
What worries us is the second part of the White Paper ; or to be more precise , the proposals to improve Community regulations .
The Treaties of the European Union - as Mrs Roth-Behrendt pointed out - are based upon the principle of the division of powers .
Article 6 of the Treaty makes reference to national constitutional principles .
All national legislations are based upon the principle of the division of powers , by which legislative prerogatives are under the control of bodies elected by the people .
In the case of the European institutions there are two such bodies : the Parliament , directly elected , and the Council , comprised of Ministers responsible to their own national Parliaments .
The role of the Commission of the European Communities is to be the Community executive , and the role of Parliament is to support and strengthen the claims of the Commission to be an authentic Community executive .
However , if the Commission enters into the regulatory framework and endeavours to take on competences or powers that have been conferred or that should be conferred on the European Parliament by the Treaties , in these areas - as Mr Swoboda and Mrs Roth-Behrendt have stated - the Commission must remain in close contact with Parliament .
To be precise , Mr Prodi ' s suggestion that the Commission could present the Laeken European Council with proposals on improving Community regulations , without waiting for Parliament to deliver its opinion , seems to me to be a dangerous thing .
I hope that the Commission , before putting forward any proposal to the Laeken European Council on improving Community regulations , enters into close contact with Parliament with the aim of listening to our point of view and in this way conveying to the Laeken European Council the Parliament ' s concerns and interests in this matter .
Mr President , Mr Prodi , ladies and gentlemen , this debate on the Commission 's White Paper on European Governance in some ways comes at a bad time , and in other ways at a good one .
It is a bad time because any debate on the internal structure of the European Union and the way it functions , and on the legitimacy of the European Union itself will at present be dwarfed by the need to protect Europe 's citizens against international terror and violence , with more arcane subjects being overshadowed .
However , it is also a good time for the same reason , by which I mean that the European Union has an opportunity at this precise moment to respond to people 's fundamental need for safety within the EU , and for legitimacy combined with an ability to act outside its own borders .
Transparent , open and accountable decision making can accordingly help to make Europe 's citizens more aware and at the same time conscious of the added value Europe can bring .
Your White Paper is a contribution to that added value , Mr Prodi .
Against this background , I particularly welcome those proposals in the Commission 's White Paper that aim for a systematic dialogue at regional and local level , at a more active role for the Committee of the Regions , and the proposal that from 2002 onwards there should be an annual report on the implementation of the Amsterdam Protocol on Subsidiarity and Proportionality .
Subsidiarity and the Community method are not after all mutually exclusive .
The division of tasks between the Commission , the Council and the European Parliament must be clear , just as a balance between the Member States , the regions and the EU needs to be struck under their institutional triangle .
It is obvious that the European Parliament and the national parliaments should play a central role in the public debate on the future of Europe .
That is why I find it amazing that in its White Paper the Commission does not consider the idea of a convention as requested in the report by Mr Leinen and Mr Méndez de Vigo .
An open convention which works out the decision-making basis for the Council , with representatives from the Commission and from national parliaments and from the European Parliament , together with representatives of the Member States and the candidate countries and from the Committee of the Regions and the Economic and Social Committee sitting as observers , is an appropriate and essential forum for bringing the Union closer to its citizens and achieving transparency , and it must supplement and support internal reforms .
Mr President , it is indeed a shame that Mr Farage is no longer with us .
He obviously has learned nothing about public policy if he thinks that we can run the whole of Europe on a series of referendums .
This discussion is probably one of the most important that we will have before enlargement .
It is neither as hallowed nor as sexy as an IGC , but until we get the actual delivery mechanisms of democracy and public policy right , the boring , tedious administrative detail , then we do democracy an injustice .
We have to reform our governmental processes .
There are many proposals in the White Paper that cause nobody any problems , but issues like co-regulation and the delivery of public policy by external agencies do cause problems .
We cannot afford not to address these issues .
Our institutional overload , as we all know , is quite dramatic in the Union and with enlargement it will get worse .
We need to ensure , however , that when we reform those processes - whether it be issues concerning co-regulation or external agencies - we see democratic control as the key factor , democratic control in a democratic framework . This will not be a resource-free exercise .
It will also require significant person power to deliver it , at least in the early stages .
The Commission has to face this .
It will not be a cost-cutting exercise by any means .
Finally , if there is a criticism that has to be made of the Commission , and I am glad it has realised the importance of this criticism , it is that its White Paper did not address the role of Parliament .
Now I realise that the Commission might be sensitive about doing so , in case it brings the wrath of this House down on it .
That represented a fundamental failure in the early discussions between the Commission and Parliament .
So I am very pleased that this has now been rectified and we can move forward to produce the sort of governmental structure which we require .
Mr President , Mr Prodi , ladies and gentlemen , in support of what Mrs Stenzel has just said , I would like to add that it is never too late and never too soon to hold a debate of this kind .
At this particular point I believe that the events of recent weeks have brought more seriousness into politics and that the public is making greater demands on politicians .
This provides an opportunity to contribute to a renaissance of political matters and also to a significant renaissance of cooperation between leaders , those in positions of responsibility and the representatives of the people , that is to say the parliaments .
That is how we should approach this debate .
When you say in the introduction to your paper that the public feels greater distrust , more apathy and more powerlessness , I agree with you . However , in your second paragraph you say that this problem is acknowledged by national parliaments and governments alike , and that it is particularly acute at the level of the European Union .
I have a problem with this wording .
We - Parliament and the Commission - are acting as if national governments and national parliaments were on one side and the European Union on the other .
The public is particularly aware of this contradiction , with the Member States and the European institutions apparently on opposite sides .
We need to make it clear for once and all that we collectively are the European Union !
There is virtually no such thing as a European decision without the participation of the national governments , but there are a good many European decisions without codecision by the European Parliament .
Codecision leads to transparency and openness and facilitates dialogue , and is therefore the starting point for a clear separation of powers and allocation of tasks .
Your report talks about leadership .
I wish to call for more Commission initiatives based not so much on a minimum Council consensus but rather on what Europe needs .
It talks about cooperation with the regions , yet in the Belgian Presidency 's proposal for the convention the Commission of the Regions is not even a full member of that convention .
Yet that is what we need .
We talk about more information , but our actions are limited to giving the Member States more money for their information work , while the Member States do not give their own parliaments sufficient information about their decisions in the Council , and therefore exclude their citizens from European decision making .
By way of conclusion , I wish to call for proposals for sanctions in the case of misuse of EU funds , because that leads to distrust about the institutions on the part of the public .
Wherever the EU is involved , that must be made evident , from the European institutions themselves to the smallest local council .
Mr President , Mr Prodi , the White Paper calls on Parliament to enhance its role in feeding the views of its electors into the political debate .
But this means , Mr Prodi , and I must stress this point , that in the twenty-first century democracy will continue to be associated with the word ' parliamentary ' and not with the word ' consultative ' .
We do not want to go back to the pre-parliamentary democracy era and the White Paper should not be associated with that idea .
Framework legislation and the use of other regulatory mechanisms can only be something positive if they are linked with appropriate guarantees .
In the case of framework legislation the effect of these guarantees should be to ensure that the power to define is not handed over to some agency or other , but is reserved to Parliament .
It is not only Parliament 's privilege to insist on this , it is Parliament 's duty .
You say that you want more transparency and consultation , but whom are you excluding and whom are you including ?
Associations and non-governmental organisations that can pay for expertise will be better off than those who do not have these resources .
And in practice some people will surely be better able to make their voice heard than others .
Will this not mean that we are making the playing field for the various parts of civil society in the European Union still more uneven ?
I believe in a level playing field for the various actors and institutions .
I believe that the White Paper is not clear enough about this .
I call on you to make this clear , because I have to say that when it comes to financial market legislation , the implementation of the Commission 's financial action plan tends to give one co-legislator a stronger position than the other co-legislator , the European Parliament .
That does not seem a very promising road to go down .
This imbalance needs to be rectified , and at the next intergovernmental conference Article 202 of course needs to be amended by creating a call-back right .
However , the Commission could also demonstrate its good will at this stage and make it clear that it does not intend to surreptitiously change the balance between the institutions .
We , as a parliament , owe that much to society , because parliamentary activity does not just mean controlling things , but also shaping them .
I do not want to leave that task to a variety of committees chaired by people without any democratic legitimacy and who are not co-elected by Parliament , as is the case in the United States for example .
( Applause )
Mr President , I am very glad that you are being very tolerant on time this morning .
It is a well-known saying that ' if you don 't know where you 're going , then you won 't get there ' .
First and foremost we need to be very clear in Europe about what we are doing ; our aim is not to create a single State of Europe , but to have a union of sovereign States that are cooperating when and where necessary .
Unlike Mr Farage , I believe there are many occasions when it is important that we cooperate in Europe .
Equally we all know that the none of the institutions are held in high regard .
That is not because they are bad .
It is because they are complex , remote and not understood .
Frankly , we will continue to face the same problem , whatever specific reforms we come up with , if they remain obscure , complex and unexplained .
I say to my colleagues in this Chamber that one thing the people of Europe do not understand is why we oscillate between Brussels and Strasbourg .
It is up to us to listen to some of the problems that people express to us .
I was disappointed in President Prodi 's White Paper .
He virtually neglected the role of the ombudsman .
After all , the ombudsman is in the front line of dealing with the complaints and concerns of citizens .
I was also disappointed last month by the response of Commissioner de Palacio , whom I normally respect , who was quite dismissive about the code of good administrative behaviour .
We must make sure that we have good administration .
That means that we must have an enforceable code common to all of the institutions .
The Committee on Petitions has asked the Ombudsman to report to us on the problems that citizens are presenting to him .
We want to listen to citizens .
I extend an invitation to President Prodi , if he really wants to understand what the citizens of Europe are finding difficult with the European institutions , European rules and regulations , to give up one afternoon and come along to the Petitions Committee to listen to what citizens are saying .
He would certainly have an afternoon 's entertainment hearing what people really think .
In brief , what I am saying is this : listen to people ; listen to those who know what they are talking about ; be clear about your objectives ; and then explain yourselves in clear and simple language .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Prodi for having clarified in his speech certain points which , from a reading of the White Paper , could have given rise to misunderstandings .
Today ' s debate on governance is important because it aims at encouraging broader discussion on the meaning of European integration and its goals .
It complements the debate on the future of the Union , and thus it should concentrate on the connection between general objectives and the concrete actions seen by the citizens .
As we all know , what really lies at the basis of this deliberation is the realisation that the long-term credibility of European integration is undermined by the lack of mutual recognition between public structures and civil society .
We must therefore involve numerous sections and expressions of civil society to the greatest extent possible , because in this way the citizens will also be playing a greater part in policy- and decision-making . This is an important task that the institutions of the European Union must all make a real effort to carry out together .
To this end , I would recall that during the last Parliamentary term the European Parliament itself , and in particular the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , recognised the need to initiate and formalise a dialogue with civil society .
To do this an effort must be made to identify the most representative groups , so as to avoid an excess of consultations and overlapping .
We therefore ask for an Interinstitutional Agreement on this , which will lead to a division of labour and , at the same time , collaboration between Commission , Parliament and Council .
A second important point , which has already been hinted at , is the need to simplify Community legislative procedures , distinguishing , that is , between political and legislative decisions , which must not become detailed technical instruments ; and distinguishing between Parliament ' s prerogatives and competences that belong to the executive .
Something that you , Mr Prodi , have mentioned is therefore important : the need to specify a call-back mechanism for secondary legislation which can safeguard and strengthen the role of the European Parliament .
Mr President , as the last speaker from my group and as coordinator of the group , it falls to me to try and summarise the positions that have been expressed .
Listening to the debate I feel that our group 's views are very much the centre of gravity of Parliament as a whole on this question .
If I could try and summarise this in two sentences , it would be to say ' yes ' to better information , consultation and more systematic consultation of non-governmental actors and so on , but ' no ' to delegating decisions to a sort of cosy deal between the Commission and industry .
We would say ' yes ' to delegating technical and implementing legislation , but only if there is an adequate procedure to bring things back if they go wrong .
In other words , there is considerable sympathy in Parliament for much of what the Commission intends to achieve in its White Paper but genuine concern about what might be the real effects of some of the proposals therein .
Let me take the example that has come up recently of the self-regulation on pedestrian safety , where the Commission has made a deal with the automobile industry .
This is a very good deal in many ways and a lot of what has been agreed is a good step forward for pedestrians ' safety .
But what if it were not very good ?
What if it contained some outrageous things that would not be acceptable to this Parliament representing the citizens ?
We represent all the citizens of Europe not just those who are organised in NGOs .
What if the automobile industry subsequently does not apply the deal , because it is not enshrined in legislation ?
What can we do to remedy the situation if one or the other manufacturer does not respect the deal ?
That is the sort of concern that is being expressed in this Parliament .
I welcome the commitment of the Commission only to take this forward once Parliament has given its view and to explore these issues further in an inter-institutional working party .
That is a very welcome development .
I am very glad you gave that undertaking today and I look forward to taking this matter further .
Mr President , honourable Members , I am very pleased with today ' s debate , since it has shown that our positions are converging , we agree on most points and , most importantly , we share working methods .
I would say we have laid the groundwork so that , together , we can conclude this period of reforms under the present legislation .
A common concern has also emerged which , even though it was not part of today ' s debate , is closely associated with it : a common concern for a Europe that should speak with a single voice and interpret people ' s growing anxieties about the institutions . These anxieties affect not only our Member States but also the enlargement States , where there is a growing problem of distrust towards the European institutions .
In this respect , many criticisms have been raised concerning the plurality of the voices of Europe , a plurality which Europe took to Washington after the tragedy .
Let us not confuse this with plurality of presence .
The content was absolutely identical : in Washington we spoke with a single voice , and after the discussions we left President Bush with the European position , which was a highly operational position , with specific areas for collaboration in justice and internal affairs and the financial problem of money recycling , fields in which we proposed lines of action on which Europe should come together .
I believe part of the citizens ' anxieties derive from the complexity of our working procedures and the fact that they are hard to understand , problems that the White Paper attempts to address - partially , at least - through enhancements to the democratic system and transparency and through greater efficiency and speed in decision-making , while fully respecting or rather increasing the prerogatives of Parliament .
I confirm , then , at the end of this short debate , that we intend to arrive at a clarification of our respective functions , but no one questions the role of the European Parliament and the Council in holding political control over the Commission ' s executive work .
Not only do we acknowledge this control but - I recall what Mr Corbett said in the last speech - we believe this control is absolutely essential .
I also confirm - and here I must confess that the misunderstanding arose from a mistake by the Commission , something it expressed poorly - that the Commission does not intend to take any decision , either prior to Laeken or at any other time , without first listening to Parliament .
We had insisted on the need for decisions to be made quickly , but in every case we must first consult Parliament fully .
Anyway , today we have made some progress .
Mrs Kauffmann and others have made some extremely useful suggestions .
The idea of organising a joint Parliament-Council-Commission working party to establish a code of institutional behaviour in the framework of the existing rules is a path I think we should explore .
We need to be clear about this aim ; that is , we must set up a procedure to streamline the decision-making process , because , I repeat , it is slow and poorly understood .
The new procedure must make it unnecessary to systematically resort to committee procedures without detracting at all from the powers of Parliament and the Council , but rather enhancing their political responsibility .
The Commission is willing to examine this path .
With all honesty and without any ulterior motive , I wonder whether the Council will be willing to do so ; we , in any case , are .
For this to happen , I ask Parliament to be politically determined and insist on this approach .
This discussion also prepares for the debate on the future of Europe , which is to be organised by the Convention .
If we start out now in the directions outlined here , I believe it will help us later to find the institutionally most appropriate solutions .
Today there was one point of formal divergence that we should discuss in the area we have described , which is the procedure termed ' call-back ' .
I believe the current committee system is a distortion of democracy , which is why we have looked at it critically .
It mixes legislative and executive functions , without there being any real political control .
The call-back proposal apparently improves the situation , but in fact it makes the system more confusing because it makes it more difficult to separate our functions and see the difference between them .
I think this is an area we should focus on in a future meeting of the bodies we have proposed , in order to clear up this point : we must work together for a system in which the Commission executes and the European Parliament and the Council exercise political control before measures are adopted .
If there is always this possibility of call-back , Parliament will obviously end up taking on a strictly executive function .
I repeat : let us work on it , because not only am I being perfectly sincere but it is absolutely clear in my mind that this is an extremely delicate point of democratic control .
We should use the same methodology with the agency problem .
The Commission believes that in some cases they are necessary , but we must not multiply them ad infinitum .
We should turn to them only when there are highly complex technical roles and they have an autonomy of their own .
We agree with you that democratic control over these agencies is needed , control that should take three forms : when the agency is set up , and Parliament plays a fundamental part in this decision together with the Council ; when its budget is checked , and it is Parliament that checks it ; and when a check is made on the workings of the Commission , which is the body responsible for these agencies .
This , then , is the Commission ' s position .
Two other points have emerged here : these are points included in the White Paper or connected with it although not actually included in it .
They are participation by civil society and the problem of participation by the regions and autonomous local areas .
I believe it is essential for the regions and local administrations to play an active role , and in the forthcoming Convention too .
If we really define Europe as the Europe of subsidiarity , we must be consistent to some degree at least , and on this I have no reservations at all .
On the problem of consulting with civil society , if we read the White Paper carefully there is no expropriation of Parliamentary , democratically elected bodies .
On the contrary , there is a different discourse : whereas now civil society is consulted privately and indirectly , we are proposing that such consultation should be transparent and in the open , so that everyone can see where particular ideas and positions arose or where certain suggestions come from .
This , to me , is a step forward .
I understand I may have created concern because , when faced with such clear evidence of a process , Parliament may say , ' But that is our job ! '
I can assure you that we have the opposite objective : we must consult civil society because it is useful for us and it is useful for you , but consulting means consulting ; it is absolutely unacceptable that this should be seen as an alternative form of decision-making that could be confused with or compared to that of Parliament .
I say this quite clearly because you will never have heard the Commission proposing , for instance , to bring civil society into the Convention in a role involving decision-making aspects .
I do think , however , that transparent , clear consultation is a step forward that we really should take .
I repeat : it has never been our intention to attribute an institutional or constitutional role to consultations with civil society , even though we are concerned to understand what is happening within that society , and thus to keep our eyes open and ears tuned , ever alert to whatever is happening .
In a certain sense it is like the suggestion made by Mr Perry to attend the Committee on Petitions , in order to keep our eyes open .
In any case , please remember that the Commission ' s proposal has two objectives : first , a more parliamentary democracy ; and secondly , a more efficient democracy .
In the discussion on the relationship with Parliament , the call-back problem lies in this context .
We want a more parliamentary democracy in which the role of Parliament is clear and precise , but also more efficient , one in which the executive role is not continually called into debate by procedures .
I believe this could be clarified with the proposal of working together on these issues over the coming months . This may be beneficial and lead to progress in future in our way of working , under existing legislation for the time being , in expectation of the great institutional reform process which should start after the Laeken Summit .
Thank you very much , Mr Prodi .
If I may , I would like to add that with the Charter of Fundamental Rights we had very positive experience of involving civil society , but we did not have any Members in the Convention .
Mr President , there has probably been a translation problem .
I shall repeat the sentence which is the key to the latter part of my speech : we have never said - and I confirm this today - that civil society can play a decision-making role .
That is reserved for Parliament and the Council - our institutions .
We simply want consultation to take place more transparently , more clearly and more comprehensively .
Thank you very much , Mr Prodi !
I think that really does make things clearer .
A few Members were actually somewhat surprised , but I think that we all know what was meant now .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you now have the floor .
As you know , if the Commission President wishes to add anything else , we will of course be happy to agree to that .
Asylum and immigration
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is a great pleasure and a great honour for me , in my capacity as chairman of the Justice and Home Affairs Council , to report to you on the work which we are doing on asylum and immigration , but also to inform you of the initiatives planned by the presidency for the coming weeks .
The fact that I have been given the opportunity to speak on this particular day is all the more appropriate given that your Parliament is being called to vote on two reports , which are of a very high quality and which are particularly important for our future work in the Justice and Home Affairs Council : Mr Pirker 's report on the Commission communication on a Community immigration policy and Mr Evans 's report on the Commission communication on a common asylum procedure and a uniform status , valid throughout the Union , for persons granted asylum .
When I introduced the presidency ' s programme to the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , I mentioned the fact that our presidency had made these two areas - asylum on the one hand and immigration on the other - a priority , and said that there were several reasons for our doing so .
First of all , I note , echoing my European colleagues , that the public have a genuine expectation here , a legitimate expectation , and it is our duty as politicians to respond to this urgently , of course , but also , I believe , to provide some reassurance .
This implies managing migratory flows effectively and it also means that we need to take measures to prevent the asylum procedure from being abused .
We have to recognise that there is widespread concern about the upward trend in the figures which we are seeing more or less everywhere in Europe .
Secondly , the evaluation of Tampere , which will be carried out at the end of our presidency , should allow us to identify the areas in which progress has been made in the field of justice and home affairs , but also to propose measures with a view to remedying any shortcomings revealed as soon as possible , and we have to admit that there are some .
To avoid the regrettable consequences of these shortcomings , we think that it is necessary to relaunch the political process at the Laeken Summit .
To do this we will need to resolve several issues which , though in the guise of technical difficulties , are in fact the subject of political dispute .
I must in addition thank Commissioner Vitorino who always puts forward very sensible proposals , but has also proven to be very open-minded in his concern to make progress and who is willing for his proposals to be challenged if this moves the issue forward at European level .
With these two points in mind , the Belgian Presidency wanted even now to create the necessary political impetus to provoke a substantial debate on issues such as establishing a common and balanced immigration policy and setting up a European asylum system .
In other words , we are working with our colleagues in this presidency to ensure that the Council of Ministers is once again able to play its role as architect of the European edifice and thus focus on settling a number of political disputes .
Its legislative work should lead to visible operational activity and cooperation on practical matters between the law enforcement agencies and the immigration authorities .
I have to tell you that for my part I am convinced that a common European approach , based on solidarity , is the only viable approach to these matters .
We should remember that for a long time many Member States believed that they could tackle this problem on their own .
They have to admit , however , that the results have not come up to expectations .
Let me take asylum first of all .
The right to asylum is , of course , a priority for all of our countries .
Europe ' s dignity would not , I believe , allow otherwise .
We still wish to see the Geneva Convention applied in full and compliance with it reaffirmed .
It seems to me that in this respect our countries have nothing to be ashamed of .
The efforts which we are making to meet our international commitments cannot be challenged or called into question .
However , it is also apparent to all of us that large numbers of people are using this procedure as a way of entering the territory of our Member States for reasons other than those laid down in the Geneva Convention .
I therefore think that we ought to consider what action we might take in the light of these two observations .
In just a few months , the Commission has completed a significant task , producing the proposals for directives which we now need to examine and which concern : harmonising the conditions for the reception of applicants for asylum ; harmonising the procedures for granting and withdrawing refugee status ; revising the Dublin Convention ; harmonising refugee status and , finally , subsidiary forms of protection .
Although we need to see all of these texts as part of an indissociable whole , there is good reason to be self-disciplined about the order in which we examine them .
Bearing in mind the timetable set by the Commission scoreboard and the Commission communication on asylum which provides for a two-stage approach , the presidency has decided to focus as a priority on the three following directives : harmonising the common minimum conditions for the reception of asylum-seekers ; the Community instrument to succeed the Dublin Convention and harmonising procedures for granting and withdrawing refugee status .
The first two documents have had their first reading , which I might describe as encouraging and from which it was clear that Member States wish to make progress in this field as quickly as possible .
As far as harmonising procedures is concerned , I organised an exploratory debate at political level during the Justice and Home Affairs Council of 27 September , based on specific questions which required specific answers .
For example , the Member States had to give their views on how the directive should be structured , and in particular on the criteria to be used to distinguish between admissible applications and manifestly unfounded ones , the number of bodies involved in assessing these criteria , their nature , the appeals mechanism making it possible to refer the matter to them , and how precise to make the qualitative standards for the decisions and the authorities making those decisions .
It was proposed to ministers that the same working method be used to examine the directive on family reunification .
This exercise made it possible - although it is certainly difficult - to make some progress , particularly on defining the notion of the nuclear family .
It is clear that the diversity of the national systems in place in our Member States means that any moves to bring them into line with each other will indisputably and necessarily require significant efforts to be made on all sides .
None of the Member States can hope that the uniform system will correspond to what it has been familiar with at home .
Above and beyond these national differences , however , I did note with satisfaction that we are all working towards the same objective : establishing procedures which are fast and effective - this is very important - but which of course respect the rights of refugee applicants .
The presidency will , moreover , continue to make every effort , working in collaboration with the Commission , to meet this objective as soon as possible .
In addition , I welcome the recommendations made in Mr Evans ' s report , which seek to flesh out the provisions in the Treaty of Amsterdam and the Tampere conclusions with a view to implementing this common European asylum regime .
Our response to this issue has to be a joint one , based on solidarity .
Europe needs to toe the same political line where admitting refugees onto its territory is concerned and needs to act together to stamp out the underground activity which this provokes .
If we ascertain that procedures are being abused , we obviously need to find solutions to situations of human distress .
Europe needs to work along these lines to improve conflict prevention , and also , through its cooperation programmes , to establish better living conditions throughout the world .
Organising information campaigns in the countries of origin should make it possible to combat illegal immigration , but also to thwart the plans of criminal organisations which are at the origin of this modern form of slavery and which do not hesitate to have recourse to any means , in particular violence and terror , to achieve their ends .
Exploiting these flows of refugee applicants for criminal purposes is an additional concern for the whole of the European Union and it is our duty to respond to this by adopting emergency measures to act as a deterrent .
It was with this in mind that we raised the issue of trafficking in human beings during the open debate with the accession countries at the Council meeting of 28 September and decided on measures to take in this field by adopting operational conclusions .
This package of measures can and must range from measures to protect victims to police-related measures such as reinforcing checks at Europe ' s current and future external borders , while safeguarding the possibility for those who are fleeing persecution to find asylum in our countries .
Finally I agree that we need to draw a clear distinction in the measures which we put in place between asylum-seekers looking for international protection and those who want to enter the European Union for other reasons , which are incidentally sometimes legitimate .
At a time of openness and mobility , this is certainly not about transforming Europe into a ' fortress ' but about reflecting on how we can manage immigration in a transparent , realistic and balanced way .
I do not have any ready-made answers to these questions ; instead we have elected to organise - in collaboration with the European Parliament and the Commission - a European Conference on Migration , which will be held on 16 and 17 October in Brussels . I should like , Mr President , to take advantage of the fact that this event will soon be upon us to thank you for the considerable support which this Parliament has given us in organising this meeting , which is , I believe , unprecedented , and which will bring together expert observers of these phenomena which are a real problem in today 's society .
The Brussels hemicycle of the European Parliament is a prestigious venue and symbolises the fruitful collaboration between the European institutions , which , on an issue such as immigration , is quite obviously vital .
In addition , I hope that many Members of this Parliament will attend the conference , thus fostering a rich and productive debate .
This event , to which we will have the honour of welcoming ministers , senior officials from international institutions and politicians , will provide an opportunity to hold an in-depth political debate on migratory flows , the issues at stake and their consequences .
It will allow us to get a general idea of the way in which migratory flows should be addressed within a common European policy .
At the conference the floor will be open for contributions from all participants which should help us - and this is our political objective - to make some essential choices at the Laeken European Summit .
The idea is to reinject momentum into the search for a global approach towards migration .
Furthermore , we are all aware that these questions of principle conceal a certain tendency for people to exploit the phenomenon for economic and even political ends and we cannot ignore this .
Significant migratory flows head for Europe , either abusing the procedures which were designed for completely different purposes or , even , entering Europe completely illegally , which is of course just as reprehensible .
A large number of these illegal migrants also benefit from criminal help , both abroad and in our own countries .
Obviously these abuses of the system sustain those who try to exploit the migratory phenomena for economic purposes or to achieve political aims and we cannot remain indifferent to this .
I was pleased to see that the issues which will be debated during the conference are the same as those raised in Mr Pirker ' s report on immigration .
How can we manage migratory flows successfully ?
How can we draw a clear distinction between asylum and immigration ?
What impact would relaxing the conditions governing the entry of immigrants have on illegal immigration ?
Do our Member States need a new wave of economic migration ?
Is this need felt to the same extent across the Union ?
What consequences does the fight against the shadow economy have for illegal immigration ?
What are the undesirable consequences of the migration of qualified labour and how can we counter them ?
In which areas do we work together with the countries of origin ?
What instruments can we put in place to establish a genuine policy of integration ?
The presidency believes that this is not simply a question of resolving technical issues : everyone knows that these matters are highly charged , economically and politically , but also at a purely human level .
We need to take account of many phenomena , including underground ones , which makes establishing a common immigration policy particularly complex , especially from an economic point of view .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , before drawing to a close , I should like to remind you of our desire to work in full institutional collaboration with you , the European Parliament , within the rules laid down in the treaties , in the hope that together we will be able to take further steps towards creating an area of freedom , security and justice which will benefit Europe and the people of Europe .
This is already the third time that I have had the pleasure of addressing you .
This is not an onerous task ; it is an honour , and I am delighted to be able to work together with you .
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Minister , today ' s debate has come at a crucial time : we are two weeks away from the European Conference on Migration , which has been organised by the Belgian Presidency , and two months from the Laeken European Council , which is tasked with carrying out the mid-term review of the Tampere agenda .
Both of these should be essential stages in the process of drawing up common immigration and asylum policies .
In adopting the two resolutions which are on the table today , whose quality and balance should be saluted - and I should like to take this opportunity to congratulate the rapporteurs , Mr Pirker and Mr Evans - the European Parliament will , I am sure , express clear and forceful priorities in good time .
Since the tragic events of 11 September , the European Union has been confronted with a new political agenda in the fields of justice and home affairs .
Thanks in particular to the determination of the Belgian Presidency , it has so far been facing up to this remarkably well .
The European Council of 21 September sent out a very clear message to us .
We should adopt as a matter of urgency the measures necessary to reinforce the internal security of our Member States and their nationals while making the fight against terrorism a priority .
At the same time , however , the European Council of 21 September emphasised that neither should we stop working on other issues set out in the Treaty of Amsterdam and thus towards our objective of safeguarding and developing an area of freedom , security and justice .
I am delighted that the European Council underlined the need to strike a political balance between stepping up police and judicial cooperation with a view to combating crime and terrorism , on the one hand , and establishing an area of freedom , security and justice , that is protecting the fundamental rights of the public , on the other .
I have always stressed in these debates here with the European Parliament , but also with the Council , that we need common immigration and asylum policies more than ever .
The relevance of both the provisions of the Treaty of Amsterdam and the Tampere conclusions has been repeatedly reaffirmed .
I am convinced that the public genuinely expects , and even demands , the addition of European value to national policies whose limitations are becoming ever more apparent , whether they be security policies or policies to protect civil liberties .
To achieve an objective of this kind and identify the European added value which we can bring to national policies , I believe that we should take into account both the security imperatives and the respect for values which are the common defining values of our European Union , including the freedom of movement which is guaranteed by the Schengen Agreement .
The Council has asked the Commission to evaluate its proposals on asylum and immigration in the light of the terrorist attacks in the United States of America .
We have already buckled down to this task .
The political will to move forward on these matters which was reaffirmed by both the European Council and the Justice and Home Affairs Council should give us new hope .
As the Minister emphasised just now , it is true that the slow progress and the difficulties which we have encountered on certain dossiers could cast serious doubt on our ability to take substantial decisions within the very strict deadlines in the Commission timetable .
This new momentum should benefit all aspects of our cooperation on justice and home affairs , provided that the Member States recognise that it is impossible to have European legislation which is a faithful copy of fifteen national laws and that they will each have to give some ground in the search for a common solution from which they will all benefit .
As far as the substance of today ' s debate is concerned , I note that there is broad convergence between the Commission ' s views and those of Parliament , as reflected in the two excellent reports by Mr Pirker and Mr Evans .
Whether they concern the principles on which the common European asylum regime should be based or the components of a coherent approach towards the migration phenomenon , we do not have any difficulty in going along with most of your recommendations .
In some cases we have even anticipated them and several of your requests are already taken into account in our proposals on the legal status of long-term residents and on admission for employment purposes , or again in our communication of last July which followed on from the one of November 2000 and went into more detail on some of the guidelines .
In other cases , we are preparing to follow them up , for example in the communications which I intend to propose to the Commission for adoption in the coming months , the first of which concerns the fight against illegal immigration and the second repatriation policies and external border checks .
I also share your concern about the need to develop practical proposals to build a real partnership between the Union and the countries of origin and transit .
We have started work on this by setting up a high-level group , whose mandate will be extended thanks to the implementation of a new budgetary instrument with the strong backing of the European Parliament .
Nevertheless , people may feel that this work and the implementation of the action plans adopted by the Council are not bearing sufficient fruit .
I therefore agree that in general we should recognise the significance of these migratory phenomena by giving them greater consideration when we are formulating the European Union ' s external policy .
To a certain extent we have to recognise that we are hostages of the division between the second and third pillars , which is completely unjustified because on closer inspection the very close links between the European Union ' s development and migration policies become apparent .
I should also insist on the fact that a genuine European policy on immigration and asylum will not exist - over and above the legislative framework - unless national policies also converge in practice and in pursuit of common objectives .
This , then , is the aim of the Commission 's proposed open coordination policy , which is similar to the method already used - incidentally with success - for employment , for example .
An open coordination method of this kind seems to me to have the advantages of flexibility and transparency as well as respecting subsidiarity , while providing a powerful incentive to harmonise legislation and national practice - even spontaneously I would say - and being a good indicator of the areas in which Community intervention is really essential .
It requires the Member States to agree in the Council on common guidelines proposed to them by the Commission after a broad process of consultation .
They will then have to implement them at national level using the national legislative and administrative means at their disposal .
The Member States will be invited to draw up national reports every year in which they will have to take stock of the progress which they have made in implementing these common guidelines .
The Commission 's summary of these reports should make it possible to identify , on a case-by-case basis , the weak points in the essential convergence exercise and , if necessary , to refine and add to the common guidelines .
In July , we put forward a first set of guidelines concerning the management of migratory flows , the admission of economic migrants , partnership with third countries and the integration of third-country nationals into our societies .
Further proposals will be made for asylum when we publish the first report on the follow-up to our communication of November 2000 , which will be sent to you in the coming months .
The Commission hopes that the Council and the European Council will give these new guidelines their blessing so that implementation can start immediately and a first complete round be conducted in the course of next year .
In conclusion , I should like to come back to some fundamental principles which in the current circumstances it is , more than ever , important to reiterate .
First of all , asylum is a right which is guaranteed and regulated by international instruments and confirmed by the European Charter of Fundamental Rights .
No one will dispute the fact that it may be abused .
And it is up to us , as politicians , to put a stop to this , not by further weakening the position of those who really need international protection , but - and this is a better bet - by aligning the procedures and criteria applied at national level and making them more effective .
The introduction , in the medium term , of a one-stop shop , which you support in your resolution , would , therefore , unquestionably be a significant step forward in my opinion .
In the meantime , it would seem to be essential to endeavour to improve the quality of initial decisions , as recommended in our proposal on asylum procedures .
Secondly , we cannot deny that immigration occurs .
It would be eminently regrettable if some people were to take advantage of current feeling to revert to a policy of slogans .
Slogans will not resolve the immigration problem .
Above all , name-calling , which is an accessory of racist and xenophobic sentiment , must be avoided .
What we do have is a genuine policy to manage migratory flows at both national and European level .
And the terms of reference would appear to me to be obvious .
Legal immigration channels need to be clearly identified and the possibilities which they represent need to be quantified , not on the basis of the unexpected whims and uncertainties of the economic cycle , but on the basis of a realistic assessment of our societies ' structural needs and how many immigrants they would be able to accommodate .
A dialogue with the countries of departure is necessary and it is important to take into account the different types of immigration with which we are faced .
Some immigrants are long-term and are expected to stay in their host societies for good , but others - and there are increasing numbers of them - are part of cyclical migration flows , which implies - and this should be encouraged - that they will maintain a stronger link with their region of origin .
Finally , the credibility of a proactive immigration policy must be consolidated by an effective campaign to combat illegal immigration and the trafficking in human beings which is associated with it .
We should give serious thought to creating a major new Community instrument , alongside those which are designed to combat exclusion , which might , for example , address the specific problem of integrating immigrants .
Today , cultural pluralism is becoming a characteristic of our societies , particularly in urban areas , which raises very serious challenges .
It may inject real dynamism into society if it is based on genuine mutual tolerance .
But it may also be the source of confrontation and social division .
This mutual tolerance and respect will be one of the keys to social balance and cultural progress in our European societies .
I should like to thank the European Parliament for helping to enrich this debate , which I sincerely hope will be brought to a positive conclusion .
Through the impetus given by the Belgian Presidency and with the personal commitment of the Minister , Mr Duquesne - whom I should like to thank and whose efforts to reach compromises in a true European spirit I can vouch for - I hope that Laeken will constitute a major step towards establishing the area of freedom , security and justice .
This is not a dream ; it is a reality which the public is increasingly keen to experience .
Mr President , as we all know , the last few weeks have been very difficult and we will continue to live in challenging times for many months and years ahead .
Therefore , this is a very important debate , and I am delighted that not just the Commissioner but the President-in-Office , Mr Duquesne , are here in person , recognising the importance of this issue .
As Mr Duquesne implied in his contribution , if the recent happenings have shown us anything , it is that we cannot turn a blind eye to events around the world and hope that they will go away .
The problems of people wanting asylum , the situation and the plight of the people of poor and troubled countries all over the world are our concerns and they manifest themselves on our doorsteps , on our shores and in our parliaments if we do not address them .
At one level these problems manifest themselves as debates in this and other parliamentary assemblies .
At the worst level we find bodies in lorries at Dover , on the beaches of Spain and other countries .
This is the plight of desperate people seeking desperate measures to start a new life .
But these people are not resorting to this sort of action lightly ; they are escaping from terror , war , torture , rape , vile regimes posing as governments and , of course , in some cases , poverty .
So there can be no more appropriate time for countries to be working together to confront these humanitarian challenges .
I congratulate the EU Heads of Government for having brought asylum into the Community competence and setting a progressive agenda at Tampere .
I congratulate the Commission on these proposals , which have started the debate on how a common asylum policy should be shaped .
In my report before Parliament today I am asking for a common and wider interpretation of the Geneva Convention of 1951 , a clearer definition of who should be recognised as a refugee and one that is consistent across all 15 countries .
Let us also harmonise the treatment asylum seekers receive ; let us establish Europe-wide common standards and then make sure that we enforce them .
If we adopt this report we can start to establish minimum basic rights , as the Minister and the Commissioner have said , for refugees , for access to welfare , housing , education , health care - things that we in the privileged world take for granted .
In recent years it sometimes seemed that EU countries were competing to become the least attractive to potential asylum seekers .
Common , Europe-wide standards will inevitably create a more balanced distribution of asylum claims throughout the EU .
That must help my city , London , and all the major cities of Europe .
It must also stop countries being able to lower their standards , which will be good for asylum seekers , who can be more confident of a fair hearing .
That is something of which we should be proud and not ashamed .
In addition and crucially , Europe must collectively do far more to address the root causes that lead to people seeking asylum and becoming refugees .
Governments must make concerted efforts to help create peace in the troubled parts of the world , however difficult , and to increase aid to developing countries - strong measures that in time will work towards countering the pressures that force people to migrate .
It is for the same reasons that we must press ahead with the enlargement of the European Union .
As Commissioner Verheugen said recently , we cannot ask ourselves the question : can we afford enlargement of the European Union ?
Instead we should put the question : can we afford not to enlarge the European Union ?
In committee , many centre-right and right-wing Members voted against my report in whole or in part .
I challenge those Members who are sitting opposite today , not to just give a prepared speech or ignore what I am saying now but to tell us why they are opposing certain parts of it and why they want to diminish the rights of a fair appeal , which is Amendments Nos 6 and 8 by Mr Schmitt .
How will this make the system better ?
To those - perhaps the British Conservatives - who will vote against this report in its entirety , if they were here I would ask them to explain to Parliament how we can address the current asylum situation in Europe without Europe-wide policies .
They must recognise that this is a global issue and one that cannot be dealt with on an individual basis in each country .
I sympathise with Amendments Nos 11 and 12 by the Green Group , but I cannot support them .
We could support them in another report dealing with those escaping from hunger or environmental disasters .
However , this is a compassionate report , one with which we can be satisfied but not complacent .
In conclusion , I should like to thank my colleagues from my own and other groups for their help and support for this report and for their cooperation .
I thank my own group staff for their hard work and I pay tribute to the NGOs that have contributed valuable ideas .
I commend the report to Parliament .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , to start with I would like to say , Mr Duquesne , that I regard it as very positive that you are taking part in this debate yourself as the Minister for the Interior and are not being represented by your Minister for European Affairs .
We have noted that you have a good grasp of the issue and are interested in really achieving something here .
If this can be done in conjunction with the Commission and Parliament , then we can look forward to some real progress .
The European Union is now clearly taking things seriously and is for the first time making a genuine attempt at a systematic approach toward migration policy . We have accordingly clearly established that there are three groups of migrants requiring different measures and different legal arrangements , and that there are also issues which cut across the three groups .
Let us look at the three groups first .
We have economic migrants , and my report addresses how they are received in the individual Member States , depending on the facilities and needs of those Member States .
Then we have asylum-seekers , who are recognised as refugees under the Geneva Convention .
I firmly believe that the Geneva Convention should on no account be watered down or departed from , either by extending or by diluting the grounds for granting refugee status .
What we need are swift and safe decisions for refugees and European minimum standards for the procedures involved .
The third group covers war refugees , that is refugees who come to us temporarily and need a different kind of help again .
Issues which cut across the three groups include family reunification and combating trafficking in and smuggling of human beings and illegal immigration .
That means that we have a complicated system before us .
My report is concerned exclusively with immigration on economic grounds and was adopted with six votes against , so that it achieved a fairly broad consensus .
I would like to express my sincere thanks for the extremely constructive and positive cooperation between the wide variety of political groups in this House , which made it possible to create a broad basis for a new approach to immigration into the European Union on economic grounds .
What is at stake here is controlling the immigration of workers and maintaining social , economic and political stability in the European Union .
However , in view of the events of 11 September , we also need increased vigilance when it comes to the hospitality , aid and freedoms offered by the Union , to make sure that these are not abused by individual elements to breach the security of Europe 's citizens or of the world as a whole .
It should also be clear to us , as I stated at the beginning of my report , that we cannot counter demographic trends by means of immigration alone , but that the only really good and meaningful approach is , of course , an enhanced education policy and family policy .
It must also be clear that we have to give the integration of third country nationals living here legally higher priority than new immigration .
What are the core issues in my report ?
It is evident that when it comes to immigration the European Union can only take on certain tasks and that a great deal must remain a matter for the Member States .
Another issue that must remain in the hands of the Member States is what workers and how many workers should be given residence permits and work permits for a particular Member State , depending on that State 's needs and facilities .
It is also evident that if integration is to be successful , factors such as the availability of suitable work and housing must be taken into account .
Another important issue for the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs is what we expect of immigrants , by which I mean their willingness to integrate and to recognise the Community of values .
Conversely , there should also be an obligation on the Member States to provide an appropriate level of support for integration .
At EU level it is a question of determining conditions for the entry and residence of these migrants and drawing up a coherent system for granting visas , of regulating the ability of third country nationals to move between Member States and the introduction of measures to counter trafficking in and smuggling of human beings and illegal immigration , and also cooperation and information campaigns in and with the countries of origin .
The committee in principle welcomes all the Commission 's proposals on the immigration of workers .
I hope that the broad consensus that we achieved in committee will be repeated when we vote here in the plenary .
.
( NL ) Mr President , when the report by Mr Evans was being written , we were still oblivious to the tragedy of 11 September .
In the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights and Defence Policy to this report , however , a number of recommendations were made which , precisely against the backdrop of 11 September , are very pertinent indeed .
This Parliament has often called for a common and unambiguous policy on evaluating whether or not countries are safe .
It is not acceptable that some Member States should declare countries safe , therefore refuse to receive refugees and asylum seekers , while other countries do .
The security services and embassies of our Member States should join forces in this respect .
Since 1992 , there has been a structure in place , comprising CIREA and the High Level Working Group , but they do not operate well together .
And they certainly do not work well with the Member States .
We are therefore asking for an improved and transparent structure to be introduced in this field .
In addition , in a Union with open borders , discrepancies in admissions policy are untenable , and a joint foreign policy is also totally inappropriate if we fail to sing from the same hymn sheet .
In that sense , I would make an urgent appeal to the Commission to do something about this .
Afghanistan is , in fact , a good illustration of how things can work .
A second observation pertains to the aid to those countries that receive large groups of refugees .
We should provide far more aid to those countries , and especially the UNHCR .
In principle , it is better for people who flee to remain in the vicinity of their own country , so that they can return quickly .
But they do need support .
However , the UNHCR resources have been cut back drastically by the European Commission , and we believe that this situation should be improved promptly .
Moreover , we also believe that people should receive more education in the camps so that they do not fall victim to radicalism and crime .
Finally , the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy would like to point at the need to be a lot more pro-active in terms of conflict prevention .
It would be of great benefit to us if we could close the ranks better in the EU in this respect .
In that way , conflict could be prevented .
The recommendations made by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy have been adopted unanimously in the committee .
It would be unfortunate , in my opinion , if Mr Evans ' report would lead to diversity .
I would like to dare him to work closely with the other groups in order to reach unanimity .
We would then , at least , be able to support his report .
Mr President , the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy welcomes the Commission ' s communication on Community immigration policy and unanimously saw fit to recommend the inclusion of a set of measures based on five premises :
One , to take on Europe ' s shared historic responsibility for this problem .
Two , to consider immigration as a positive and irreversible phenomenon .
Three , to consider the harmony that should exist between the free movement of capital and goods on the one hand , and the free movement of persons on the other .
Four , the application of the whole range of human rights in political , social , economic and cultural terms to all people , including , of course , immigrants .
Five , to take advantage of the opportunity for the European Union to play a positive role in eliminating international inequalities , strengthening the economic links of countries in which immigration originates .
From this , again briefly , the Committee drew five main conclusions :
One , to have an EU immigration policy based upon human rights and mutual benefit with countries from which migratory flows originate .
Two , to promote multiculturalism , respect and positive regard for the contribution immigrants bring to our society and economic development .
Three , to speed up the legalisation of all immigrants and in this way fight against the mafias involved in the illegal trafficking of people .
Four , to have a coordinated common European foreign policy that serves as an instrument for eliminating poverty in countries in which immigration originates .
Consequently , five , to increase the B7-667 budget line and its effectiveness with the aim of limiting illegal immigration and strengthening democracy and the rule of law , in addition to launching integrated development aid programmes .
, draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
( ES ) Mr President , I think the President-in-Office of the Council and the President of the Commission have given us two very good speeches .
The President-in-Office of the Council told us in all honesty that Council is at present rather confused about asylum and immigration policies .
Commissioner Vitorino , who has undertaken magnificent work in this field , told us that , in the area of immigration and asylum , Community institutions currently find themselves caught between two stools : that is to say between the first and the third pillars .
That is to say that immigration and asylum policies , at this moment in time , appear on the one hand in the Treaty establishing the European Community and yet there is no clear Community competence in the field of asylum and immigration .
Also , it is very strange that the Heads of State and Government in Tampere made grandiose statements about a European immigration policy , but we do not know if these will actually be converted into Community Law .
We , in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , have highlighted the inconsistencies between the declarations by the Heads of State and Government in Tampere and the commitments given in the Community Treaties .
I think that the Conference on immigration , which the President-in-Office of the Council informed us would take place within the next two weeks and at which I think there will be significant participation by Members of the European Parliament , will be an opportunity for the three Community institutions - Parliament , the Council and the Commission - to formulate , or to at least start to formulate , the need to give a Community legal basis to the problem of immigration , for , in this case , we have a genuine Community-wide problem .
With regard to immigration we cannot talk of subsidiarity .
The problem of immigration is , at this moment , common to all European countries , and Commissioner Vitorino , in carrying out the work on the Commission communication on a Community immigration policy , is moving in the right direction .
I think that the Commission ' s strategy is suitable , but we need to strengthen it from the constitutional angle with the appropriate modification of the Community Treaties .
Mr President , as the Vienna Monitoring Centre showed last year , there is a need for a progressive policy and leadership in both areas under debate today .
I welcome the recognition that a restrictive approach to immigration has not worked and is counter-productive .
We have only to look at the increase in trafficking and the difficulty in recruiting skilled professionals to demonstrate this .
It is obvious that there is work available in the European Union for people from third countries .
In many of our countries they are crucial to agricultural production and many major companies employ third-country nationals in senior executive posts .
Yet there is still an attitude around that we are doing such people a favour by allowing them to enter the EU to support our economy and our social security system .
Let us be honest : we want them to help maintain our standard of living .
If we get it right , it should be a mutual benefit .
As part of that , we need to ensure equal treatment for third-country nationals , not least in the workplace .
The implementation of the Article 13 directives on anti-discrimination is also crucial .
Why work here , if you then face racism and xenophobia ?
Business tells us that recruitment needs to be made easier and more flexible at all skill levels .
This calls into question work permits attached to a particular job and company .
Unfortunately , the lead committee did not take this on board .
Recruitment is also hampered by restrictions on family reunion , business tells us .
My political group has tabled amendments relating to that human factor . The working rights of partners also need to be improved .
We have also to recognise the fact that some migrants will wish to stay and settle . This is important in terms of continuity and stability for individuals , society and business .
A constant turnover is problematic on many levels and we have to remember that we are human beings , not cogs in an economic wheel .
Mr President , immigration over recent decades , which is measurable in millions , has taken place largely despite the arrangements put in place by the Member States .
In most cases , the hallmark of national policies on immigration is a lack of vision and creativity and a fear of domination by foreign influences .
However , there is now no disputing that immigration has taken place on a substantial scale and that immigration will and must take place in future .
The detailed reasons for this are to be found in the 28 pages of the Commission communication .
The Commission 's shift to an active immigration policy is very much to be welcomed .
The Commission recognises that pressures to migrate will continue and that regulated immigration can be advantageous for the EU , for the immigrants themselves and for their countries of origin .
This change in policy does , however , also mean that decisions will have to be taken and that it is not sufficient merely to administer immigration by hiding behind general political guidelines , or , in the words of the rapporteur , on the basis of the cornerstones of immigration policy .
That would mean that we would never achieve a Community migration policy as laid down in the Tampere conclusions . Instead , immigration would remain a national responsibility for Member States , with all their shortcomings , with just a basic framework at Community level .
Overall , a long-term immigration policy can reduce the pressure from illegal immigration , from trafficking in human beings , from illegal employment and from the economic exploitation of migrants .
Third country nationals must be given the same rights as EU citizens , as the Commission assumes in its communication , and they should be able to contribute to the local economy through their work ; only in this way will the sort of integration we want take place .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission communication on a Community immigration policy with common standards and a common status for recognised asylum-seekers has provoked a much-needed debate and you deliberately arranged for an open debate at the outset , Commissioner Vitorino .
Various possible scenarios have been presented and the possibilities for a common procedure and common principles have been investigated .
I deeply regret that in contrast to the Pirker report it was not possible to achieve a broad compromise in committee .
Unfortunately , in the case of the Evans report , instead of a reasonable consensus emerging , it was ideology that won the day .
It is intended that both the grounds on which asylum is granted and the procedures involved should be extended across Europe .
This is despite the fact , as you mentioned , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , that at present some 90 % of asylum-seekers apply for asylum on purely economic grounds and are therefore rejected , and despite the fact that the present checking procedures can take up to eight years .
I am sure that it is only possible to agree to extensions of this kind if you have totally lost sight of the position in your own country .
What will the impact on us be if arrangements of the kind Mr Evans is presenting to us today become a reality , and if in future persecution by non-State agents and gender-related persecution are recognised ?
In practice this would amount to granting an unlimited right of residence in the EU to most families in the Islamic world .
Why is that ?
Let me explain .
No one would deny that in every Islamic country there are fundamentalist groups that use Islam to discriminate against women 's rights , from the perspective of our system of values .
Which means that any woman in an Islamic State can make a valid claim of persecution by non-State groups .
If this were to be recognised in the EU , she would then be able to bring her entire family to join her .
So the question we need to ask here is this : do we want to and are we able here in Europe to solve the problems of the Islamic world and the problems of the Islamic view of women ?
I have a clear answer to that : no !
And the picture is even clearer now that we are all aware of the problems and risks that have arisen over the last few weeks .
At the same time , Mr Evans , contrary to his original statement , wishes to abolish the concept of a safe third country and thus burden the in any case protracted procedures with additional checks .
My own conclusion is therefore that in its present form the Evans report is irresponsible .
It gives the Member States sufficient arguments for refusing to give us the right of codecision when further EU reforms in this area are being considered .
It is evident that there is a majority in this House that is not yet mature enough to be given such responsibility .
Mr Evans , if you are advocating an extension of the right of asylum here , then I would ask you what steps your own party , the Labour Party in the United Kingdom , has taken in this direction in recent years ?
I can tell you that it has certainly not dealt with things in this way .
That is because it does not have the support of a majority of the population for such steps and Labour could otherwise expect to be voted out .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I would like to be quite explicit about this , and it is obvious in any case : if we try to standardise every detail of the right of asylum across Europe in future , we will be unable to achieve agreement on this in the Council of Ministers .
That is why I am specifically asking you and advising you to limit harmonisation to the necessary minimum standards .
Mr President , Europe is experiencing tension between low population growth and a genuine demand for manpower in the labour market , on the one hand , and a population that is distrustful of immigration on the other .
Faced with this situation , political decision-makers can react in two ways : either by exploiting people ' s fears to their own advantage , at least in the short term , or by attempting to manage the different aspects of immigration as best they can , bravely explaining the reasons for this phenomenon , the benefits it brings our societies , its more problematic aspects and the policies that are necessary .
We have seen some examples of this first approach right here this very morning .
In its two communications , the Commission has , fortunately , positioned itself firmly in the second camp , and we can only congratulate the Commissioner for this and show our approval .
It has also achieved this - I would like to stress - in accordance with the agreements and mandates reached at the European Council in Tampere .
Whilst I fully subscribe to everything my friend and colleague , Mr Evans , said about asylum , I would like to focus during the short speaking time available to me on the communication on immigration and the report .
Both define a clear path to be followed .
The communication discusses , and the report also focuses on , the external and internal causes of immigration , the need for codevelopment policies and a new partnership with the countries of origin , a common European legislative framework to organise entry in a fair , transparent and straightforward way , residency and integration , which to me means rights .
Only after this does it talk , once these standards have been established , of addressing the subject of illegal immigration , because we need legal channels to do this .
Lastly , the report speaks , and we shall be discussing this here in detail when we see the legislative proposals , of establishing new immigration policies in the twenty-first century for a new society and a new economy , that cannot simply be a rehash of guest worker policies from the industrial societies of the 1960s .
I hope that the Council will also align itself with those politicians who want to broach this subject clearly and courageously .
I really hope this will be the case and I say this in the full knowledge that , on the subject of immigration , we are speaking with both our minds and our hearts - I say this knowing that listening to me today are EU citizens , some by birth and others through choice , all invited by my colleague Mr Aparicio , and who have high expectations of this debate .
Parliament will try to prove equal to events , and , despite the fact that on occasions events make things difficult for us , we are going to try , and this is something that has never been done by the PPE-DE Group with regard to asylum , to give strong support to this Commission communication and we hope in exchange , Mr President , that the European Council at Laeken will be able to once again initiate a dynamic and robust policy that will allow us to tackle this much needed common immigration policy .
Mr President , my group strongly supports the report by Mr Evans and welcomes its call for a high-quality common asylum policy .
It is a curious feature of the construction of Europe that more opportunities for cross-border cooperation have been taken by commerce and criminals than by civil servants , and it is about time our national public administrations made a real effort to get out of their bunkers .
The situation at Sangatte , near Calais , has featured often on television screens in my home country in recent months .
The UK can reflect on why so many people wish to come to our country and especially to my city , London .
I like to think , at least in part , that this is a compliment to our free and diverse society , but we cannot just have an open door , and maybe the French authorities need to reflect on whether their system could be improved .
There must be an equal balance of effort and sharing of responsibility to prevent both forum shopping by asylum seekers and ' pass the parcel ' by Member States .
We also need consistency .
It is illogical to be dismissive about people fleeing Iraq or Afghanistan , implying that they are undeserving scroungers , when by common agreement the regimes of those countries are deemed brutal and depressive , and even deserving of military attack .
Even if not everyone from such countries can be judged refugees under the strict Geneva Convention criteria , but only as escaping mere misery , there is no call to demonise them .
We must also be consistent about our attitude to women .
If we think , as we do , that women 's human rights in Afghanistan are grossly denied , we must take account of that in deciding asylum claims .
Finally , we must not weaken or lower the standards of our asylum systems under the guise of fighting terrorism , as the British Home Secretary is threatening to do .
There are adequate powers to detain and deport if security is threatened .
Speedy decisions are those based on high-quality procedures and efficiency such as that offered by the functioning immigration service computers which the UK lacks - not on removing appeal rights for all applicants .
Mr President , when a Community competence in immigration and asylum was enshrined in the Treaty of Amsterdam it certainly raised hopes , chief among them that of seeing a policy on immigration and asylum founded on values associated with democratic freedoms and respect for human rights , especially fundamental rights .
In this respect , we welcome the two Commission communications , which examine these complex issues in great depth .
Thus , instead of ineffective , inappropriate immigration policies which make illegal immigration an inherent part of the system , they propose a flexible approach with provisions for managing flows and integrating third-country nationals .
It is regrettable that our rapporteur on immigration should have focused on exploiting the management of migratory flows for the economic and demographic ends of the countries in the Union , without showing concern for the human factor .
To implement these proposals on an intergovernmental basis , as Mr Pirker wishes , would not only be a step backwards compared with the Treaty of Amsterdam ; it would also show contempt for the need to make immigration and asylum policy a Community instrument and above all it would be a refusal to recognise what is really happening on the ground , which can be seen every day at Sangatte and elsewhere .
Furthermore , we urgently need to correct the misconception that , ' immigration equals workers ' .
The notion of a ' migrant worker ' does not actually take account of what really happens when people immigrate with members of their family , including students or retired people .
Let us remember that the right to live as part of a family is a fundamental right which no country can deny .
There is therefore a strong case in favour of talking about ' residents ' and - why not - ' European citizens ' , assuming that they participate fully .
It is the Member States ' duty to take the necessary measures to ensure that all European residents are fully integrated ; they achieve this by making sure that everyone has the same rights , including political ones .
As far as illegal immigrants are concerned , the only solution that we know of is for the Member States to be responsible for legalising their situation so as to combat all forms of crime , including that committed by traffickers and unscrupulous employers .
Mr President , while stating that our Group is fully in agreement with the Evans report , I should , however , like to highlight two aspects .
First , the procedure for examining refugee applications needs to be speeded up .
Member States should be aware that many of their problems , but especially many of the immigrant refugees ' problems , would be overcome if these applications were dealt with quickly .
A great many refugees - a great many people who have every right to be recognised as such - wait for months or years without receiving aid , deprived of work , gradually sliding towards illegality and often sucked into areas of organised and other crime .
It is therefore necessary to shorten these excessively long time periods .
Secondly , it is important to understand and establish the fact that the notion of a ' safe country ' is one that may be overturned by specific evidence of the treatment an individual receives in his or her country .
I mean that the notion of a safe country must be a relative assumption , because many refugees flee from a safe country because they are personally persecuted .
This notion must not , therefore , be an absolute notion , but the conditions to which the individual refugees have been subjected - in other words , the conditions that have led them to flee to another country - should be examined on a case-by-case basis , and they may lead to the above-mentioned notion of a safe third country being overturned .
Mr President , I should particularly like to thank Mr Pirker for the work he has done .
Now more than ever , as the rapporteur has stressed , it is essential to reformulate Community immigration policy : not just aseptic rules allowing or forbidding entry , but a broader and more responsible approach based above all on economic and demographic assessments and evaluations of social and cultural integration .
We therefore need to lay down a strategy for a sustainable immigration policy in which national and local institutions can play a major part in using objective criteria to identify occupational needs and the availability of jobs , accommodation , social services and training for all those who ask to come and live and work in our Member States .
Setting limits and strict rules means ensuring they get the best possible welcome and are fully integrated , with mutual respect and benefits for both European citizens and the immigrants .
It means avoiding painful social conflict , and it also means being tough on illegal immigration , which all too often is associated with crime and exploitation .
Above all , Europe cannot confine itself to taking a passive role and attitude towards immigration as if it were just a traffic policeman directing traffic .
Europe must act with greater political awareness so that it can also interpret fully the strong motivations underlying these phenomena .
Very often , or almost always , people from third countries come to Europe out of desperation , poverty , hunger or marginalisation .
Their desperation is such that there are mothers who leave their own children and come to our countries in order to earn something for them .
For this very reason , and also because of its geographical situation , Europe cannot play a merely bureaucratic role , encouraging or limiting immigration .
Europe must choose to play a strong , responsible , political role , aware that behind the policy choices to be made regarding immigration there lies the possibility of also being a player in the serious international crisis we are going through .
We must be aware that it is only by making greater efforts through Third World development programmes and by preventing the so-called brain drain that we can implement the best peace policy of all , which is the fight against poverty and injustice .
In conclusion , Mr President , we must be aware that well regulated immigration can bring great benefits to the European Union , to the immigrants themselves and to their countries of origin .
But we must be wary of the demagogy of those who propose too permissive an immigration policy , a policy that would encourage Europe to open its borders indiscriminately , reduce controls and extend the right to asylum to an absurd degree , but then to selfishly close our eyes - as we have been doing for years - towards what is happening in the Middle East and the southern countries , as if it had nothing at all to do with us .
September 11 showed that what happens in those parts of the world affects us closely , and so we should really be convinced , with a little consistency ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , seeing as there is no rule guaranteeing to the inhabitants of one country the right to enter another if the second country is opposed to this , I would like to voice some considerations and one deep concern on the subject of immigration .
This concern springs from having seen communities , and individuals belonging to communities of immigrants , celebrating after the tragic attacks in the United States , and from the knowledge that terrorist cells have been sheltered and supported by certain communities on ethnic and religious grounds .
At this point , with the greatest respect for the majority of immigrants who are respectable and honest , I feel that it would be appropriate , in future , to adopt more stringent criteria when assessing immigrants , based on the precautionary principle , in order to avoid even just the potential risks which some immigrants could introduce into our Europe .
With regard to Europe , in Italy , we are preparing a fairer , more severe , more appropriate law on immigration .
We need to prevent European legislation conflicting with our national laws because we do not want left-wing permissiveness , which was rejected by the Italian electorate , to penetrate our legislation via Brussels .
In Denmark , it has recently become public knowledge that Danish authorities have provided residence permits to outright war criminals , in particular the General responsible for the massacres of the Kurds under Saddam Hussein in 1988 .
This is , of course , scandalous , as the Danish right wing also acknowledges , but ought not the right wing to be content with the fact that the Danish NATO government has obtained military and political benefits from giving shelter to a war criminal ?
Ought not Saddam ' s General to have earned his fare home long ago ?
Naturally , he has been debriefed by the CIA .
That goes without saying .
Very discreetly , of course , just as more and more crucial aspects of political life take place in ever more hermetically sealed rooms .
This baroque situation reflects one of the ambivalent features of Mr Evans ' s report , which is otherwise full of engaging features .
The report endorses and further develops the finest legal principles we know .
The Evans report centres upon persecuted human beings in a way that Mr Pirker ' s , which is of course an expression of undisguised worker imperialism , does not .
This is appealing and necessary .
The problem is that these sound principles are part of political and legal contexts which will in practice reduce them to ideological window dressing .
The common asylum and immigration policy is being used first and foremost as an engine for homogenising countries ' extremely different legal traditions by creating an area of freedom , security and justice that is the crucial link in the European superstate .
The loser in this disagreeable game is democracy , and the benefit for refugees is doubtful unless one is a general in Saddam Hussein ' s army .
Mr President , the Commission communication on a Community immigration policy is extremely disappointing .
I am talking about the written communication , because both the oral statement which Commissioner Vitorino has just made and that given by the Council were very interesting and much more balanced than what we are accustomed to hearing in this House , and they give us hope that there will be a change in policy following the attacks of 11 September .
The written communication in any case is marked by a certain lack of a sense of what is really happening on the ground , the same shortcoming which is responsible for discussions in the Council on the proposals on family reunification being at a standstill today , a fate which may well be reserved in the future for the proposals on asylum which I have criticised , in particular during our last part-session .
The written communication focuses on legal immigration , but - apart from a few allusions - it minimises or forgets illegal immigration and the essential fact that today one in every two people emigrating to the industrialised world does so illegally .
Of course , I am aware that papers have already been tabled on illegal immigration , in particular on trafficking in human beings and on the liability of hauliers , but these are specific texts , tabled , moreover , for the most part by Member States by virtue of their right of initiative , which they still have for the time being .
These texts do not show any evidence of an overall grasp of the problem ; they are not equal to the challenge .
The Commission has just announced that it is going to table further papers following the attacks of 11 September .
So much the better .
In the meantime , however , if anyone wants to read a good document which clearly sets out the real problems associated with immigration and their possible solutions , they have to refer not to the Commission communication which is being examined today , but to the strategy paper on asylum and immigration , the amended version of which was tabled by the Austrian Presidency on 19 November 1998 - yes , I did say 1998 .
I would invite listeners of good faith to compare the two texts ; they will be staggered by the differences in approach .
For example , reading from the Austrian document : Generally speaking , it is no longer only issues related to asylum and the problems of temporary protection but also , and especially , general migration issues , the problems posed by the fight against illegal immigration networks and issues related to expulsion which are at the heart of the political debate .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I ought to read it to you in full , but time does not allow and this sentence on its own shows what the real priorities are .
( Applause from the right )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , taking as a starting point the reports by my esteemed fellow Members Mr Evans and Mr Pirker , I would like to talk about the communication from Commissioner Vitorino which is at the heart of this .
He is a colleague whom we hold in extraordinarily high regard on the basis of our joint work in the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , and whose opinion I have very little in common with !
A fundamental debate is taking place about asylum and immigration in Europe .
It is about guidelines for asylum and immigration in Europe .
We need to be clear about two things : first about the quotas to be applied and secondly about the content .
As far as the methodology is concerned , European directives on asylum and immigration can only set minimum standards .
It is only possible to oblige the European Union as a whole to accept minimum standards .
Anything going beyond that will not be accepted .
One example of this is that Commissioner Vitorino 's proposals on family reunification may suit some people , but it is not possible to stipulate a binding solution for the entire Union .
Some revision is needed here .
As regards content , we need to limit and control immigration .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you mentioned the concept of ' fortress Europe ' .
It is precisely because we do not want to erect a fortress Europe and could not do so anyway that we must control and limit immigration .
The approach proposed by Commissioner Vitorino does not meet these requirements .
A couple more examples : by adopting the concept of the safe third country , we in Germany have been able to reduce the number of asylum-seekers from some 450 000 to well under 100 000 .
Commissioner Vitorino has virtually given up this concept , by making its use dependent on conditions which make it almost impossible to apply in practice .
My second point is that binding material grounds for granting asylum are laid down in the Geneva Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees .
It would be giving asylum-seekers an incentive if we go beyond the binding framework of the Geneva Convention , as in the case of persecution by non-State agents for example .
There are some very worthy individual arguments in favour of this , but we cannot allow a higher level of asylum than at present .
The problem of asylum is with the procedure .
It is still a fact that 90 % of all asylum-seekers in Europe are not victims of political persecution .
So we need to get the procedure under control .
If we can manage to bring the procedure to a rapid conclusion , we can be more generous when it comes to grounds for the granting of asylum .
However , this does not sit well with the three-stage asylum procedure that Commissioner Vitorino is proposing , for example .
Commissioner Vitorino , if Mr Schily , the German Minister for the Interior , who as you know does not belong to the same party as I do , behaves in the same way in Council as he does in Germany then your proposals have no hope at all !
Mr President , notwithstanding the events of 11 September , the Commission communication on asylum basically remains not only appropriate but more necessary than ever .
The Evans report , for its part , is no less topical or relevant .
This is not the time to step back and it is , therefore , crucial to work towards a solution common to all the Member States with regard to the criteria for assessing requests and to cooperation between national administrative systems .
I can see that we will have to confront certain challenges in order to come up with effective regulations .
This effort must not only involve the European dimension , however , but also cooperation with third countries , specifically with the asylum seekers ' countries of origin .
In order to avoid the ' Kafakaesque ' situations often described in the European press , it is crucial that we adopt - and we are not asking for much - minimum standards that will ensure faster and simpler procedures for granting asylum so as to prevent the demoralisation and uncertainty that beset asylum seekers .
The creation of a space of freedom , security and justice will inevitably involve the need for the mutual recognition of judgments . In order to reach this stage , however , we must first of all harmonise asylum procedures .
Mr President , this communication , for which Commissioner António Vitorino is responsible , is making a timely appearance on the agenda .
On the basis of the framework defined in Tampere , we are committed to create a common policy in the field of asylum , which I am sure will have the support of the Council and of Parliament .
Through a joint effort by the Community institutions and civil society we will achieve a platform of understanding , so that by 1 May 2004 the objective outlined by the European Council will be complied with .
Mr President , we have a historical responsibility to take this decision and there is no time for hesitation .
I wish you the best of luck , Commissioner .
Mr Wiebenga , we wish you all the best , and I am sure that the State will be in good hands if you are a member of the Council of State !
Ladies and gentlemen , I must ask you to stick strictly to your speaking time , as we are dreadfully behind schedule !
Mr President , I should first like to pay tribute to Commissioner Vitorino , because I believe that it is thanks to his tireless work that today we are able to draw a clear distinction between asylum-seekers and immigration , and this is to be welcomed .
I would also thank the representative of the Belgian Presidency , who has just definitively abandoned the idea of a fortress Europe , which it is neither feasible nor desirable to achieve .
Finally , I should like to thank our colleague , Mr Evans , for his painstaking work .
I believe that it is by applying clear , fair and precise standards that we will not only ensure that refugees are protected but also fight to release them from the grasp of criminal organisations .
In my opinion , Mr Evans 's painstaking work is in stark contrast to the partisan vision presented by Mr Pirker .
Mr Pirker poses some complex questions , but the answers are inadequate and even dangerous .
This internal report by Mr Pirker , comprising reflection , analysis and proposals , is one of the weakest which we have had to discuss in this Parliament .
Firstly , it contains a series of commonplaces .
After a time , it says , immigrants adopt the birth-rate pattern of the host country .
As I see it , this is a sign of integration and proof that attitudes change .
Instead of being delighted about this , however , Mr Pirker expresses concern about the fact that the destiny of women from the third world , female immigrants who have come from the South , is not confined to having children .
He also recommends a policy to recruit a set number of workers which , he says , is supported by the Member States as a way of reducing the labour shortage in certain sectors .
For him , immigrants are like Kleenex : you use them and when you no longer need them you throw them away .
This is a vision of the human being , more particularly black and African , or dark-skinned , human beings who come from the South , which I do not share .
Mr Pirker 's report deplores family reunification . Mr Pirker 's report does , I believe , in many respects , stand in total contradiction to the Charter of Fundamental Rights and the Treaties of Amsterdam and Nice .
Faced with an issue of this complexity , instead of saying that the tragedy in Dover opened our eyes to the possible consequences of immigration , we would have preferred him to consider taking measures against the hauliers who are the real proponents of modern slavery and against the slum landlords ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , I would like to do something that I rarely do for reasons of time , and congratulate Mr Pirker on his well balanced report , although I believe that he is at present not in the Chamber .
Social integration of economic migrants in the Member States is , as he stressed , absolutely essential if we are to avoid social tensions .
And a greater degree of contact between immigrants and the indigenous population will perhaps also help us to recognise ' sleepers ' and so help to fight terrorism .
I also believe that in view of all the measures proposed it is important to give the Member States the option of fine-tuning the entry and residence of third country nationals in accordance with the requirements of their own labour markets and demographic trends , because these questions in particular can only be dealt with at local level .
It will also be important to take into account the imminent enlargement of the EU when planning immigration policy .
The rapporteur took all this into consideration .
I wish his report every success , and we will certainly be supporting it .
Mr President , for the first time ever in this Parliament we are talking about economic migration and asylum in distinct and separate terms , which could be considered to be a wise move by the European Commission in its respective communications for it will help us to give the debate a sense of order and clarity .
This was one of Parliament ' s requests that has now become reality .
I would like to briefly share two thoughts with you on the issues that are the subject of this debate : firstly , that the migratory movements toward Europe we are now seeing correspond to a mass exodus of citizens who , in their own countries , do not enjoy the minimum conditions necessary for survival and who are being tragically exploited by the organised mafias who traffic in them .
This has already been discussed here in Parliament .
The cases in Dover and on our own Andalusian coast are clear examples of this .
However , illegal immigration of this nature is fertile ground for the social exclusion of this immigrant population and for the exploitation of their labour , in addition to the outbreaks of xenophobia and racism that are taking place in certain parts of Europe .
This problem can only be resolved by close cooperation and collaboration with the countries of origin , otherwise , any policy in this field will be condemned to failure .
Community programmes such as PHARE , TACIS , MEDA , or the immigration and asylum action plans themselves are absolutely necessary .
Yet at the same time , and I would like to put particular emphasis on this point , it must also be stressed , from a political angle in particular , that the countries of origin should make the most of their natural and human resources and , most of all , guarantee political and social stability so that their citizens can have confidence in their own leaders .
This is , therefore , an issue of shared responsibility and not only the responsibility of the Member States or of the European Union itself .
Countries such as Morocco , Algeria or Tunisia are an example of what I have just been referring to .
On the other hand , with regard to the communication on the common asylum procedure , the main problem with which Member States are confronted is that of asylum seekers whose claims are unfounded . The Commission and this Parliament should , therefore , make a great effort to remove the major obstacles blocking the standardisation of solutions between Member States .
On this subject , it does not seem to be the right occasion to talk about a common procedure , distinct from the mandate contained in the Treaty of Amsterdam that refers to a common asylum procedure .
It is not the same .
Furthermore , both the communication and the Evans report fail to define concepts such as persecution by third parties , persecution in cases of conflict or gender related persecution , for example , given that the difficulty sometimes lies more in the definition of the concept of the refugee than in the process of identifying it .
To be precise , we are on the right track : faced with a phenomenon such as asylum and immigration , a concern for many of us , cooperation , solidarity , clear legislation and realism are the necessary prerequisites for addressing one of the major challenges for the European Union in this new century .
Mr President , at a time when we have all , I hope , been scandalised by Mr Berlusconi ' s statements , demonstrating as they do such suspicion and hatred of foreigners , I believe that now , more than ever , it is time to combat racism , and to combat it in all its most insidious forms .
The Commission ' s communication on a Community immigration policy , and the vote on the Pirker report , give us an opportunity to do just that .
In that respect I welcome Mr Vitorino 's statements .
We must not forget that for Europeans the Tampere Summit in October 1999 , which sought fair treatment for nationals of third countries in comparison with citizens of the Union , was a very important event .
We must start from one important established fact , which we were reminded of just now : the myth of zero immigration can no longer be a realistic concept , and in any case demographic problems and labour shortages will have to make us change our ideas about immigration .
This is why , today , we must give our strong support to the Commission ' s communication , because this future Community policy on immigration has a great many virtues , in particular that of combating all forms of criminal activity .
It has to be said that the rapporteur , Mr Pirker , has adopted a rather critical position regarding the Commission ' s communication .
Unlike Mr Pirker , we socialists are convinced that our approach to this question must be a humane approach rather than an economic approach , because we are talking here about the fate of human beings , not about common merchandise .
We must also remember , and we can never remember it enough , that if people emigrate and suffer the pain of separation from their country and their loved ones , it is because they are obliged to do so . They are not simply doing it for pleasure .
The Commission ' s position is fundamental inasmuch as it proposes a framework .
I shall end by saying , in addition , that in a European Union which is constantly becoming more integrated , and which now has the benefit of a Charter of Fundamental Rights , no Member State can now claim that its policy on admission is nobody ' s business but its own .
I therefore reiterate my full and wholehearted support for the Commission ' s proposal , at the same time taking a critical view of the content of Mr Pirker ' s report .
As far as I am concerned , I defer the vote of the French socialist delegation on this report .
Mr President , I wish to discuss Paragraph 15 of Mr Pirker ' s report which says , among other things , that immigrants are expected to respect the community of values - as set out in the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights - and to show a willingness to integrate .
How is this to be interpreted ?
A wave of Islamophobia is passing over Europe at present .
In several EU countries , Muslims have been persecuted .
The most rancorous debate I have been able to follow is taking place right now in Denmark .
Quite a few politicians have made astounding statements .
Mr Camre , a Member of this House , has said that all the countries of the Western world are being infiltrated by Muslims and that , while some of them are friendly enough with us , many of them are in favour of getting rid of us - in Danish , få os fjernet - that is to say , removing us .
That is a prejudiced and irresponsible statement .
My concern , as I address this House , is that the wording of Paragraph 15 might be in danger of creating further scope for this type of inflammatory statement .
Is Europe not in danger of losing its diversity ?
Are we not in danger of tampering with freedom of religion and freedom of expression ?
Could not Paragraph 15 be understood as saying , ' Adapt , full stop . Otherwise , gather your belongings together and go ! '
I wonder if Mr Camre might respond to this .
Mr President , I want to begin by fully endorsing both Mr Olle Schmid ' s description of the political situation in Denmark and the request with which he concluded .
I also want to say that I think there are an incredibly large number of good things in the Commission ' s proposals in this area .
It would of course be marvellous if we were to use our cooperation to strengthen the principles we talk so much about - democracy and human rights and , I might add , humanitarianism - instead of dragging each other down to the lowest common denominator .
I think there are quite a lot of good things in Mr Evans ' s report .
I intend to support it and shall call for a vote in favour of it .
I think , however , that there are still a lot of problems with Mr Pirker ' s report .
It was improved quite considerably by the committee ' s reading of it .
It is also , of course , reasonable to hope that it will be further improved in the course of today when we vote on it .
However , a lot more is required before I shall support the report , which is based principally upon the EU ' s wanting to show solidarity with itself .
Mr President , Mr Evans has put a great deal of thought into his report .
Quite rightly , he raises the issue of the safe-country concept being based on human rights considerations , not on diplomatic links .
He underlines the lack of common approach between the Member States with regard to the concept of safe countries .
This is no longer acceptable .
Mr Evans concludes that the concept of safe countries needs to be defined unequivocally .
Although I agree with his motivation , we must admit that this approach is not a safe one .
I recall that our colleague , Mr Pasqua , as France 's French Minister of the Interior , once said that ' La démocratie s 'arrête là où commence la raison d 'Etat . '
Mr Evans : as long as la raison d 'Etat exists , there is no safe country .
Mr President , I am really sorry about this , because the debate is an interesting one which I believe demonstrates not only the complexity of the issue , but also its political dimension .
It would be unreasonable to think that it is merely a question of settling technical problems in the context of a generalised consensus , and I believe that these difficulties also demonstrate the urgent need to reach a consensus , at European level , on a certain number of essential measures .
First of all I think that it would be unreasonable and irresponsible to deny the extent of clandestine immigration and the fact that it is getting worse .
I believe that that would be unreasonable and politically tactless .
It is therefore very important , in addition to having measures of a regulatory nature , to develop an active policy of combating trafficking in human beings , because such trafficking constitutes , above all , the exploitation of a great deal of misery , poverty and fear , by organisations which are highly efficient and who not only traffic in human beings but also engage in other criminal activities .
For this reason , policing measures , and in particular the intensifying of border checks , are essential if we are to remain one step ahead and ensure that our future external borders will be protected .
I would remind you that the largest police operation that has ever been undertaken in Europe is now underway , on our future external borders .
Thirty countries are involved , from Finland to the Mediterranean .
I am sure I do not need to tell the European Parliament that , to us , asylum is a sacred concept , that it constitutes the dignity of Europe , and that is why , throughout the world , Europe still acts as a beacon and an example .
We cannot preach in favour of democracy and liberty if we do not set an example ourselves .
However , at the same time we cannot ignore the fact that this important value is being abused by a considerable number of people , who probably have , in human terms , legitimate reasons for doing so , but who do it to the detriment of those who are fleeing real persecution .
It is therefore a matter of urgency that we should first of all agree on the conditions for receiving would-be refugees into our territory , and not add still further to the attractive prospect which our prosperous and - though we tend to forget it - happy countries pose to those who know only wretchedness and poverty .
We must therefore agree quickly on the rules for allowing people to come in , if we want to avoid the phenomenon of asylum shopping .
Asylum is , of course , a right , but is it necessary , in order to have legal guarantees , that things should be complicated , thereby allowing procedures to be dilatory and resulting in a situation in which , in some countries , even after four , five or six years no one has proved capable of taking a decision , so that it is necessary to take measures to regularise the situation ?
Respect for the law is not incompatible with rapid and effective procedures .
These were the questions we raised at the last Council , and I was pleased to find that , among the Fifteen , there was a very broad consensus on the need to reach a consensus on this issue .
Finally , of course , we must define a certain number of rules at European level .
I was going to say minimum rules , but I shall not do so because to some people that would mean ' no improvement ' .
What I am trying to say is essential rules which do not necessarily go into matters in detail but which translate into practical terms the fundamental political consensus that there has to be on this subject if we are ever to succeed in overcoming this problem .
We need to do this quickly , and that is why I said that we must , at the Laeken Summit , try to re-launch the European dynamic , because otherwise the outcome would be negative and not a true reflection of our opinions .
We must also decide how much solidarity has to be agreed on at European level because the mere fact that one country happens to be situated at an external border should not mean that that country should necessarily have to bear the whole burden of any measures that are agreed on .
It is true that immigration is another problem , but it is also true that we cannot claim that if we had a more or less unrestricted immigration system all our problems would be solved ; nowhere in the world is there any example of such a policy being implemented , and even where the system is the most liberal , it is still not possible to solve all the problems , especially those that are still linked to illegal immigration .
It is therefore necessary to ask a certain number of pertinent questions , and this is what we shall be doing at the conference which will be taking place in a few days ' time in Brussels .
How is Europe ' s population going to develop ?
Do we still have any requirements at economic level and if so , of what kind ?
Will the situation be the same everywhere ?
Does immigration have to be subject to conditions ?
Is it to be permanent or for a limited period ?
Should we demand a certain number of qualifications , risking savage consequences for the countries of origin , which often have a need for precisely those qualifications ?
Would there not be the risk of an increase in the number of unemployed people , at least in the long run , which would only make budgeting more difficult ?
If we want to find successful solutions to all these questions , we must have the courage to ask them clearly and to come up with some serious answers , and I hope that that is what will happen at our conference .
Finally , I must tell you that the Belgian Presidency - we may be a small country but we are , I think , a realistic one - would like to draft proposals that bear the stamp of realism , because we believe that such realism is the only thing that will enable us to make the progress that is so essential .
If we get lost in ideological or technical considerations , we shall still be debating the question fifteen years hence and we shall still not have made any significant progress .
However , there is an enormous risk , because the people of Europe are waiting for some answers .
They have confidence in Europe . They believe that this is a useful , perhaps even essential , dimension in the solving of such problems .
If we do not succeed in finding answers for our people , I fear that there is a dangerous risk that they will take matters into their own hands , and I am also afraid - and I hope that we in this House share this feeling , at least most of us if not all - that Europe may not be able to remain a Europe of rights and freedoms , a Europe that is welcoming and open , and also , because this is what our fellow citizens are concerned about , a Europe that is prudent and takes precautions , and a Europe that expects all those who find themselves in its territory to respect the rule of law .
Mr President , I am aware that the subject before us is extremely sensitive , particularly at this moment in history .
We have been working - and I refer to this legislature , of course - over the past two years to establish positive relations between citizens and immigrants , to make equal opportunities possible and to create a form of social cohesion .
Now , everyone can see the need to revise certain parts of the agenda we have been working on and , in particular , to identify how the revision of these points can be converted into positive Community legislation allowing us to grow into the kind of Europe we all want .
I would now like to make three points .
Firstly , we need to focus more on defining framework legislation to promote actions at regional and local levels , always in agreement with the Member States , in situations where an initiative is certainly needed to make it easier to balance the three factors which have always been the basis for our analyses of the issue of immigration and asylum .
These factors are migration flows , which must be regulated and continuously monitored , integration , and the fight against illegal immigration which is often , sadly , a source of the more major concerns of crime and the exploitation of human beings .
Secondly , we need a thorough debate at European level on the issues which we consider to be vital for our policies such as cooperation between police forces , judicial cooperation , common forms of control and common information systems .
We must make it quite clear what financial resources we should consider adequate and quantifiable in these areas .
Thirdly , we may well have disregarded or underestimated the importance of one of our tasks .
We must insist on the need for the major educational programmes which are the foundations of our culture , and of multiculturalism , in particular : there must be schooling and education starting with foreign children , especially , irrespective of their legal position .
These programmes are fundamental for the policies of integrating and building the societies we want .
In my opinion , we must establish a substantial educational and cultural programme , a major part of which promotes communication between cultures , for that would be the first step along a path which will certainly bring about the sort of integration we desire .
Mr President , I would first like to thank Commissioner Vitorino .
Commissioner , you have listened seriously to the demands made by many experts on migration and NGOs and have made it clear in two communications how policy on refugees and traditional migrants is to be handled .
With your communication on a common asylum procedure and a uniform status valid throughout the Union for persons granted asylum you have brought forward some excellent proposals for harmonising asylum policy .
Your proposals will now help us to find some concrete solutions .
The rapporteur , Mr Evans , has made a fine job of this .
I regard the additions he proposes as enhancing the current debate on concrete directives .
You have also succeeded , Commissioner , with your communication on a Community migration policy , in making it clear how important it is that future migration in the European Union should be jointly controlled and regulated throughout the Union .
However , we will probably have to carry on debating the wishes of the Nation States , which I take very seriously .
They want to arrange the fine tuning of migration themselves , although their strategies have already been a failure at national level for decades .
I trust that we will soon manage to persuade our colleagues at national level that there is no alternative to Union-wide control of migration .
Mr President , Commissioner , there is no doubt that after the tragic events of 11 September , asylum and immigration policy will be undergoing drastic changes .
In the light of this , it may have been more appropriate to postpone the discussion of these reports because they do not take into consideration recent international developments .
Particular attention should be devoted to the formulation of Paragraph 15 in the Pirker report .
The present document emphasises that the Member States are obliged to respect the rights and duties of third-country nationals .
In my opinion , this is a bridge too far .
Two-way integration is not feasible as long as there is no reciprocity and mutual recognition .
In other words , only if reciprocity and mutual recognition are secured in third countries can two-way integration take place .
The Pirker report has the merit of being frank .
It presents immigration as a simple problem of merchandise linked to the needs of the capitalist system .
In effect , the report regards as positive the view that immigration should be envisaged from an economic viewpoint , as a function of the needs and capacities of Member States .
Article 23 could not be clearer .
Each Member State has the freedom to define the skills profile and number of workers required on the basis of the needs of its labour market .
In other words , the proposed Community policy on immigration is a quota policy .
By adopting such a position , Europe shows that it is still a long way from recognising the right to immigration .
What we have here is residence permits restricted by the requirements of the bosses and the fantasies of the demographers .
Even the issue of keeping families together is going to be subject to different rules for each group of immigrants , which is the exact opposite of freedom of movement , freedom to select one ' s place of business , and the right to live with one ' s family .
Massively overexploited , immigrants are the victims of liberal deregulation .
I shall end by saying that only the general regularisation of the position of illegal immigrants plus citizens ' rights will enable us to combat effectively the modern slavery which we are being invited to support .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are fully aware that this debate addresses one of the most important and ' hottest ' issues at European level : Common asylum and immigration policy .
This situation is the result of two separate factors : firstly , it has come about because the Treaty of Amsterdam granted new competences to the Community , opening up new possibilities for action on a European scale ; and secondly , because there has been a considerable increase in migratory pressures from third countries , the devastating effects of which have been highlighted by certain recent tragic events , such as the massive influx of refugees from the Kosovo crisis and the tragedy at Dover .
It is therefore necessary , for both humanitarian and economic reasons , to define a global policy that is able to effectively manage these migratory flows , which currently constitute a legal vacuum , to which the European Union cannot fail to provide a response .
We must take account of the fact that three different types of people are involved in this problem : asylum seekers , temporarily displaced persons and economic migrants .
Although the symptoms are similar , it is important to distinguish the causes and find different answers .
Confusing the status of these people does not help to solve the problems we are facing , and actually makes them worse .
We also know that this external pressure adds to the internal pressure felt by States that are facing a decline in their own population , caused both by a slowdown of population growth and a reduction in the population of working age , with an increasing population of those over the age of 65 . Concern is also growing about the sustainability of social security systems .
The answer cannot be to make vain attempts at preventing and halting immigration at Europe ' s borders .
The answer lies , instead , in managing and freezing it at current levels .
Hence the need for a carefully thought out , clear and coherent common European policy for the management of migratory flows .
In order to prevent new problems emerging , we will have to consider the real labour needs of each Member State and the resources available for the reception and integration of these immigrants .
It must be understood that we incline more to the approach advocated by Mr Pirker .
I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate Commissioner Vitorino on his announcement today that , within a month , he will be presenting two initiatives on combating illegal immigration and on repatriation .
Lastly , I wish to emphasise that we need to adopt a prudent approach to a sensitive issue that requires intelligent answers .
It makes more sense , for example , for us to give priority to legalising immigrants who can be integrated into the labour market and who are already on Community territory than encouraging a new wave of immigration .
Mr President , at this stage , the European institutions and this Parliament in particular are fully aware that due to the complexity and importance of the subject we are dealing with today , a legislative programme is needed that will only be effective within the framework of a common and coordinated European approach .
There are many points of agreement between the Commission communication and the reports we are debating today .
We need to develop a more proactive policy which recognises that pressure from migration is set to continue and that properly planned immigration can bring benefits to Europe , to the migrants themselves and also to their countries of origin .
Our aim is to improve the management of migratory movements within the framework of close cooperation with countries of origin and of transit , strengthening the fight against illegal immigration and combating the criminal networks involved , guaranteeing , at the same time , the rights of victims .
What is required is a more open and flexible policy which , in addition to providing greater coordination of policies aimed at reducing migratory pressures and strengthening border controls , could have the benefit of achieving a reduction in illegal immigration that would be advantageous to those very people who truly need the protection that refuge and asylum affords .
We should maintain these levels of protection at all costs , as envisaged in the Geneva Convention , for this is also a sign of European identity that fills us all with a sense of pride .
I would encourage Commissioner Vitorino to continue his good work and to keep to the timetable that has been fixed , and the Council to be equal to the position adopted at Laeken , thereby fulfilling the commitments made at Tampere .
It is time to take practical decisions and not to make statements that are only balanced because of their ambiguity .
These are the hopes and needs of Europe ' s citizens .
Mr President , we cannot talk about immigrants and immigration without distinguishing between the different types of immigrants .
There are at least three different types of immigrants : political refugees , refugees from war zones and economic migrants .
Once this distinction has been made , it immediately becomes clear that a single asylum law cannot cover all three categories , as Mr Evans proposes .
Not only does this document fail to correspond to reality , it even goes so far as to demonise the Member States which demand the right to decide whether to recognise the right to asylum on a case-by-case basis , depending on the way the society of the country in question is structured and the adequacy of the reception facilities available , without incurring negative repercussions for anyone .
Instinctively , all of us have always been supportive of those who find themselves in the dreadful situation of being forced to leave their own country and apply for asylum in another , but the level of danger to which the rapporteur would have it conceded that all applicants are exposed in their countries of origin is not always acceptable .
He is compelling governments and Member States - to put it in colloquial terms - not to make a fuss and to open their gates without delay , invoking the Geneva Convention as if it were a magic password , a skeleton key , rather than what it actually is , a series of guarantees that place those seeking and those granting asylum on an equal footing .
Mr Evans ' proposal to establish a common minimum standard - as he calls it - actually invalidates this principle by making it too permissive .
The same may be said of the proposal to introduce a single procedure - as it is called - which , in practice , takes away from the host State any possibility of verifying the suitability of the applicant , who cannot be denied any right , mind you , and whose only obligation is to produce his credentials , as happens among respectable people .
The problem is that refugees and exiles often provide easy cover for decidedly undesirable guests such as drug dealers , traffickers in human beings and terrorists who pretend to be immigrants and then train as pilots and destroy skyscrapers and all the people working inside .
The caution and controls that the rapporteur is denying the States are the fundamental elements of basic , legitimate protection of the States and their citizens .
The Pirker report , which I do support , on a common immigration policy , is much more responsible , not least because it is more balanced , does not make concessions to cheap populism and respects safety measures .
Lastly , to those Members of the left who have attempted once again to bring up the usual controversy against Mr Berlusconi today , I would point out that they are at least a day late .
They should read the Arc-en-ciel ; although they have missed the debate , they are still on time for the train of cheap populism and pointless political speculation .
Mr President , thank you for allowing me to take the floor after such a long and full debate .
I believe that there is no doubt at all that the two reports we have seen today prove that we need a common policy on migration and asylum .
I should like , in passing , to pay tribute to the Commissioner ' s statement and to all the work that Parliament has carried out , which shows that we attach real importance to these issues , particularly in the current circumstances .
I believe that here today we have been able to make our different views clear , and perhaps we have also made clear the difference between asylum and economic migration .
I am not sure , however , that we have entirely avoided confused thinking .
On the subject of migratory flows and the right of asylum , we must make it clear , in the face of all opposition , that rights and obligations have to be shared , by both migrants and host Member States .
We must not have a situation in which certain people can take advantage of the loopholes in our harmonisation in order to create an underclass of Europeans by introducing second-class workers or deferred citizenship .
It seems to me to be important that the rights of workers , of whatever origin , should be asserted and given tangible expression in order to combat the trafficking in human beings , by which certain people exploit misery and distress .
As for our asylum policy , it will gain in terms of quality and justice if we can agree to recognise that it needs to be supplemented by other compulsory cooperation policies which enable everyone to live with dignity and self-respect in their own countries .
In all cases , asylum policy should reject arbitrary criteria linked to the current situation .
I should also like to ask , simply , that we should also give political rights to those whom we welcome for their work .
Mr President , I would ask Members to ponder one question : is it viable in today 's world for all matters of asylum policy to be decided within the parameters of the Geneva Convention ?
The Geneva Convention drafted in 1951 was conceived as a temporary measure .
It was negotiated in a very different world - a world still haunted by the shameful failure of Western countries to offer sanctuary to the victims of European fascism .
It was designed first and foremost to ensure that refugees from communist tyranny would have access to safe havens .
But the world has moved on .
Mass air travel has facilitated unprecedented migratory flows .
The great majority of those seeking better lives in new countries are actuated by understandable - indeed laudable - economic motives .
But the terms of the 1951 Convention , and specifically the requirement to assess all claims individually , even if the applicant is manifestly coming from a safe country , encourage economic migrants to seek entry as refugees .
This clogs the system to the disbenefit of those genuinely fleeing from injustice and wrong .
I support , as Mr Pirker 's report does , a degree of controlled primary immigration .
All countries can benefit from the energy and enterprise of people who are prepared to cross whole continents in search of a better future .
For such a policy to gain public consent it must be fair and transparent and it must be open to account .
It cannot be right for the judiciaries of our Members States , by applying a peculiar interpretation of the 1951 Convention , to operate an immigration policy beyond the control of elected politicians .
If we want to manage a sustainable policy of legal immigration and , at the same time , protect the rights of those most in need of sanctuary , we must take back control of our asylum laws from the judges .
Far from enlarging the scope of the Geneva Convention , as Mr Evans suggests , we should scrap this outmoded accord and replace it with something more suited to the modern world .
Mr President , today 's debate on asylum and immigration is extremely topical , what with insecurity and fear about military operations in the Middle East giving rise to mass movements of desperate people .
Waves of refugees have already reached the European Union , their first port of call being Greece , which is the European Union 's closest border with the Middle East .
Ladies and gentlemen , Greek islands are under pressure from an unprecedented influx of refugees and asylum seekers , mainly from Afghanistan .
Greece is having to shoulder a burden which is out of proportion to what it can cope with , which is why the European Union urgently needs to take its share of the responsibility , in this specific case by helping Greece to draw up an integrated joint plan to protect the right of asylum and ensure that the Geneva Convention is fully applied .
Obviously , the sacred right to asylum must not , under any circumstances , be undermined by the measures needed to combat international crime and terrorism .
In any event , mass movements of people will be dealt with under a fairer global policy to reduce inequalities and resolve differences using peaceful means .
Mr President , the increase in the number of asylum seekers over the last few years is causing grave problems for Member States , which are having serious difficulty in coping with the situation .
As Deputy Mayor of the city of Lyon , I see this problem every day . In my city , the number of conventional asylum seekers has doubled in a little less than a year .
The two Commission communications that we are debating today are certainly an important step forward .
However , we must go further and put an end to the current situation , in which some Member States allow in refugees coming from certain countries whereas others do not .
We must ensure that the countries that receive refugees really do have the means to do so .
In recent times , however , those means have been reduced .
We can no longer receive asylum seekers with dignity .
In our cities we have families living under canvas . This is absolutely unacceptable .
Winter is approaching and we are heading for a catastrophe .
In order to make progress , however , I invite , above all , the governments of Member States and the Council to take the courageous decisions that are necessary .
Insisting on maintaining positions which are too national will end up becoming indecent and irresponsible when the lives of thousands of refugees are at stake and when certain districts in our major European cities are at risk of turning into ghettos .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall be very brief , because I know that voting time is approaching .
First of all , I wish to thank you for all your contributions to this debate , including the critical contributions , and clarify two points of criticism I think are important .
First : with regard to the comment by Mr Nassauer , the Commission has not abandoned the principle of the safe third country .
It has not abandoned this principle at all and in fact we are working , in Council , on a definition of a safe third country and I am sure that , as Mr Nassauer said , Mr Schilly will continue to be as tough a negotiator on this matter as he always has been .
With regard to the second aspect , I should like to remind you that the Commission has given itself the task of reviewing its proposals in light of the international situation that has arisen following the terrorist attacks in the United States of America .
The review is now underway .
We shall undertake this task with the utmost rigour and the results will be submitted to Parliament . The Commission does not take a positive view , however , of the implication that there is a link between terrorism and immigration .
The Commission has put forward proposals that respect rights and seek to manage migratory flows . There are also proposals on combating illegal immigration .
Any attempt to portray the Commission as having no initiatives on fighting illegal immigration is unfair .
The proposal for a framework decision against trafficking in human beings adopted by the Council last week is a Commission proposal .
The communication on illegal immigration , the communication on repatriation policy and the communication on the joint policing of borders have been on the ' scoreboard ' since May 2000 and are part of the Commission ' s work programme that was submitted for debate in this Parliament this year .
These are not the result of emergency measures arising from the terrorist attacks ; they are an integral part of this Commission ' s coherent and consistent immigration policy .
Lastly , I wish to thank Parliament for its support .
I hope that , with the clear ideas that have emerged from this debate , the Laeken European Council will be able to take a step forwards .
These measures provide added value at European level and I thank the European Parliament for its contribution .
( Applause )
Mr President , I feel I must request the floor because I find this situation intolerable and wish to protest at the great number of speeches from large political groups in this Chamber that have sought , this morning , to link terrorism with immigration , asylum seekers and , more than once and in a direct manner , immigration of Islamic origin .
This seems a very irresponsible attitude to me , a time-bomb threatening peaceful coexistence , and I would like to remind you all that many a terrorist with white skin has been born to the world from our own European continent .
Mrs Terrón i Cusí , I am afraid that was not a point of order .
I will not permit any further discussion of this .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
VOTE
Then I suggest that you make an exception and sit in another seat ; perhaps the device there works .
I again request the House 's services to send a technician to you .
( Parliament adopted the draft legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0303 / 2001 ) by Mr Turchi on behalf of the Committee on Budgets on the financial consequences of the expiry of the ECSC Treaty concerning :
1 . Amended motion for a Council resolution [ COM ( 2001 ) 121 - C5-0165 / 2001 - 2001 / 0061 ( CNS ) ] on the adoption of provisions for the implementation of the Protocol to the Treaty of Nice concerning the financial consequences of the expiry of the ECSC Treaty and concerning the Coal and Steel Research Fund
2 . Amended motion for a Council resolution [ COM ( 2001 ) 121 - C5-0166 / 2001 - 2000 / 0363 ( CNS ) ] on the adoption of the multiannual financial guidelines for the administration of the assets of the ' ECSC in liquidation ' with , following completion of the liquidation , the ' Assets of the Coal and Steel Research Fund '
3 . Communication from the Commission to the Council [ COM ( 2000 ) 518 - C5-0204 / 2001 - 2001 / 2095 ( COS ) ] , the European Parliament , the Advisory Committee of the ECSC , the Committee on Economic and Social and the Committee of the Regions - expiry of the ECSC Treaty : financial activities after 2002
Before the final vote on the first proposal
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for the reasons I expressed yesterday and considering the fact that you have adopted my legislative amendments , I call upon you to postpone the vote on the legislative resolutions until the possibility of an agreement with the Commission and the Council increasing Parliament ' s role , pursuant to Rule 69 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure , can be ascertained .
I therefore call upon you to vote on the motion which is not a legislative resolution , to make the political positions of this House on the matter quite clear .
We now come to a proposal , in accordance with Rule 69 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure , to adjourn the vote , and we shall now proceed to vote on it .
( Parliament adopted the proposal ) President .
The matter is accordingly referred back for reconsideration to the committee responsible .
Before the final vote on the second proposal :
Mr President , I repeat what I said just now , that is , I call upon you not to vote on the legislative resolution but to vote on the following motion , which is not a legislative resolution .
We now come to a proposal , in accordance with Rule 69 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure , to adjourn the vote , and we shall now proceed to vote on it .
( Parliament adopted the proposal ) President .
The matter is accordingly referred back for reconsideration to the committee responsible .
( Parliament adopted the motion for a resolution )
Report ( A5-0297 / 2001 ) by Mr Linkohr on behalf of the Committee for Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy on the guidelines for the research programme of the Coal and Steel Research Fund on the amended Council motion for a resolution [ COM ( 2001 ) 121 - C5-0167 / 2001 - 2000 / 0364 ( CNS ) ] on the adoption of the multiannual technical guidelines for the research programme of the Coal and Steel Research Fund .
Before the vote :

Mr President , in view of the Commission 's response to the debate last night and , in particular , to my colleague Mr Mombaur 's point on the expiry of the Coal and Steel Treaty , the protocol attached to the Treaty of Nice and the legal uncertainty now surrounding that , I would ask the rapporteur to comment on this point . Would he be in favour of referring it to our own legal services as the Commission is apparently about to do ?
Mr Linkohr , as rapporteur , has the floor .
Mr President , as rapporteur I cannot but agree with that .
Not being myself a lawyer either , I would be interested to know what the Commission 's position would be in the event of Nice not being ratified before the Treaty expires , for then , or so my reasonable human understanding tells me , a legal vacuum results , and that is something we should have looked into .
In that respect I would like to support Mrs Ahern in what she has said .
Having already , however , been called to speak , I wanted to point out to you that Amendments Nos 1 to 5 are founded on a misunderstanding .
We did not vote on them at all in committee .
They may well be substantially included in the Turchi report - there is no need for anybody to worry about that - but I recommend that we should not vote on them today , and , insofar as I am entitled to demand such a thing , I demand that .
I would gladly submit that to this House 's decision .
I shall call for a vote on Mr Linkohr 's motion , but not on Amendments Nos 1 to 5 .
( Parliament adopted the motion . ) Before the final vote :
In this instance , I ask for a vote on the legislative resolution , in particular because of items 8 and 9 , on which we have just voted .
In my judgment , it is sufficient if we proceed to examine the Turchi report , but because of items 8 and 9 , I would really attach importance to us now actually voting on the resolution .
I ask you to vote in favour of it .
( Parliament adopted the draft legislative resolution . )
Explanation of vote - Turchi Report ( A5-0303 / 2001 ) and Linkohr Report ( A5-0297 / 2001 ) :
. ( FR ) The two reports on the expiry of the ECSC Treaty state - and deplore the fact - that the Council is asking Parliament to give it discharge regarding activities which it has no means of controlling .
In other words , Parliament may vote for what it wants but it will be the Council who decides .
That is certainly one way of recognising that Parliament serves only to give the stamp of democracy to decisions which are not democratic .
These two reports also state that the so-called social aspect of the ECSC is to be abandoned , precisely when we are envisaging the accession of countries on which the European Union intends to impose the restructuring of their coal and steel sectors so as to make them profitable , profitable , that is , to possible Western investors .
In spite of this ' social aspect ' of the ECSC , the restructuring of coal and steel in Western Europe has resulted in the dismissal of hundreds of thousands of workers , a disaster for many people .
Some regions , such as Lorraine , have taken years to recover from the companies that were closed down and the jobs that were lost .
We can imagine what it will be like for the workers of Poland , the Czech Republic or Hungary , who will not even have the chance of compensation or early retirement .
Rather than using the balance from the liquidation of the ECSC as a research fund , which will in one form or another profit the bosses , the sums released in this way should be used in their entirety to continue to pay the wages of the workers who will be thrown out onto the street as a result of future restructuring programmes .
We have therefore voted against these two reports .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.24 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Arms exports
The next item is the report ( A5-0309 / 2001 ) by Mr Titley , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the Council 's Second Annual Report according to Operative Provision 8 of the European Union Code of Conduct on Arms Exports [ 13177 / 1 / 2000 - C5-0111 / 2001 - 2001 / 2050 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , 11 September showed us that the world we live in is very insecure .
We discovered that the world 's security , stability and economy are much more fragile than we previously believed .
Wherever we look - whether at the fight against terrorism , the horrors of the Balkans , the nightmare of a small town in Switzerland , the virtual anarchy in parts of Africa - one common theme emerges everywhere : the huge number of weapons which are freely available .
That is one of the main causes of instability in the world , and we must act before the tidal wave of weaponry overwhelms us all .
The Code of Conduct on Arms Exports was a significant development in controlling this trade .
It is clear from the second annual report that there is rapidly growing cooperation between Member States , both in terms of implementing the code and of achieving greater mutual understanding of the interpretation of the code .
It is also clear that arms export policy in relation to security is becoming more closely aligned .
There is much greater transparency in arms controls policies .
Most EU States , except for Austria , Greece and Luxembourg , now produce their own annual reports , albeit with a huge variance in the quality of information provided .
It is worth noting that the NGOs ' Safer World holds up the UK 's annual report , first introduced by the then Foreign Secretary , Robin Cook , as an example for other countries .
The code 's influence goes beyond the EU : all the accession countries , the EEA , EFTA States , Canada and Turkey now subscribe to the code 's principles .
Member States are also seeking to apply those principles in wider international fora .
It would be a mistake to underestimate the importance of what has been achieved or the considerable mindshift that is taking place among Member States in this field .
Nonetheless , there are areas where the code needs to be strengthened .
The principles of the code will be constantly undermined if action is not taken to control and license arms brokers .
It is beyond belief that in many countries you need a licence to own a shotgun but not to trade in weapons of any type .
Some arms brokers are legitimate businesses ; many , however , are little more than merchants of death .
Action in this field must be an absolute priority .
Similarly , controlling the activities of EU armaments companies will inevitably be compromised by the uncontrolled licensing of production outside the EU .
We further need a more harmonised system of end-use data provision , certification and enforcement .
Controls of official exports are important , but the illegal trade in arms is our biggest problem .
I welcome the work of Member States towards a UN Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons , reminding Parliament that the definition includes things like shoulder-carried , anti-aircraft missiles .
I very much regret the attitude of the USA to that conference and the influence of its gun lobby .
We can only hope that recent events will cause the USA to reflect on the need for global partnerships to remove the causes of insecurity .
We must have a global crackdown on this illegal trade .
Greater transparency is the guardian of our security in this field .
Despite the rapid advances made , I would like to see all countries producing publicly available annual export reports in a commonly agreed format .
The Council 's annual report ought to be more detailed , as I have set out in my report .
We would naturally encourage greater scrutiny of arms policies by Member State parliaments .
I was delighted that last year Member States agreed a Common List of Military Equipment to which the code applies .
We now need a common list of non-military security and police equipment , and I am happy to accept the amendments on that subject .
The list , however , has to be meaningful and provide the basis of effective action in this field and not be a statement of general intent .
We will not win the war on terrorism - which we are all talking about at the moment - unless we control arms , the tools of this deadly trade .
That is the challenge confronting us now and it is even more important today than it was this time last year when we debated the first annual report .
Mr President , first of all I should like to congratulate Mr Titley on his very sound and constructive report .
His efforts , as well as useful contributions by other fellow MEPs , have enabled this Parliament to reach more or less consensus on an otherwise very sensitive issue : the control of the arms trade .
In light of the attacks in America , there is growing awareness of the fact that the vast distribution of arms worldwide leads to unstable countries which form the breeding ground for terrorism .
The Titley report rightly points out that the 1998 EU Code is a major step forward towards a more coherent and transparent European policy on arms exports .
At the same time , however , a number of shortcomings and flaws have been flagged , five of which I should like mention .
First of all , the annual reports of the Member States are not harmonised .
Some countries , including Great Britain and Ireland , give a detailed account of the permits issued and of the amount and value of exported arms .
Other countries , such as Austria and Greece , give no information whatsoever about the licences issued .
In that way , an efficient , effective assessment is , of course , difficult .
The annual report would , therefore , need to meet a number of standards .
Each permit issued should be accompanied by a detailed description of the material , the addressee and end user .
For permits refused , the reason for refusal should be explained in more detail .
Secondly , in my opinion , the monitoring procedures concerning the end user of the exported arms should be stepped up . In Africa , Togo and Burkina Faso are officially the end users of arms supplied from Bulgaria , whilst in reality , these are passed on to Liberia and the rebels of Sierra Leone .
Embassies of EU Member States could play a more supervisory role in situ .
Penal measures should also be introduced for transit countries that violate arms embargos .
Thirdly , I am of the opinion that tighter controls should be in place for the production of military equipment under licence abroad by EU companies or in the framework of industrial joint venture agreements .
It is not acceptable for a certain country to be refused a licence for weapons and for arms manufacturers to be able to circumvent that ban by supplying arms components which are then assembled on site .
A fourth shortcoming is that there is no control whatsoever on private arms dealers , the number of which is rising all the time since the end of the cold war .
Of the five hundred million light arms in circulation worldwide , forty to sixty percent of these are illegal , according to the UN .
A final serious shortcoming of the EU Code of Conduct is that it is not legally binding .
At the moment , it is a no-strings-attached gentlemen ' s agreement .
Sanctions cannot be imposed on those who breach the Code .
Finally , I should like to express the hope that the EU Code of Conduct will form the basis for a worldwide code on the export of arms .
It makes no sense whatsoever for Europe to be committed to controlling the arms trade , while China and Russia continue to export weapons to crisis areas without any restrictions .
In that sense , the UN Conference in July was a missed opportunity , and I believe that this topic must remain a permanent feature in the transatlantic dialogue .
Mr President , Mr Titley has lived up to his reputation and has produced an excellent report on the Code of Conduct concerning arms exports , on which we would like to congratulate him .
Needless to say , the report receives the full backing of the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
That is why I should not so much like to confine myself to the technicalities of the report , but rather to a number of general observations .
On 11 September , the first reports rolled in about the horrific attacks in the United States during the vote of the Titley report in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy .
The European Union has reacted adequately and coherently .
All available means are being deployed right across the pillars .
One would wish for the same promptness of action in other areas too .
The EU can do anything if it puts its mind to it .
Where the arms export is concerned , we have to make do with a Code of Conduct which is considerably restricted by Article 296 of the EC Treaty which protects national security interests .
That is such a vague concept that Member States , if they so wish , can more or less do their own thing .
In fact , it has never been clear to me in what way national security interests can be different from those of the European Union .
The arms export agreements are also typified by a large degree of voluntariness , but also , for example , by inconsistent agreements on the end use of exported arms .
That is why an EU-wide and effective approach is lacking .
Not all relevant information is made available , which obstructs the transparency of the policy .
Annual reports are useful , but joint action is preferable , of course .
Mr Titley ' s report mentions a few areas which require attention , such as the destabilising distribution of hand-held weapons .
That causes great chaos in some parts of the world .
The trade in these weapons also sustains phenomena such as child soldiers .
My group would like to turn this into a priority , also in cooperation with the candidate countries , the countries of the Stability Pact and countries such as Ukraine and Russia , for we know that many of the hand-held weapons which are in circulation in the world originate from those countries .
The EU must make every effort , together with those countries , to tackle the often criminal trade in weapons .
Here too we require a new international coalition .
In the light of 11 September , it is important to tighten the agreements on the export of so-called dual-use goods .
I am curious about the discussions which are undoubtedly already taking place behind the scenes .
The citizens would like to know how the export policy will be adopted to prevent the wrong expertise from falling into the wrong hands .
I would quote the reports on terrorism and the use of weapons of mass destruction in this connection .
Here too , better cooperation with Eastern Europe and the Commonwealth of Independent States is necessary .
What will happen to the export of encryption software ?
Will new arrangements be made in this connection ?
The least we can ask from the Council and the Commission is to indicate the role which can improve the organised arms export policy in the fight against terrorism .
As far as I am concerned , the debate on Article 296 can be re-opened .
Arms export must form an integral part of the new EU security policy .
Only then will it be truly effective .
Mr President , I welcome much of what is in the report , particularly the need for transparency , the issue dealing with the end use of weapons and the illegal trade in arms .
As Mr Titley mentioned , the control of small arms is important .
It is a major problem , as we have seen from the tragic events in Switzerland .
There needs to be a mechanism to control non-military security and police equipment .
But I do not support the idea of a European defence industry and we need to look at getting rid of the defence industry .
The recent tragic events in the United States have actually given a shot in the arm to the arms industries .
I will mention one in particular because it is relevant to Ireland , and that is Raytheon .
This company has seen a 40 % jump in share prices as a result of the events of 11 September and thereafter .
We must look at the whole issue of arms production in the first place .
I mentioned Raytheon because it is ironic that , in spite of the peace process in Northern Ireland , Nobel peace prize winners stood on a platform welcoming into Derry Raytheon , one of the world 's biggest arms manufacturing companies .
It is appalling to encourage manufacturers of weapons , or their components , into a place where people are killing each other every day with weapons so that these products can then be transported to other parts of the world to cause havoc and deprivation .
We do not want peace here and wars in other parts of the world .
We should look at ending the trade in weapons completely and the idea of government support for an industry that is responsible for death and destruction around the world is unacceptable .
As regards torture weapons , we have a situation where these weapons are being sent to certain parts of the world with an EU stamp on them .
This is completely unacceptable .
In my own country , Ireland , there has in recent times been an increase in the arms industry , mainly involving US-based arms manufacturing .
This manufacturing comprises mainly components , but irrespective of whether components or end-use weapons are concerned , we should not accept the production of weapons .
There are far more beneficial ways of creating employment for people in a given area than the production of something that is used to kill another human being .
Mr President , in principle our group agrees with the report by Mr Titley , who has done an excellent job in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy .
There are some aspects of the report that we do not agree with , such as that referring to the defence industry , but , generally speaking , this effort to achieve transparency and for the EU to play a crucial , I would say leading , role in the process of world disarmament and also in achieving peace is positive , and , for this reason , we think that it is a good report .
However , there are various aspects that could be improved , especially following the sad events of 11 September , since when North America has been promoting the indiscriminate sale of arms to all those it considers to be potential allies in the fight against terrorism .
We think that this is an appropriate moment to adopt clearly transparent behaviour that would avoid these double standards , and for this reason we , through our colleague Mr Brie , have tabled several amendments which seek specifically to prevent such problems - such as cases , for example , in which arms are indirectly sold to countries that contravene EU agreements through third countries , as is the case , for example , with Turkey , or Israel , bombing or attacking the Palestinians , or Pakistan .
For this reason it would be a good idea to have more control over these sales .
We also think that it is important - as stated by Mr Titley in his speech - to include terrorism as an objective .
Lastly , we also think it imperative , in order to improve transparency , for the Commission itself to draw up a report that clarifies this series of measures so that the role of the EU can be much greater and more decisive in achieving a world at peace and without arms .
Mr President , those who declare that they are dedicated to fighting terrorism need to cleanse themselves of all hypocrisy and must condemn those who carry out the worst acts of bloodletting under the guise of freedom fighters .
In Dublin this weekend , Gerry Adams boasted that the IRA campaign of atrocities were the acts of freedom fighters and not the acts of terrorists .
No wonder The Wall Street Journal the other day carried an article with Adams and bin Laden linked together .
Actions , not words alone , can cleanse the hands of those nations in Europe which have both armed and furthered the aims of terrorists and have then refused to extradite those criminals for proper trial .
Mr President , until a few weeks ago , the distinction between conventional weaponry such as light and heavy arms , on the one hand and weapons of mass destruction on the other , in other words , nuclear , chemical and biological weapons , seemed relatively clear .
Now the very concepts of what constitutes a weapon are in doubt , when a civilian aeroplane can become a missile when guided by a murderous ideal .
We may be tempted to adopt an attitude which is at once relativist , with regard to the means , and ultra-safe , with regard to actions .
I would say , however , that there is now a greater need than ever to prevent tendencies that are not firmly anchored in politics .
Particularly at a time when , as is becoming obvious , we need to speed up the construction of our common foreign and security policy , which must be given the appropriate resources and be supported by an effective shared commitment .
This policy must go ahead on the basis of cohesion , which also means trust between Member States , and of coherence between the ideas that are put forward and practical action .
We are today discussing an issue , arms exports , to which these principles must be applied , today more than ever before .
It would , of course , be better if there were no need to discuss weapons , but , unfortunately , the world we live in is not like that .
The European Union ' s Code of Conduct on arms exports adopted in 1999 is a key instrument for harmonisation and control in this field .
With regard to the Council ' s second annual report , on implementing this Code of Conduct , the rapporteur himself welcomes the greater transparency and the convergence between Member States arms exports policies and the adoption of common principles by third countries . He also , however , highlights the need to go further , putting an end to illegal sales and exercising greater control over arms dealers ' fees and on the destination of arms .
I therefore support the thrust of this report , although once again , I wish to emphasise the need for coherence and cohesion in this field .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is naturally useful to have a report on arms trade .
That is also true of a European Code of Conduct .
But I hope that the tragic circumstances in which we find ourselves will also galvanise us into action , for example in order to render this Code of Conduct compulsory , as Mr Titley rightly pointed out in his report , and finally to also make progress in supervising the arms trade .

For although that is what we intend to do , if we have no control over the end-user certificate , it is impossible to check whether that arms trade is legal or not .
Similarly , the production under licence by EU countries in third countries is another one of such issues .
Ultimately , we will need to reach the stage where we have black lists of countries to which we do not under any circumstance supply weapons . This will need to be monitored and sanctions will need to be put in place .
Mr President , I congratulate Mr Titley on his work and acknowledge his endeavours to include the point of view of civil society on arms exports .
I would , however , mention certain negative points : firstly , light weapons .
The UN Conference in July was a failure : in my opinion , the EU should commit itself resolutely once more to enforcing a reduction .
As regards transparency , I feel that this is still too superficial and that Parliamentary scrutiny should be obligatory for arms exports .
Then there is no reference to the OCCAT Agreement which actually protects industrial cooperation and is the basis for laws such as Italy ' s which make it possible to export arms without infringing human rights rules .
Then there is an arms exports control policy which must be in line with European common foreign policy .
In short , I consider the Titley report to be important , but I feel - this is my point of view and is not a criticism of the Titley report - that the European Union should , in these tragic times , set itself the target of disarmament , not rearmament .
You will excuse me , Commissioner , for addressing you alone , but the Council benches are empty .
I would like to say that I find the Council report very interesting .
This Code of Conduct is also of major importance and this debate is very dignified , although we should ask ourselves how much we are actually achieving .
We must have the courage to go deeper into certain complex issues which are still to be resolved .
The first of these issues , which has already been mentioned by all those who have spoken , is the need to make this code law , that is to convert it into a legally binding instrument , seeing as , nowadays , everything depends on the good will of the Member States of the European Union , which are even free to decide whether or not to submit an annual report , which not all the Member States have chosen to do .
Another complex issue which has yet to be resolved is that of a Community system of controlling the end use , the final recipient of the arms exported and the brokers who , in the arms trade , in arms trafficking - the word trafficking may be more appropriate , more to the point - are the real money-makers .
It is a matter of serious concern that all this is not happening , that we do not have such a control facility , bearing in mind , for example , that the Taliban will probably be fighting in Afghanistan with arms supplied by the West , including some of the countries of the European Union .
Lastly , the candidate countries .
What guarantees will we have that the candidate countries will be able to respect this Code of Conduct properly ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , as regards these questions , there is only one risk , which is engendered by our hypocrisy in disregarding - as has been pointed out - the great difference between a gentleman ' s agreement and a law .
I will therefore close by reiterating that , until the Code of Conduct becomes law , we will be at fault , and this report ' s due reference to the values of democracy and the protection of human rights is likely to be reduced to a mere , ineffective appeal .
Mr President , the report is more critical on the subject of the export of weapons than any previous report by Mr Titley .
Despite this , we must observe that its demands do not reach their target either as regards parliamentary scrutiny or as regards transparency .
As far as parliamentary scrutiny is concerned , there is no demand for formal provision for an opinion by the European Parliament , and that is the least we can ask for if we are to have some degree of influence .
I take an even more critical line on what is said about transparency .
Here , Mr Titley speaks of transparency in the form of a framework agreement .
We know , however , that the framework agreement between six EU States to promote the defence of industry and of a global defence market is precisely the most opaque procedure ever , that it clasps tightly what it used to give : no parliamentary scrutiny and no debate , even on the conclusion and ratification of this agreement .
That must be changed .
Mr President , one thing for sure is that the excessive profits reaped by multinationals , especially American multinationals , from manufacturing and selling arms far exceed the profits to be made from drug trafficking or crude oil .
Tensions , armed conflict and mutual genocide are being provoked and fomented in order to promote the production and consumption of all sorts of arms and munitions , thereby increasing sales and boosting profits .
And governments have no objection ; in fact they are doing their utmost here , given that , as we all know , they cream off huge sums of money from manufacturers supplying arms .
Whatever Mr Titley 's intentions as rapporteur , in today 's general climate of militarisation and warmongering , with a new structure to NATO , with the militarisation of the European Union and , more importantly , with the shameless exploitation of the terrorist attack in the United States , codes like this , even if they do not pull the wool over the people 's eyes , are no more than a hypocritical wish list .
We believe that strict controls are needed and that the manufacture of all types of equipment - and not just exports as the report suggests - should be denied , if not banned .
In the final analysis , however , this is a matter for the popular front , for the global and national peace movement which , as we have seen recently , is burgeoning - and thank God it is .
Mr President , I wish to thank Mr Titley for another excellent and characteristically intelligent report , which we have read with very great interest .
As his report and his speech have made clear , the issue of arms exports is tremendously complex and close collaboration is required by everyone in order to address its many different angles .
There were a number of good speeches in the debate , some of which referred to the relevance of the appalling events of 11 September and their aftermath .
I should like to respond to what Mr Paisley had to say .
As he is not in his place , maybe my remarks will be borne to him on angels ' wings .
I agree with the definitional point he made .
It is an enormously important point for us to make .
Some of us from Spain or the United Kingdom have personal experience of this ; some of us have friends who have been murdered by terrorists .
There is no such thing as a good terrorist .
There is no distinction between good and bad terrorism .
What is a terrorist ?
A terrorist is a man or woman or , alas , a deluded child who sets out in the morning to murder innocent men , women and children to make a political point - the propaganda of the deed .
That is not justified .
It is never justified .
There are never extenuating circumstances , any more than there are ever extenuating circumstances from extrajudicial killings by a State .
So I hope that when we start talking about definitions we will remember what terrorism really is .
We will have views about the political roots of terrorism .
We will have strong views about the importance of trying to find political solutions to some problems .
However , I hope we will not be morally confused about what constitutes a terrorist act .
During the debate on last year 's report , I stated that the ultimate responsibility for arms exports belongs to national governments .
However , it is also clear that some aspects of the arms trade lie within the remit of the common foreign and security policy , with which the Commission is fully associated .
The Commission is making every effort to move forward with the implementation of those recommendations which lie within Community competence and we stand ready to collaborate with Member States where joint responsibilities are involved , for example when one is talking about dual-use goods .
As Parliament is already aware , the associated countries of central and eastern Europe , Cyprus , Turkey , Malta , and our EEA / EFTA partners have issued declarations through which they align themselves with the criteria and the principles contained in the European Union 's Code of Conduct on Arms Exports .
The Union has continued to assist the candidates in their efforts to bring their legislation and administration fully into line with the provisions of the code .
Furthermore , the European Union continues to urge the world 's main arms exporters to subscribe to the principles and criteria developed in our code .
We would react most favourably to the idea of drafting an international code of conduct on arms transactions , on the condition that it is based on the same principles as the European Union code .
The Commission strongly supports the honourable Member 's call for the establishment of common rules for European Union control of the legal trade in small arms and light weapons , as well as effective European Union controls to combat and eradicate trafficking in these arms .
In this respect we welcome the agreement reached at the July 2001 UN Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons .
Although the final text falls well short of the Union 's initial expectations , it marks an important step forward .
It represents a delicate and hard-fought compromise , which would not have been achievable only a couple of years ago .
If all parties involved were to adopt a more positive attitude , the agreement would become a more effective tool for addressing the concerns of all participants in the future .
For the first time the international community has set out some principles for national and international measures which might curb the illegal trade in small arms .
They aim to establish reliable controls on the production , export and transit of weapons ; to apply reliable markings to them in order to trace their origin more successfully ; to criminalise their unlicensed production and trade ; to regulate the activities of brokers ; and to destroy surplus stockpiles and all confiscated weapons .
A new conference will be held no later than 2006 - I suspect that recent events may bring that date forward - and in the intervening period , biennial meetings will consider the progress made on turning the objectives of the conclusions into tangible reality .
We will work hard with the Member States to ensure an active and ambitious follow-up .
The European Union 's commitment to concrete action in the field of small arms is illustrated by a number of projects currently under way or under consideration in different parts of the world .
In Cambodia the European Union gives technical , administrative and financial support to the government and selected NGOs for actions aimed at promoting the collection , control and destruction of weapons .
We also support Operation Rachel , a joint South Africa-Mozambique project , to collect and destroy arms left over since the civil war .
We provide equipment to the Georgian and Ossetian police forces as part of a programme which consists of the voluntary handover and subsequent destruction of small arms in the region .
We also support the UN Regional Centre for Peace , Disarmament and Development in Lima , which works to promote the control of small arms in Latin America and the Caribbean .
We are also considering further projects in the Balkans , Africa and South Pacific .
During the past few months Commission services have begun drafting EC legislation on a number of non-military items such as instruments of torture , to which the provisions of the code should , in our view , apply .
Work is now near completion , and the Commission intends to submit a proposal to the Council soon .
This marks a first step in tackling the issue .
Compilation of a more extended list , which might include items that also have civilian uses - instruments of internal repression such as riot-control equipment , for example - would require the commitment of significant additional resources .
If we are going to take on such a task - which involves establishing the eventual end use of the items and , perhaps , the identity of the end user - then we shall need more resources .
However we will , of course , pay careful attention to what Parliament has to say on that issue .
Progress in that field is conditional on the willingness of Member States and Parliament to make additional resources available for these purposes .
So I repeat our gratitude to the honourable Member , Mr Titley , for an important report .
I hope that year by year we can continue to respond constructively to what he has to say .
Anybody who looks at the violence around the world , the violence often associated with the breakdown of States , from Somalia to Sudan , to Sierra Leone , to Afghanistan ; anybody who looks at the situation created by the breakdown of States knows how much the trade and small arms is responsible for continuing the violence and making the violence far more lethal .
So this report is an important one , and I hope we can respond to it over the coming months and years with appropriately constructive behaviour .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Political and humanitarian situation in Afghanistan
The next item is the Commission statement on the political and humanitarian situation in Afghanistan .
I shall ask Commissioner Patten to take the floor immediately .
I should like to begin the Commission 's contribution myself and then at the end of the discussion ask Commissioner Nielson to say something about the humanitarian situation in which he has been actively involved because of his responsibility for ECHO .
If I have to leave before the end of the discussion it is not for lack of appreciation of the importance of what we are discussing - I believe this issue is going to dominate the international agenda for the next few months - but because I have to attend an important meeting before the EU-Russia Summit with the Deputy-Premier of the Russian Federation to discuss the modalities for beginning discussions on a common European economic area .
We will try to agree the terms of reference of our work this evening before our summit with President Putin tomorrow .
There will be other reports on the Troika visit that I took part in last week with the Foreign Minister of Belgium , which holds the presidency , and with the Foreign Minister of Spain - the next presidency - which demonstrated our commitment to the issues we were discussing .
With my friend and colleague Mr Solana we went to Pakistan , Iran , Saudi Arabia , Egypt and Syria , all in the space of four-and-a-half action-packed , sleep-free days and nights .
I should just like to say two or three words about that visit and make two or three points about the political situation in Afghanistan , leaving the humanitarian issues , which are of such compelling importance , to Commissioner Nielson .
Then I would like to say a word about a draft regulation which the Commission has today adopted .
The main purposes of the Troika visit were three-fold .
First of all , we wanted to make the point clearly to the Islamic countries we were visiting that the campaign against terrorism is not a campaign of the West against Islam .
It is not a campaign of Europe and North America against the poorer countries of the globe .
It is a campaign of decent governments everywhere against those who would try to make their political point through murder and mayhem .
It is a fight , in my judgment , between those who stand up in favour of civilisation , of a number of different religious bases and those who represent the forces which have always been opposed to civilised values .
We made that point strongly in every country we went to .
For me , it is very important to recognise that if we are to make the point around the world that human rights are universally valid , including the right not to be murdered by terrorists - if we are to make that point successfully around the world - it is very important for us not to give the impression that we have a monopoly of virtue , that we in Europe are perfect when it comes to talking about these matters .
It is also exceptionally important for us not to concede that human rights bear a different weight according to the continent you are in .
It feels exactly the same to be tortured , whatever sort of country you are in .
It is exactly the same if you are locked up as a journalist or an editor because you disagree with the government , whatever country you are in .
Those sort of rights are universally valid .
It seems to me that we dilute the integrity of our argument if we give the impression that somehow different civilisations have fundamentally different approaches to human rights .
The second point we were seeking to make is that out of the appalling events , out of the atrocities of 11 September , we must hope that it is possible for some good to come .
Adversity sometimes produces an opportunity to be constructive , positive and to build better for the future .
One thing we said in Pakistan , Iran and elsewhere is that we have a chance now - taking account of the awful things that have happened - of opening some doors and windows which have been closed for too long .
Thirdly , we say that it is a cliché , a truism when people talk about 11 September to say - rather like the fall of the Berlin Wall - nothing will ever be the same again .
But it is actually true .
Nothing will ever be quite the same again .
One way in which we have to make sure that nothing is ever the same again is to try to ensure this time that multilateralism , that international cooperation , works a great deal more effectively in the wake of those awful events than it perhaps has since the 1940s .
That is the challenge to us : to make sure that when we discuss conventions against terrorism in the UN , everybody signs them and everybody implements them .
Those are the sort of practical challenges that we are going to face for weeks and months and years in the future when these events are no longer on the front pages of the newspapers .
Those were three points that we - the only four-person Troika in the business - were making insistently at each of our stops .
Concerning the political situation in Afghanistan , which we were able to discuss both in Pakistan and in Iran , there were of course different views of the situation .
In Iran , for example , there are very strong views about the Taliban .
That is not surprising given the number of Iranian diplomats that were killed three or so years ago by the Taliban in Afghanistan .
There is a general agreement that the political situation in Afghanistan remains extremely fluid .
There are reports from neighbouring countries that the Taliban are in terminal decline .
There are also reports that speak of some Taliban military successes and of a return to what passes for a sort of grim normality in Kabul .
The Taliban continue to show no real sign of being ready to give up Osama bin Laden or forcefully to encourage his voluntary departure from the country .
The opposition Northern Alliance has declared itself ready and willing to assist the United States and international coalition efforts .
Following the death of Commander Masood on 8 September - and I know he made an important visit to Parliament not long ago - there is greater uncertainty as to the cohesion of this alliance .
What is certain is that no wholly military solution is possible in Afghanistan .
In both Pakistan and Iran , where as I said there are very different views of the situation in Afghanistan , there was agreement that only a broad-based government made up of representatives of all factions and ethnic groups in the country , taking account of the security concerns of neighbouring countries , can begin the process of restoring Afghanistan to normality and pave the way for reconstruction .
The means of doing this may be through the Loya Jirga or Grand Assembly mechanism .
It would be for the Afghan people to decide what kind of Loya Jirga process they want and what role different political personages might play in such a development .
I repeat that there is a shared perception of what the outcome should be : a broad-based government .
How you get to that broad-based government is incomparably more difficult to work out , but there is also a shared perception that the world outside - even in the shape of the United Nations - cannot impose a political settlement on Afghanistan .
We can and should aim to facilitate a political settlement , and having facilitated it not then walk away .
We have to make sure that a better government , which will emerge from that sad , embittered country will be able to count on the long-term support of the international community to rebuild from the ruin of the medieval ferocity which has been unleashed on Afghanistan for the last few years .
I should like to make one other point .
We have in the Commission today adopted a draft regulation on specific measures directed against certain persons and entities with a view to combating international terrorism .
The draft proposal includes all those individuals and organisations potentially related to the 11 September attack covered by the US Executive Order issued by President Bush last week .
But it takes the form of a framework regulation which could serve as the vehicle for a wider campaign against terrorist financing .
There is a considerable urgency to this regulation , which is put forward on the basis of Article 308 , for reasons which I am sure I do not have to set out for Parliament .
In these circumstances we would be extremely grateful if Parliament could consider an emergency procedure , if possible completing the consultation process during this week 's part-session .
We would then be able to put the draft regulation to the General Affairs Council next Monday .
I know that the President of the Commission will be writing to you on these lines , Madam President .
We understand the difficulties .
We do not want in any way to curtail examination of this important measure ; but if it could be done very rapidly it would send the right signals .
It would be an opportunity to demonstrate that in exceptional circumstances the Community institutions can act with real despatch .
Not only would we thereby signal the strength of our determination to rise to the challenges presented by the 11 September attack , but we would show that the EU institutions are able to respond to crisis situations .
I will finish my remarks with that point .
So far , in the proposals brought forward by my friend and colleague , Mr Vitorino , a couple of weeks ago , we have demonstrated that though we are sometimes the butt of people 's humour about the lack of speed of our reactions , when it really matters we are able to react very rapidly and comprehensively and we are able to demonstrate in practice what multilateralism should mean .
If there is any institution in the world , if there is any group of countries in the world that can demonstrate the benefits of multilateralism , of arguing about fish quotas or budgets , rather than murdering one another , it is the European Union .
That seems to me to give us a particular responsibility to show leadership in the coming weeks and months and I hope we will be able to do so with this regulation this week .
Madam President , as Mr Patten stated , with four aircraft carriers heading towards the Gulf of Oman and the Persian Gulf , the very least that can be said of the situation in Afghanistan is that it is uncertain .
Even the President of Pakistan - a country where over the last few days there have been huge demonstrations of support for the Taliban regime - has unambiguously stated that the days of the regime are numbered .
The offer to open up the government of three Afghan provinces and the exodus of people fleeing the country to avoid being mobilised against potential intervention by the international alliance clearly suggest that this is true .
If , to this fact we add the decision made yesterday in Rome to create a Supreme Council of National Unity instructed to form a provisional government and name a Head of State , we can truly arrive at the conclusion that the situation in Afghanistan is changing from one day to the next .
So , Madam President , in this context , what attitude should the European Union adopt ?
Well , in my opinion , the European Union , faced with the crisis situation in this region , should present itself as an element of stability and moderation .
The EU should contribute to the establishment of a democratic government in Afghanistan .
The EU should encourage the full application in that country of respect for human rights and fundamental liberties , which the Taliban regime refuses to acknowledge , as proposed by the mission led by Commissioner Patten and the Troika .
At the same time , the European Union has to sign up to the international alliance referred to yesterday by the Secretary-General of the United Nations at their General Assembly .
Lastly , Madam President , the European Union should give its support to an enormous humanitarian task .
We should not forget that 25 % of the 22 million Afghans will survive thanks exclusively to international aid .
However , Madam President , it is important that the European Union does not commit a series of errors .
Firstly , that of supporting governments that do not have sufficient popular support , as happened in the first Afghan crisis a decade ago .
Secondly , the European Union should not commit the error of carrying out indiscriminate actions and of not pursuing tangible objectives .
For we should not forget , Madam President , that our objective should not be to dominate a country that certainly holds a strategic position , but not to encourage the action of extremist elements that could cause the overthrow of regimes such as those in Saudi Arabia , Pakistan or Egypt that would make Bin Laden a martyr or a political military leader or , something that would be far more serious , a religious or spiritual leader .
I think that in conclusion , Madam President , we need to give our total support to Mr Patten ' s proposal and behave with maximum diligence and efficiency to support the Commission ' s proposals today .
Madam President , Afghanistan is a country with an average income per inhabitant of USD 800 .
This statistic makes it the poorest country in Asia and the world ' s fifth poorest country .
There are some five million people who rely on food programmes .
Millions of people live on the Iranian side of the border , millions of others live on the Pakistani side .
The borders are now closed , but it is expected that another million people will end up fleeing .
The hands of the WFP and UNHCR are tied , for they cannot work in that country .
There are a few other international NGOs which boast sound structures and can offer aid .
Over the past few years , the Commission has granted a great deal of aid via the ECHO programme .
I should like to hear Commissioner Nielson give us an extensive account on this in a moment .
We know that we are extremely limited in what we can do .
We , as Europe , must do more .
We cannot cross the borders .
We can use the structure in the country to some extent .
UNHCR and WFP are in the same boat .
I would actually like to echo Mr Lubbers , the High Commissioner of UNHCR who stated that ' in fact , we also need a new coalition which can cope , as it were , with the huge humanitarian tragedy which is unfolding before our eyes ' .
I am consciously disassociating myself from tomorrow ' s debate on security issues that is much broader still .
I should now like to home in on this particular region , however .
We will need to take action in Iran .
We , together with UNHCR , will also need to take action in Pakistan .
We will need to do this as Europe .
To date , each of our Member States has failed to earmark sufficient funding .
They are dallying and dithering .
The European Union has taken sound initiatives in that respect , for which I should like to praise Commissioner Nielson and the Commission , but now is the time to build this coalition .
For if we are not able to tackle this humanitarian issue jointly , we will be presented with the political bill in due course .
You are dividing the world into two .
You are on your own side but not on ours .
It is not ' them ' or ' they ' , but it is our joint responsibility to act in that region .
On behalf of the Socialist Group , I hope that the Commission , in close cooperation with all those involved , the international NGOs , UNHCR , WFP , in Iran , in Pakistan , with the political initiatives which Commissioner Patten indicated a moment ago , manages to send out that signal on time : a new coalition for humanitarian aid in the region .
Madam President , Commissioner Patten correctly said that we have no quarrel with Islam .
I say that we have a quarrel with those who abuse Islam and who turn the principles of Islam into weapons against the innocent .
In the same way , we have no quarrel with the Afghan people .
Our quarrel is with bin Laden who shelters in Afghanistan and with the Taliban , they seem to be almost one and the same , and we pity the situation of the Afghan people .
They are already one of the poorest nations upon Earth .
Two million Afghan refugees are sheltering in the Islamic Republic of Iran and they have been for some years now .
It is sad to see how little international help has been given to those refugees or to their hosts , the Iranian government .
These refugees fled acute starvation and utter brutality in Afghanistan to find a haven in Iran and there are huge numbers of new refugees now on the move .
The psychological terror that our new alliance has properly caused against terrorism in the region is causing the new flight of so many new millions of refugees .
We must ask ourselves , how we can save lives ?
We have always supported NGOs .
We have perhaps given less interinstitutional support .
I plead here to the Commission to look closely at how best to involve our work with that of the United Nations , particularly UNHCR and the World Health Organization , for only the UN , can command the volumes of support that are needed in such a situation , in terms of food , clothing , shelter and the provision of basic needs .
I ask the Commission to assist the refugees who have already fled and are in situ elsewhere .
May I also include the 3.5 million Iraqi refugees in the region .
We must do all we can to help .
Madam President , with regard to the humanitarian dimension of this disaster , I fully concur with Mr Van den Berg .
However , I would like to add one more aspect , which is at the same time a question , a question to the Council , who are not here .
I would therefore like to ask the Commissioner a question instead .
A special area of concern when granting aid is the protection of the aid workers .
It is extremely dangerous to grant the necessary aid .
Is the Commission aware of any European countries being prepared to provide those aid workers military back-up ?
Next , I should like to turn my attention to the political relationship between the EU and Afghanistan .
What is that relationship not ?
Let us be clear about that too .
It does not aim to arm the Northern Alliance .
Neither does it aim to overthrow the Taliban by military force or play the role of Florence Nightingale , caring for the wounded and displaced once the American big brother has smashed everything to smithereens .
So what is - or what should be - the role of the European Union ?
Allow me to quote three examples .
Firstly , I believe it would be beneficial if the European Union , as in the past two , three weeks , were to exercise its moderating influence on the United States , so as to prevent any unnecessary civilian victims from being claimed when the Taliban are brought down .
This is an extremely important condition for any broad coalition in future .
Secondly , I strongly urge the United States and Europe not to make the same mistake as we did fifteen years ago , when we supported the mujahedin in the fight against the Russian presence in Afghanistan by filling the country with arms and then walking away .
That is not acceptable .
Mr Joschka Fischer , Germany ' s Foreign Affairs Minister , put this across very articulately , in my opinion , when he said that we can no longer afford any black holes on the global map .
Next , I should like to move on to my most important point .
In my opinion , any aid , whether it be military , financial , political or economic , now and in future , to the Afghan opposition , whether it be royal or not , should be typified by at least one aspect , namely that this aid should be conditional .
It is not acceptable for Afghanistan to be lumbered with another regime which fails to observe democracy and human rights .
As far as I am concerned , the lesson we should draw from the cold war is , or should be , that not every enemy of our enemy is our friend .
It is friends , in particular , that need to be alerted in an open and critical manner to respecting democracy and human rights .
And that should therefore apply to any aid to any Afghan opposition .
Finally , if the Taliban are fought or overthrown in the name of fighting a strange regime which has been repressing human rights for the past five years , for example where women ' s rights are concerned , then that is a fair motivation for this fight in my view , but we then also need to be consistent , and this must also apply to other countries in the region .
It is unacceptable for a country such as Saudi Arabia to escape our attention , because it now forms part of our coalition , for that country too violates human rights and operates an anti-democratic regime .
In my opinion , the real consequences of 11 September can only be drawn if we display the honesty to tackle that country and that region . Only then will we have a truly justifiable argument against the objection which is currently being heard in that region that our anxiety with regard to Afghanistan would be one of selective indignation .
Madam President , I am able , as it were , to take up where my esteemed fellow MEP , Mr Lagendijk left off .
Who is it we are cooperating with when we wish to strengthen democracy and combat totalitarian regimes , and what is it we are cooperating about ?
In the course of the next few days , we shall no doubt become much clearer about what is possible .
We still do not know , of course , how the United States will react .
We still do not know whether the United States will choose to use violent methods and first and foremost seek revenge , or whether we shall in actual fact be given the opportunity to engage in a radical fight against terrorism following the terrible events of 11 September .
With regard , however , to the issue of whom we are to cooperate with , I would urge us to focus upon the very special circumstance that what we have here is a population exposed to violent oppression and that we must be alert to the fact that half of this population is doubly oppressed .
I am talking about the female portion of the population .
I should like to emphasise that there are in actual fact women ' s organisations which are still attempting , in Afghanistan too , to fight for women ' s rights .
One of these organisations , RAWA , is trying to create the opportunity for both boys and girls to go to school , and we know of course that illiteracy is very high in Afghanistan - 96 % in the case of women and 72 % in the case of men - so that this is in itself a useful thing to fight for .
They are also attempting to put some documentation together and to do some fact-finding in Afghanistan so that those of us outside the situation have a chance of actually knowing what is going on .
When we find out , it is up to us to use that knowledge , and I should like to call upon us to do just that : to use the knowledge that there are courageous women , committed to democracy , and to cooperate with them in our attempt to eradicate the breeding grounds for terrorism in , for example , Afghanistan .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , there is no doubt that the response to recent events must be broken down into several different parts , and I will not focus on internal security or military solutions , seeing as I clearly do not have the necessary ' intelligence ' , nor will I concentrate on humanitarian responses , for I am sure that the European Union and the international community as a whole will be able to respond generously , effectively and competently , as they have always done in the past .
The problem is not one of humanitarian efficiency or effectiveness , which have been proven for a long time now , but rather of deciding what political response to make to the matter at hand .
I am happy to be able to say this here in this Chamber because Parliament and the European Commission have been the only , rare exceptions among the institutions to pay constant attention to the issue of Afghanistan : in recent years , Parliament has been able to present to the Member States and the Council of Ministers a whole range of political and other suggestions .
We can only lament the fact that we were never heeded and our suggestions never taken up or even considered .
We have been trying to draw attention to the indisputable problem of the tragic violation of human rights for years and , since 1997 , the Commission and the European Parliament have also been reiterating that there is a problem of terrorism and drugs in Afghanistan , that is , a major geopolitical problem .
All we can do is lament the indifference shown by the major international institutions .
At the present moment , however , I feel that we have to make a choice : there are moments in history when one has to stop hesitating and take sides , and if we are to do so we must not side with religious fanaticism , dictatorships or some other form of nationalism , but with the liberal democracies - with all their failings and imperfections , admittedly - but also with all their power and their capacity to operate systems which are better equipped to protect human rights in the world .
My concern is the political response .
I fear that it would be a mistake to think that our only enemy is terrorism and , in particular , possibly just Osama Bin Laden .
The issue is much more complex than that : our current enemy is that explosive mixture of authoritarian regimes and dictatorships based on religious fanaticism .
We must make an effort and go deeper into the matter rather than simply believing that if we catch Osama Bin Laden - which would be right and proper and is a legitimate , necessary thing to do - then the problem will be resolved .
A ' holy alliance ' to combat terrorism is being formed , made up of a collection of unlikely , not to say dubious allies : there are a number of regimes which are likely to join this alliance , each for its own reasons , each maybe drawing up a list of its own genuine or alleged terrorists with the aim of suppressing its own dissidents , who may well be non-terrorist , democratic individuals .
We must be careful not to put everything under the same umbrella indiscriminately .
I wonder whether it would not make more sense and be more useful to create a world organisation of democracy , of liberal democracy as we know it - and , once again , I do not deny any of its shortcomings - for I feel that this is the institution which we should envisage in the medium term .
Today , when we talk about women or violation or female genital mutilation , we have no organisation to turn to for help .
This is the great challenge before us : to create , export and promote democracy and freedom .
Madam President , the people in Afghanistan , as well as the entire civilised world , stand to benefit from a drastic end to the Taliban regime .
At home , the Taliban keep the country under a reign of mental terror and prefer continuing the civil war to relieving acute famines .
Viewed from outside , their prompt departure from the political stage deserves the highest commendation , because the Taliban export terrorism .
The handiwork of their guest Osama bin Laden is a case in point , as is the fact that they export narcotics on a large scale .
However , Afghan history and today ' s political reality prove that the Taliban can only be driven out by internal opposition forces .
That is why we deem the present Afghanistan strategy of the American administration to provide financial and material aid to the broadest possible coalition against the Taliban around the king in exile , Zahir Shah , to be the most plausible foreign contribution to this political and military tour de force .
That is why I call on Europe to lend its unconditional support to this strategy .
We are also delighted by the fact that President Bush has earmarked USD 100 million by way of aid for the immense damage incurred to the Afghan refugees .
May this gesture of compassion with the suffering Afghan people be the first step towards a Marshall plan for this country that has been completely razed to the ground by sustained armed violence .
In that way , the international community can discharge itself from its share of the blame for the present situation in Afghanistan and raise a dam against Muslim terrorism and drugs .
Madam President , Commissioner , as I take the floor in this debate , I would be failing in my duty if I did not pay homage , as you have done Madam President , to the memory of Commander Ahmed Shah Masood .
A number of our Members had the opportunity to meet him here just six months ago , at your invitation , and we discovered that not only was he a man of war famous for his tactics and his exceptional charisma , but he could also be a statesman , and a man of peace and reconciliation , the peace and reconciliation for which his country has been waiting for more than thirty years .
My hope today is that this man , my friend , who said that he was prepared to give his life for the sake of the people of Afghanistan , will not have died for nothing .
Obviously I regret the fact that he was not listened to sooner when he asked for international aid to rid his country of the iron rule of the Taliban , and when he condemned the development of that totalitarian movement of Islamic fundamentalism flaunting its desire for world domination .
What Mr Patten has just told us about the political situation in Afghanistan confirms my analysis that Commander Masood ' s plan for solving the crisis in Afghanistan could be well underway .
Now that Pakistan has been obliged to stop giving political and military support to the Taliban regime , that regime should collapse under the pressure of the whole of the Afghan people , as Commander Masood predicted .
I think that proof of this has been provided by the agreement that has just been signed in Rome between the opposition forces and the former King Mohammed Zahir Shah , whose prestige is still as great as ever in his home country .
I also see proof of this in the statements made by Mullah Omar himself , when he announced yesterday that he might possibly be overthrown , and finally in the news that has just reached us about the defection , with seven hundred of his militia men , of the Taliban governor of the Javan region on the border with Turkmenistan , which has brought the province of Badghis under opposition control .
Carried away by the idea of realpolitik , the international community , and with it , I am sorry to say , the European Union , had adopted an attitude towards the Taliban that was at the very least conciliatory , working on the principle that they exercised the real power and that they could not do so without the support of the whole of the Afghan people .
At the time I compared this attitude with the attitude that the Western governments thought they ought to adopt towards the Cambodia of the Khmer Rouge before their abominable barbarism became apparent .
Thanks to that same blind tolerance , we have allowed this hornets ' nest of Islamic terror to develop on Afghan territory .
Its evil deeds were denounced by Commander Masood , and it must now be destroyed , something which I hope will happen very soon .
However , for the sake of destroying a hornets ' next it should not be necessary to burn down the whole house .
On the contrary , it is essential that the Afghan people should be spared , and given all the assistance , of whatever kind , that they need in order to establish a stable regime based on national reconciliation .
I have the feeling - and Mr Patten has just reinforced it - that this is the direction in which the Union ' s efforts are heading , and I welcome this , but I do not forget the disastrous humanitarian situation that prevails in the region as a whole .
I am thinking of the hundreds of thousands of refugees waiting at the border with Pakistan , and also of the people who for months now have been completely without supplies in the northern provinces .
I know that the Russians have set up an airlift for emergency humanitarian aid , operating from the airport at Dushanbe in Tajikistan .
I would not like to see the European Union conspicuous by its absence in this undertaking , in which its assistance is also desirable .
What these people want is , of course , food , but in addition they want medicines , blankets and shelters , and above all they want us to demonstrate our solidarity .
In Bosnia , at the height of the crisis , Europe , acting within the Atlantic Alliance , was able to set up a scheme for parachuting supplies into the most isolated enclaves , those that were at greatest risk .
This is what the people of Panshir are now expecting .
Have we , and have you , Commissioner Nielson , the will and the means to provide it ?
Madam President , I am very much in agreement with the majority of what has been said on this matter and I shall , therefore , not repeat what other speakers have said .
I do think , however , that all of it should be taken into account , given that the whole world is waiting to see the European Union ' s reaction .
It seems to me that , given the condemnation of the situation in Afghanistan that this Parliament has already issued , and given the danger of the reduction in civil liberties , we have to remain united , as Commissioner Patten has said , and present a united front against terrorism .
I am also worried , however , by something else that has already been said : the tragic situation that has arisen since these attacks .
On the one hand there is the Afghan population , which is facing a serious crisis , as was very clearly stated by the Joint Committee of the FAO and the World Food Programme ( WFP ) that recently visited Afghanistan , and which has said that , at this moment in time , the country is suffering widespread starvation due to a serious crisis in agricultural production , that could cause the death of a huge number of people .
To this we must add the continuing danger to the farming population posed by the antipersonnel mines scattered throughout the country and the situation of the thousands of refugees in bordering countries - not only in Pakistan and Iran , but also in Uzbekistan and Tajikistan I would like to point out - that have to be dealt with .
However , what also worries me - and it is on this that I would like to focus , Madam President - is the situation of the populations in all the other developing countries , particularly the African countries , who will suffer the worst economic consequences of this crisis .
According to information from the World Bank , the terror attacks condemn ten million more people to poverty , as a result of economic slowdown and , particularly , from the loss of income due to decreased exports , a reduction in tourism , falling prices , etc .
It is true , Madam President , that the European Union and this Parliament now have to form a strong coalition against terrorism .
But we should also consider - and this would send a signal to the whole world - an international coalition against the poverty , misery and despair of millions of citizens across the world who very often seek protection from the very fanatics who organise these acts of terrorism .
I would , therefore , ask that , alongside this coalition against terrorism , we also send a signal , chiefly to the peoples of Africa and Asia , stating our desire to build a coalition against misery , poverty and despair .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as Chairman of the delegation of the European Parliament for relations with Central Asia , I should expressly like to draw your attention to what is happening in countries such as Turkmenistan , Uzbekistan , Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan .
These countries have been , and will be , the first to be affected by the refugee problem as a result of what is now happening in Afghanistan and in that part of the world .
There is , therefore , an unqualified need for European consultation on the provision of emergency aid , something which Mr Morillon was quite right to point out .
Central Asia is a vulnerable and very fragile region .
It is a vulnerable region economically speaking , in terms of respect for human rights and in terms of the fabric of the civil society and democratic institutions .
It is a region which , for years , has required our support in the fight against fundamentalism and the drugs trade .
That is why we need to ensure that we lend sufficient support to that region .
And what do we do ?
In the 2002 budget , we cut back the budgetary resources allocated to that region .
I therefore urge the MEPs of the Committee on Budgets , together with the entire plenary session , to rectify that budget and to give Central Asia what it is entitled to .
This is my urgent plea .
Madam President , we are facing a war against terrorism that all freedom-loving people must embrace .
As you know , I was born in a country that understands terrorism , with 65 000 dead - please remember that the LTT suicide bombers in Sri Lanka are not Muslims - but the world has so far turned a blind eye on twenty-three years of terrorism .
The tragedy of 11 September has finally focused the attention of those that love democracy and freedom on the cancer that hides within .
The cancer of terrorism . A cancer that is fed , not by religion , but by greed , hate , envy and ignorance .
In Afghanistan , the 1963 Constitution as promulgated by King Zahir Shah is an exemplary document .
I salute my colleague , Edward McMillan-Scott , for taking the initiative to lead a delegation to Rome to initiate a coalition between the King and the Northern Alliance , which I am happy to say has now been signed , as General Morillon has just mentioned .
I want to congratulate General Morillon on inviting Shah Masood here , so that in April we had a chance to meet him .
The 1963 Constitution states that liberty is a natural right of each human being - this right has no limitations except the liberty of others , but freedom of thought and expression is invaluable - that every Afghan has a right to print and publish ideas , that education is a right of every Afghan and shall be provided , free of charge , by the State , and that work is a right of every Afghan who has the capability to do it .
What a far cry this is from the tragedy existing in Afghanistan today , where women are beaten , denied education , kept at home as slaves and with one in eight dying in childbirth .
It is a State run by ignorance using the stick of religion , of which they know little , to cower and terrorise their own people .
The war against terrorism is a war to free the people of Afghanistan from the twenty-eight years of slavery .
I salute President Bush and the British Prime Minister for their determination - shoulder-to-shoulder with a Democratic Party and Ian Duncan Smith , the leader of the Conservative Party who was here in Parliament today - to defeat and eradicate international terrorism .
But this must not be a purely Anglo-Saxon affair .
If the EU and this House are to be anything at all , they must have an involvement in ensuring this most basic of human activities ; the right to live without being terrorised , the freedom to live without the daily sudden threat of death .
We should not think that we in Europe are not targets .
We already know of plans to attack Genoa , Paris and elsewhere .
When will we learn that is our war too ?
Madam President , Commissioner Patten , Commissioner Nielson , I would firstly like to pay tribute to the thousands of innocent victims in New York , Washington and Pennsylvania , victims of an attack on our principles , on our democracy , on our system of freedoms , on our way of understanding peaceful coexistence , on our economy , an attack , at the end of the day , on tolerance between peoples and ideas .
The European response has for once been fast and immediate in the case of this Parliament .
The response of the Commission and the Council has also been quick , as Commissioner Patten has just reminded us with regard to the mission by the Troika .
This is a response that should be firm , forceful , proportionate and selective , in cooperation with the United Nations , and which requires political , military and police measures by the intelligence , diplomatic , legal and economic services which have , in one form or another , already been or are in the process of being adopted .
These must be measures that can be adopted and upheld in the short , medium and long term .
I have to remind you that the magnitude and gravity of events is such that the decisions taken here a few days ago that have still not been implemented have already been superseded by events .
I remember several opinions expressed here by various speakers on the occasion of the Watson report on the European Union search and arrest order just three weeks ago .
Mr Massoud , who came to visit us a short while ago , has been assassinated and so will not be able to see to fruition the objectives he spoke to us about here in Parliament .
As a member of the Committee on Development and Cooperation I would call for the implementation of a major humanitarian aid programme that must be put in place immediately to help the millions of displaced persons and refugees in Afghanistan , Pakistan and other countries in the region .
The humanitarian disaster that is on the horizon could be of a greater scale than any that has taken place in the past as a result of human barbarity .
I shall conclude , Madam President , by stating that the fight against poverty in the world , that we have highlighted on numerous occasions , is now particularly relevant and that we should make it one of our top priorities if we want to solve this problem in the short , medium and long term .
Madam President , the terrible pictures from New York exactly three weeks ago today have entered our souls to stay .
The speedy declarations of solidarity by Europe and the NATO allies have not been forgotten .
Now that the USA has demonstrated that it is not engaging in cowboy politics , but is giving very serious consideration to every step in the fight against the terrorists , we must not leave it to later to convey our thanks and appreciation across the Atlantic .
But what is being done in comparison ?
Take us in Germany as an example : we find fault with the USA and make so bold as to set up rules of conduct .
We are already distancing ourselves from the USA , and an objectionable anti-Americanism occasionally puts in an appearance .
As a German European , I am ashamed of this , bearing in mind also that around 100 Germans were murdered in New York on 11 September .
I can understand why the USA , despite the announcement today that this is an issue for the Alliance as a whole , does not want , if possible , to involve its 19 NATO partners in the military counter-attack against the terrorists and their accomplices , with the exception of Great Britain .
You cannot fight and win a campaign with doubters - and I say that as an officer in the Parachute Reservists .
This is evidence of Europe 's incapacity , all the more so as the wrecked twin towers in New York have their counterparts all over the EU .
Afghanistan may well be a target for the USA 's counter-attack .
The inhabitants of this country battered over decades are leaving their homeland in droves , eking out an existence in refugee camps in Pakistan .
These people deserve the complete solidarity of the EU and of our Parliament .
Aid from the EU should be unbureaucratic and be given swiftly , bearing in mind that winter is very hard over there .
If we do not help now , it is to be feared that the many young refugees there will be easy prey for one fundamentalist or another .
The European Parliament should consider the advisability of sending a delegation of members of this Parliament 's Committee on Development and Cooperation to Pakistan as soon as possible .
Impressions gained directly from experience are always better than voluminous reports .
Madam President , Afghanistan must be the ultimate example of a tragic and failed State and yet , in spite of this , the will exists for it to remain a unitary State across the ethnic divide .
It has now suffered 28 years of communist dictatorship , followed by fanatic Islamic theocracy , turning it into a pariah State as the Taliban harbours terrorists and executes thousands .
There are over 2 million refugees outside the country and some 5 million internally displaced persons , many of whom may flee if hostilities break out between the US and its allies and Afghanistan itself .
The World Food Programme is hampered by difficult terrain , destroyed infrastructure and Taliban policies which prevent female participation , and which have led to the arbitrary arrest of aid workers on charges of religious proselytising and a ban on communications with the outside world , so essential to an international aid programme .
In spite of this , some 218 tonnes of food got through to Kabul last week to avert a crisis .
It is clear that the West must now think of what can be done post-Taliban to bring permanent stability to the country .
Last week , with two of my fellow MEPs , I was privileged to meet in Rome , the former King of Afghanistan , who has lived in the European Union for much of his life .
We were the first Western elected politicians to visit the royal household since the crisis .
He demonstrated a supreme sense of patriotism and duty to his estranged country , and went as far as to say that he would serve Afghanistan in any capacity his people chose through their assembled tribal council , or Loya Jirga , which he has been working on for the last two years .
He confirmed that he has now received key support from the opposition United Front / Northern Alliance forces and will facilitate an internal settlement appropriate to his country .
He is the only acceptable Afghan figure who can unite all the warring factions and demonstrated the ability , when he ruled his country between 1933 and 1973 , to rule constitutionally with tolerance and moderation , even using the English model of sport as a way to unite the disparate ethnic groups .
It was clear to me that Zahir Shah , in spite of his advanced age , was both cogent and fit enough to do the job , after conducting a lengthy one-and-a-half-hour interview with myself and my colleagues .
He has also wisely distanced himself from the restoration of the monarchy as an issue , leaving this to his people to decide .
I urge this House to support the King 's mission in this tricky area .
Madam President , I condemn without reservation terrorism and murder .
I agree with my colleagues that there is no reason for it and no-one has a right to carry out such acts .
Terrorists choose violence rather than the ballot box , inflicting death and pain on innocent civilians , justifying their actions by flying the banner of religion , race or political sovereignty .
Islam , like other great world religions , such as Judaism and Christianity , is a way of life for over one thousand million people in this world .
These millions of Muslims , from Indonesia to Nigeria , from Central Asia to the leafy suburbs of California , knew nothing about Osama bin Laden before 11 September .
For these millions and for Islam there is no place for terrorists like him or any others , whoever they are and wherever they come from .
These terrorists have no authority to act on behalf of any people , race or religion .
Therefore , we must fight terrorism and act against terrorists , not innocent civilians who pursue their lives peacefully and who should have the freedom to believe in a religion of their choice .
Human life is precious and the death of innocent civilians , wherever it occurs , is simply not acceptable .
Reason without passion is sterile , passion without reason is heat .
Let us be firm and decisive .
Let us target terrorism : let us remove the causes that conceive , feed and sustain terrorism .
Madam President , the situation was already bad and now it is worse .
I totally agree with what has been said this afternoon on the situation of the people in Afghanistan .
We put Afghanistan on the list of so-called forgotten crises when we fixed ECHO 's programme and priorities for 2001 .
We had a spending level of some EUR 23 million , which would have covered the continuation until New Year of the very last activity that we were funding there .
In fact we had 29 European NGOs delivering humanitarian aid inside Afghanistan .
They were all there on 11 September .
On 11 September I was on my way to a mission to Afghanistan and to Pakistan .
I was supposed to meet Dr Masood , the Taliban leadership and to go around the whole country seeing the work of these NGOs that we are funding .
I had to cancel the trip .
The morning after , we took the train back from London to Brussels but our luggage was already in the aeroplane for Islamabad .
Now , as I said , the situation is worse .
Winter is approaching .
Winter is such a dominating feature of reality there that even in normal years military fighting more or less stops simply because getting around is so difficult .
So humanitarian aid now faces a really scary challenge .
The international staff of the different aid agencies and NGOs have all been withdrawn from the country .
However , it is very encouraging to see that the local staff is continuing to distribute food - if the food has not been taken over by the Taliban - and is still running health clinics and providing education where it is possible .
Obtaining real , true information is extremely difficult , but we can see that they are trying to keep these activities going even in this situation .
Of course the threat of an outside attack has resulted in large movements of population .
This also has the effect that we cannot rely on people accessing the different storage centres for food as they used to , because they have fled into the countryside in their millions and lost the access to food they had in the cities .
So the internal situation is extremely bad and the people who make it to the border look even weaker than they did before .
Some six million Afghanis are considered to be totally dependent on food supplies from the outside .
If no planting is possible before the winter sets in - and this is most probable - we are in for a very serious threat within less than half a year , even if things work out well in terms of stability .
The very logistics of what is needed down the line , even on the basis of the best case scenario , pose a formidable challenge .
We have supported the different UN organisations very actively , and participated at the meeting of the Afghan support group in Berlin on 27 September .
The UN has launched a UN-donor alert in support of emergency assistance .
The alert calls for some USD 580 million from now until March next year to ensure that delivery of humanitarian assistance and the protection of what is estimated to be around 7.5 million Afghans .
USD 120 million is required immediately .
Funding of this appeal would , in fact , seem to be less of a problem than the overall question of accessibility to internally displaced people and refugees .
There are conflicting views in the discussion as to whether emphasis should be placed on keeping the additional migratory flows within Afghanistan or on encouraging Pakistan and Iran to open their borders , as the UNHCR intends to do .
My personal analysis of this is that we are only able to influence the choice of these people to a very small degree .
Things may happen and we will have to be very flexible in order to be able to do what we need to do as things develop .
We have never had to draw up a contingency plan with so few given elements and so many unknowns .
The need to keep food aid going was central to the discussion at this Afghan group meeting .
Everybody agreed on the urgency , but concurred that the prospects for actually delivering such aid were quite poor .
Most participants argued that food-aid distribution without the presence of expatriates could expose Afghan partners to undue risk .
My earlier reference to Afghan local staff continuing to do what they did before the expatriates had to leave relates to deliveries of existing food and other stocks .
It is a far more difficult and demanding task to manage the convoys of new supplies coming in , given the internal situation that exists today .
Things are different in the north-eastern part controlled by the Northern Alliance and in the rest of the country .
But from the humanitarian point of view it is quite evident that our activities must be targeted at the whole country .
That is how it must be .
We are using three financial tools to fund the aid to the Afghan population .
First - and this is to set the record straight - over the past ten years we have provided humanitarian aid of more than EUR 400 million to internally displaced persons in Afghanistan and refugees in neighbouring countries : ECHO funds , drought mitigation and response activities like food aid , agricultural rehabilitation , water and sanitation rehabilitation , assistance to internally displaced persons and to refugees in Pakistan , as well as prevention of displacements and support for returnees .
So this is more than just food aid .
ECHO and the organisations working with our money have managed to build up a portfolio of meaningful activities that they have been able to continue .
I add that one unfortunate international case is not representative of the situation of the 29 organisations that the Commission is funding .
It is a difficult situation but it is important to note that the organisations we are funding cannot be accused of the same kind of activity .
They were able to work with expatriates until 11 September and to build up a portfolio of activity , which I was very much looking forward to coming to see .
I pay tribute also to my predecessor in this job for laying the seeds of this kind of good cooperation with the European humanitarian NGOs .
We have , this year , committed EUR 23 million to ECHO , channelled through NGOs and different UN agencies .
As I said , this would have covered a continuation of this level of activity until the end of the year .
Then this terrible act of terrorism took place .
We reacted immediately with an additional EUR 4 million .
This is committed for action through the World Food Programme , UNHCR , and the International Red Cross .
Now our response has to go beyond this .
We will approach the budgetary authority in order to get the green light for accessing and using funds from the emergency budget reserve , as in earlier years when ECHO 's normal budget did not cover the needs that arose because of terrible events .
We announced EUR 25 million a week ago in the Commission .
It will form part of this operation and be directed at the immediate situation of the refugees .
We will be asking for more money . But this is covered by the normal procedure for accessing additional money .
The second line of support is EC aid to uprooted people .
Here we fund activities creating environments conducive to a sustainable resettlement of returnees and activities aimed at persuading people to remain in their villages .
This budget line will commit funds from October for a budget of EUR 19 million in Afghanistan , EUR 3 million in Pakistan and EUR 2 million in Iran .
Funds are channelled through Afghan NGOs and UN agencies .
The third line is EC food aid and food security .
Since the beginning of this year this line has committed 30 000 tonnes of food aid to the World Food Programme and 7 000 tonnes to NGOs .
A further EUR 7 million is now being requested by the Commission for the WFP Afghan programme .
Let me address some of the questions that have been asked .
Mrs Nicholson mentioned that we should do more through UNHCR and WHO to broaden the broad basis and improve the organisation of this assistance .
In relation also to Mr Van den Berg 's remarks , from a commercial management point of view , if you will , the operation in Afghanistan is a good case of cooperation between the UN organisations and those very professional and relatively big and specialised NGOs which , for some years now , have formed part of the operation .
What we need now are operational plans for concrete action .
We hear in the media now about a convoy getting through the Khyber Pass and going north .
This is a ' pilot scheme ' , so to speak , which may also progress towards Kabul and on , to try to see what is possible .
But there is no overall plan in place ; this was a response to the UNHCR proposals in the discussion with donors for better planning so as to know what to do and not be burdened down with red tape , as Mr Knolle called it .
This is not the problem .
I would go as far as to say that in general this is not the problem with our work in the humanitarian aid area .
Please keep in mind that the totality of ECHO 's budget is used every year and this year we are coming to you asking for more because of this situation .
The red tape here is minimal .
Protection was mentioned .
Here we are in a terrible dilemma .
We cannot push those voluntary organisations that work with our money into doing something that goes beyond what they want to do .
On the other hand , we have a problem as a funder , for example if they want to do something very daring that may get them into trouble and we just do what we can on the issue of security , no questions asked .
Chechnya is a case in point ; the Russians are still denying our NGOs access to radios , and this is a real problem for the safety of the people there .
This is a balancing act and the responsibility that we have as the funder of the activity goes far into the issue of security .
Again , working with the UN is partly an answer to this , but working to deliver humanitarian aid now to the Taliban-controlled part of Afghanistan under some sort of armed protection is not an option .
There has to be a very open humanitarian mode of operation where suspicion about how one moves around in their country is not a factor .
But this is extremely difficult .
I agree with what Mrs Frahm and Mrs Bonino said about the situation of women .
This is the most extreme version of a denial and violation of human rights apparent to us .
It is part of the conflict that they are in the midst of , and one would hope that sanity emerges after what we are about to go through now .
Mr Belder mentioned the export of drugs .
It should in all objectivity be noted that the Taliban has made an incredible effort to reduce the production of opium and this may be one of the best cases globally that we have seen where they have done what the international community would like to see done .
It reflects a totally different agenda , but has in fact taken place , and so I believed I should mention it .
As regards Mr Morillon 's reference to the deceased leader of the Northern Alliance , Ahmed Shah Masood , we have no better answer than the one very well presented by Commissioner Patten as our view of the need for a comprehensive sort of basis for shaping the future of Afghanistan .
This is the line to take .
Mr Morillon also asked me if I had the determination and the means to do what must be done .
We are relying on the international aid organisations to do what needs to be done on the ground .
We have not been hesitant in mobilising funds and are actively participating in the region with the people representing ECHO who are permanently stationed there .
We are participating in the debate on how to organise things and to understand the situation as much as possible .
In response to Mr Staes , consideration for the countries in the Central Asian region bordering Afghanistan to the north will be part of the package I mentioned and we are discussing resources in addition to the EUR 25 million that we have publicly mentioned .
In respect of the dialogue with the budgetary authority , we are not releasing figures other than this EUR 25 million , but this will be an element in that package which we will be coming back to quite soon .
Thank you for your patience .
This is an extremely demanding situation .
I see this as something that demonstrates to us that , looking back on the history of our own experiment in Europe , we got organised to do what needed to be done in Europe after the Second World War and we did it .
The problem we are discussing here today and the challenges it involves tell us that Europe now needs to get organised and find a way of achieving what the world needs to achieve .
Thank you .
The debate is closed .
Guidelines for the trans-European transport network
The next item is the Commission communication on Guidelines for the trans-European transport network .
I now give the floor to Mrs Loyola de Palacio , on behalf of the Commission .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in its meeting today , the College of Commissioners adopted a proposed review of the trans-European transport networks , as well as the review of the Financial Regulation , which allows for a doubling of the Community funding in these projects , up to a level of 20 % of those projects .
The trans-European transport network has been the backbone of our internal market since it was introduced by the Treaty of Maastricht and , thanks to the guidelines which we jointly adopted in 1996 , the European Union has a structure of networks of European interest which allows the interconnection of our regions and aids the mobility of people and goods .
These trans-European networks are Europe ' s first attempt since Roman times to treat its infrastructures in a truly global and integrated fashion .
The review we are proposing today attempts to update the development of this system and add new priority projects which respond to the problems of the challenges which our common transport policy has raised in recent years .
The liberalisation of transport systems and the increase in demand for mobility have caused an imbalance between the different modes of transport and have contributed to the creation of bottlenecks in certain areas of our infrastructures .
Both the Gothenburg Summit and the Transport White Paper adopted on 12 September have identified these failings and have demanded that the Commission implement urgent measures to overcome them .
In today ' s proposal , the Commission recommends including amongst the priority projects , as well as the so-called Essen projects , eight new rail , combined transport , inland waterways and intelligent transport - specifically the GALILEO project - networks and withdrawing three of the initial projects which have now been completed .
The new projects would be : first , a rail crossing for the Pyrenees which would overcome the natural obstacle which separates the Iberian Peninsula from the rest of the continent .
Second , the high speed train , East-west combined transport , from Paris to Vienna , which will later be extended to Budapest and will complete our network by opening the door to enlargement .
Third , the navigability of the Danube between Straubing and Vilshofen , which will connect the North Sea to the Black Sea , thereby improving the interconnection between the Danube and the Rhine .
Fourth , the GALILEO satellite positioning system , which has been recognised as a priority by successive European Councils and by this House .
Fifth , the road connection between Germany and Denmark via Fehmarn according to the Oresund model , which will improve interconnection between the Nordic countries and the rest of the continent .
Sixth , the high speed rail interoperability of the Iberian network , by adapting it to the track gauge of the rest of the European continent , which will ease sky and land congestion .
Seventh , the extension of the Brenner project from Munich to Verona , as far as Naples , adding the Bologna-Milan line .
Eighth , the extension of the high speed train south as far as Nîmes , which provides a connection between the north and south of Europe .
The necessary global investment for these projects , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , will amount to more than EUR 66 000 million which must clearly be financed essentially through national , regional , private , public and also , where necessary , Community funds .
Geographically , they involve the whole of our territory and they will have a decisive impact on the competitiveness of our economy .
This review also includes in the trans-European networks certain minor technical modifications of existing projects which were left outstanding after the conciliation of the package of guidelines in 1996 .
In the Transport White Paper , we committed ourselves to this review , which is the most urgent priority , being followed in 2004 by another which will include in more detail the projects of the new countries of the Union .
Ladies and gentlemen , it would be premature to do so now since , despite the preparatory work , which has made good progress , there is a lack of important information which we will only be able to obtain during the final phase of enlargement .
This Parliament will therefore examine the next review and this is a political commitment which I reconfirm to this House .
Mr President , I am very pleased to fulfil through this work the mandates of the Council and the new requirements of our common transport policy .
Now that the White Paper and the review of the trans-European networks have been presented , I trust and hope , within the framework of codecision , that this Parliament will make its contributions , the added value of which is evident .
Ladies and gentlemen , I know that , while this has been approved today by the Commission , there are currently other topical realities , specifically the consequences for the airline industry of the events of 11 September , which you will possibly be concerned about .
Of course , I will answer any question which you may ask me on this subject .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President , thank you for giving us this interim report now .
We are dissatisfied with the Member States , which have practically left you in the lurch over the last eighteen months .
The interim report on trans-European transport networks has been overdue since 1999 .
We thank you for presenting it now .
So , to our first question : in your report , you make it clear that you want to add new elements , but that you also want to insist on existing projects which the Member States are still working on - such as the Brenner Tunnel - now at last being finished .
I would therefore ask you how we are together to ensure , even with a possible change to the financial arrangements , that older projects as important as the Brenner Tunnel , but also new ones such as the Franco-Spanish link across the Pyrenees , or the fixed Femarn Belt link between Denmark and Germany actually get built ?
Madam Vice-President , you have already alluded to my second question : when are you going to expound to us in committee or in this House what your policy will be on combating new competition in the form of subsidised air travel ?
Alternatively , the question arises of how the airlines can be helped after the tragic events of 11 September .
Mr President , I think we can agree wholeheartedly with the Commissioner 's main remarks .
I can endorse what Mr Jarzembowski said .
I would , however , like to ask the Commissioner , whether she is able to concur with our view that we can learn from our experiences to date with the Trans-European Networks .
One insight we have gained , for example , is that when the Heads of State and Government decide upon a list , it is not necessarily better than a list of priorities drawn up by Parliament .
Might we perhaps put this experience to use ?
In any case , I find the Commissioner 's approach in the White Paper , concentrating on rail and waterways , very much worthy of support .
The issue there is whether or not we should check all the financing instruments , not only the money we have for the TEN , with that in mind .
For if it is only in the TEN that priority is given to rail and waterways , then the other funds - for example the Cohesion Fund and others - will have to be looked at and checked with a view to their perhaps taking these new priorities into account as well for the sake of consistency .
Those are my two questions .
Commissioner , a moment ago , you listed a number of projects which will be followed up , for example the high-speed link from Paris-Vienna-Budapest eastwards , and making the Danube navigable .
I wonder whether the latter actually falls within the scope of such a thing as establishing trans-European networks .
I can understand why its repair would come under its scope , in a manner of speaking , for there is already a link there at the moment .
That was my first question .
Secondly , it has become increasingly clear to me that with regard to links within the candidate countries , requests are mainly made for north-south links , and not only for east-west links from Europe and beyond .
My question is therefore whether there are currently any plans to set up more north-south links in the present candidate countries ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for your questions .
Firstly , I will reply to Mr Jarzembowski .
It seems to me extremely urgent that we present to Parliament and the Council a new system of charging for infrastructures and , in particular , a modification of the current ' Euro-disc ' directive with regard to the funding of road infrastructures .
In this proposed new funding of infrastructures we will undoubtedly consider , amongst other things , that infrastructures should meet not only the costs of their own maintenance or construction , but also the so-called external costs , in accordance with the Costa report which was approved by this Parliament .
We are talking about costs such as congestion , accidents and certain environmental costs , which are clearly definable and quantifiable .
Furthermore , in this proposal we will introduce the possibility that in certain cases - I insist , not as a habitual system , but in certain exceptional cases such as the Brenner tunnel or certain large projects which involve very costly work with a significant environmental impact that must be reduced as far as possible - the so-called Swiss model may be applied in the European Union as well , that is to say that tolls , or part of a toll from an existing infrastructure be used to create a fund to finance the construction of an alternative rail infrastructure .
This is a fundamental issue .
It is by means of these formulae that we hope the most important projects for the structuring of the whole of European territory may be carried out .
Secondly , you are going to analyse the projects that appear here in the codecision procedure .
I wish to say that the fact the project appears in the trans-European networks allows the European Union to promote the idea that States - who in the end have to make the great investments - or regions should also plan their large-scale works not on the basis of national interest , but in the interest of trans-European interconnection and hence with a cross-border vision .
This is why I said that , since Roman times , the trans-European networks initiative is really the first rational proposal of this type .
It will be made possible by providing co-funding , up to a current maximum of 10 % .
If the proposals being made here are approved this may go up to 20 % for certain particularly important and costly projects , because appearing on these trans-European networks eases access to funding by the European Bank .

Lastly , I will say to Mr Bouwman that , in this new proposal , we incorporate not only the North-south routes , which are the ones that have essentially been included in the other trans-European networks , because they were the most necessary , but also the East-west routes , above all the basic Paris-Stuttgart-Vienna route , which will eventually provide a link with Budapest ; we also incorporate the Danube and its best communication with the Rhine , creating a south-east-northeast route which crosses the whole of the Union .
There is no doubt that the 2004 review , when the new countries of the Union will also be integrated , will stress this East-west component even more , without forgetting the North-south , which must always be maintained , in any event .
Exactly , Madam Vice-President , we must not lose sight of the North or of the South .
Sometimes , in Spain , we say that we should not lose sight of the North , that is to say we should not lose our way , but , on the other hand , we should neither lose sight of the South .
So that there are no doubts , I will now tell you the order in which you will take the floor .
The first group of three will comprise Mr Ripoll , Mr Izquierdo and Mrs Langenhagen ; the second , Mr Varela , Mr Savary and Mr Rübig .


And following the reply of the Vice-President , we shall pass on to another item .
Mr Ripoll therefore has the floor .
Madam Vice-President , I would like to thank you for being here and ask you two very brief and specific questions .
Firstly , could you confirm that the whole of the Spanish high-speed network is included in the trans-European networks ?
And secondly , if the answer is yes , what are the scope and consequences of its incorporation for European infrastructure and from a Spanish point of view ?
Mr President , Commissioner , the merit of providing information quickly is to achieve an effect of surprise when giving good news .
And I must congratulate you on the news you have brought us today , which was directly related to my first budgetary question , which I now have to adapt .
However , I would like to stress the importance I attach to moving from 10 % to 20 % in the projects .
My question is , ' how have you done it ? ' .
Because this action is of interest to us in terms of future actions and requests by this Parliament .
So where did you get that 10 % from ?
Can the same be expected for other modes of transport ?
Secondly , the environmental impact .
When you appeared before us in 1999 , at your hearing as a candidate for Commissioner , you said that you would pay very close attention to the environmental impact .
Do you intend to maintain this level of attention in relation to these projects and not be mechanically subject to the will of the States , which normally incorporate truly harmful environmental effects into some of these areas ?
Thirdly , we have still not been able to digest the projects which you have just mentioned to us , but I would like to ask you a question with no ill intention , but simply so that we may know your initial opinion : do you think that your proposal tackles the problems of the peripheral regions and is therefore of a cohesive nature ?
Mr President , I believe that the terrible experiences in America are causing the European satellite navigation system , GALILEO to be looked at from a new political and economic angle .
The Member States have in the past supported this good initiative of theirs only with reluctance .
Do you believe that there is now a new readiness on the part of the Member States to implement GALILEO without delay ?
Mr President , the whole of the European gauge high speed network of the Iberian Peninsula is , in fact , included in the networks .
There is going to be an enormous effort to integrate the Iberian Peninsula with the European rail network and this will bring about such interoperability , thereby making rail transport - for both people and goods - a genuine alternative to other types of transport .
Secondly , what I have just said will clearly serve to integrate the Iberian Peninsula more with the rest of the European Union , just as the Rhine-Rhone project or the Paris-Stuttgart-Linz-Vienna , and , later , Budapest , rail project will serve to integrate the East with the rest of the current European Union .
The same can be said of the link between the Scandinavian Peninsula and the European continent by means of the new alternative connection to the Oresund Bridge , to the Oresund connection , which is also approved in the new plans .
Therefore , Mr Izquierdo Collado , it does serve to integrate the peripheral areas with the centre and , in this respect , it is cohesive .
As for the aforementioned 10 % and 20 % thresholds , these are financing possibilities .
It does not mean that 10 % or 20 % will be granted .
There are times when 5 % is granted and is the maximum limit .
Second issue .
We will have to see whether the Council and Parliament support it .
Third issue .
It works for all modes of transport , because these trans-European networks do not only include the elements I have indicated .
Generically , there is the interconnection between ports and their adjacent land area , that is , rail interconnections , land interconnections , the intermodal interconnection not only of the sea ports but also of river ports , the modal interconnections between rail and airport , for interconnection with the air sector , and the interconnection between rail and road , essentially in the freight sector .
In other words , there is another series of generic elements that I have not expanded upon , which are also included in these networks .
In particular , we have to solve the problem of bottlenecks .
In the case of bottlenecks , with much less action in terms of budget , we can achieve multiplier effects .
Ten per cent of the road network and 20 % of the rail network is affected by habitual bottlenecks .
This does not mean that 20 % of the rail network is a bottleneck .
But there are problem points within this rail network that eventually effect 20 % of the European rail network .
Of course , we will try to ensure that funding is at the maximum level in these cases .
In relation to environmental impact , I maintain what has been said before .
We have prepared all of this in common agreement with the department of Mrs Wallström and with the Commission ' s Directorate-General for the Environment and we have agreed that we will continue to work jointly on its implementation and promotion .
Mrs Langenhagen , we are going to hold a debate in relation to GALILEO .
Ladies and gentlemen , you are aware of my personal interest in this project , which I believe to be crucial in terms of European Union strategy .
In my personal opinion - although it is shared by the Services and by the Commission as a whole - what happened on 11 September gives us all the more reason to move ahead with this project .
Clearly , not all of the applications that increasingly depend on the American global positioning system can rely on a single system .
We need a second system that will complement and strengthen the current system , which is the American one .
It is not a question of competing with the Americans . It is a question of participating , together with the Americans , in order to make the whole system more secure .
In any event , you know that Council will have to give its definitive opinion on these issues at its last meeting in December and I hope that on that occasion we will finally clear up any ambiguities and doubts once and for all and we will move ahead with a project which is essential to the future of the European Union .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner and congratulate her on having appeared so quickly before this House to give us this important information today .
Although she gave a general reply earlier in relation to Spain , I would like , if you will permit me , to ask about a specific aspect which has a lot to do with peripheral regions , or rather the most peripheral of the peripheral regions - the Galician Finisterre .
I would like to ask you whether these new guidelines approved by the Commission , in relation to Spain and the high speed railway , include connections with the Autonomous Community of Galicia and , if so , whether you can explain how .
Thank you , Commissioner , for this new information on the trans-European networks .
I should like to mention one issue , and at the same time take the opportunity to say that I welcome the fact that it has been included , and that is the crossing of the Pyrenees .
It is an issue that has received much less media attention than the Alps , but it is probably a more critical one .
Even now , the number of heavyweight vehicles which cross the Pyrenees every day between the Iberian peninsula and France is greater than the number crossing the Alps .
We shall therefore be faced with the development of a very critical situation , because infrastructures on the Atlantic side are lagging behind .
As for the actual crossing , or central railway tunnel , I believe that this is a very good thing , but we must not forget that this tunnel will certainly not be constructed in the short term , since the Lyon-Turin tunnel and the Brenner tunnel have to be built first .
I would like to make a personal plea - and I would like to hear your opinions on the subject - for emergency structures at either end of the Pyrenees , particular between the Basque Country and the Atlantic coast .
It seems to me that it is there , first of all , because that is where the people and the activities are , that we shall free the bottleneck in the road and rail routes leading to the Iberian peninsula .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President , thank you for your initiative .
The citizens want enlargement to build visible bridges .
The Slovak government seeks a bridge in the form of the joining of Vienna and Bratislava airports into a mega-airport with a ' Transrapid ' rail line to improve transport links .
This could well be the first stage of the Paris-Vienna route you have mentioned .
I believe it would be a very important initiative to take it onward as far as Budapest .
We also have , however , the shipping junction on the Danube , and in the long run this would become a triple junction .
Do you think this programme could also facilitate the financing of junctions of this sort ?
Mr President , many thanks to Mr Varela .
If we are talking about the Galician stretches of the high speed network , yes , they are included , as are the interconnections with Portugal , insofar as , I insist , it involves adapting and modifying these constructions in accordance with the European gauge , whether they be new lines or adaptations of existing lines , and I should like to make this clear .
Furthermore , there is another series of projects which affect that part of Europe , such as issues relating to ports and other issues that I will not go into now .
Mr Savary , I fully share your concern about the Pyrenees .
When , as the person responsible for transport in the European Union , I look at a map to see what is happening , I see a barrier , a wall , with a pass on the right of the map , on the far eastern side , and another on the left , in the west , and in between there is nothing .
There is no railway .
It now seems that there is going to be a pass at Canfranc but , for the moment , there are just those two passes .
The Commission believes that , between now and 2010 , we must provide a pass for a further 100 million tonnes between the Iberian Peninsula and the rest of the European continent .
We must now begin to discuss , prepare and work on a rail project that will create a great Pyrenean pass , not at the western or eastern extremes , but at the most central part ; that will go further than the contribution of the possible creation of the Canfranc pass ; that will create a truly significant rail route for goods .
We are talking about high figures .
As you say , undoubtedly both the Spanish and the French governments will have to consider alternatives , because for that great central Pyrenean pass we are talking in terms of around 2015 to 2020 , that is , in 15-20 years time , and this type of project has to be planned that far in advance and they have to be dealt with and initiated within that timescale .
Apart from that , in any event , one of the Essen projects is still under way , which included the Basque ' Y ' , which also involves a European gauge link via that entrance to the Iberian Peninsula .
I would like to say to Mr Rübig that the Vienna-Bratislava motorway is included in the projects ( I have not mentioned it because it is a lesser issue ) , which includes the stretch of that motorway within Austrian territory .
A rail interconnection is not envisaged at the moment , but I would like to say that all of these aspects will clearly have to be looked at with care for the 2004 review , when enlargement has taken place , at least its first stage , if there are to be more stages .
Thank you very much , Madam Vice-President .
That concludes this item on the agenda .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Questions to the Commission ( B5-0333 / 2001 ) .
We are not going to have an hour and a half . We are going to have an hour and a quarter at the most .
I would therefore ask Members to cooperate so that we can get through as many questions as possible .
Mr Vitorino represents the Commission .
Part I
Question No 27 by ( H-0700 / 01 ) :
Subject : Illegal immigration into the European Union through Morocco What measures will the Commission propose in order to regulate illegal immigration through Morocco , with a view to preventing any recurrence of the kind of tragic events which occurred this summer in Community waters ?
I am grateful for your explanations , but I wanted to stress the urgency of the issue .
Specifically , this summer thirty or forty people , that we know of , have drowned as a result of the operation of these illegal immigration networks .
It is calculated that last year four or five thousand people drowned trying to cross the stretch which separates Morocco from Spain .
I would therefore like to repeat the question , Commissioner , of whether there is any possibility that , without waiting for the result of the Barcelona process and the broader renegotiations on association , we can reach a very practical agreement in terms of policing and control so that the Moroccan authorities may prevent these deaths , which are reaching frightening proportions .
Mr President , I fully agree with Mr Medina ' s belief that we are facing a human tragedy , that we cannot expect an ideal solution and that we will have to discover the solution as we progress .
In order to progress , however , the two sides must agree on the mechanisms to be applied .
This is something which is yet to reach a point which I consider acceptable .
We therefore have great hopes that at the Association Council next week progress can be made on the identification of specific cooperation mechanisms , including police cooperation on border control .
In any event , I would like to stress that in 2001 a very substantial proportion of the budgetary line which I mentioned has been dedicated to actions for cooperation with Morocco , increasing that country ' s administrative capacity in the management of illegal immigration , which is not just a human problem : it is a political problem , especially for Spain .
But it is also a problem for Morocco , because Morocco is today a transit country in which there are many sub-Saharan illegal immigrants , with very harmful social consequences for Morocco .
I believe that after next week we will have better cooperation perspectives , which I hope will be the result of the meeting of the Association Council .
Question No 28 by ( H-0730 / 01 ) :
Subject : Release of Mr Albin Kurti and other Kosovars still being held hostage by the Belgrade authorities Of some 2000 Kosovars who were kidnapped and held hostage by the military and paramilitary forces belonging to the regime then in place in Belgrade in the days leading up to the international police operation in Kosovo more than 28 months ago , 229 are still being held in Serb prisons .
One hundred of them are being held for common law offences , while the remaining 129 , including the student leader Arbin Kurti , are being held for their convictions or for ' political ' offences .
In February 2001 the Serb and Yugoslav parliaments passed an amnesty law allowing the release of 30 000 Serbs and some 400 Kosovars .
At the end of April 2001 , 143 prisoners were released from Jakova prison .
The Serb judicial authorities had stated that the cases of the remaining Kosovar prisoners would be the subject of a rapid judicial review followed by release .
Despite these commitments given by the Belgrade authorities , however , and despite the Council and Commission 's repeated promises to intervene forcefully in order to put an end to this intolerable situation , the matter has still not been resolved .
Has the Commission decided no longer to consider it a priority to resolve this issue ?
If not , what initiatives will it take in order finally to bring about the immediate release of Arbin Kurti and the 129 Kosovar hostages and the transfer of the 100 Kosovar prisoners still being held in Serbia for common law offences to the UNMNIK , which is the only competent body in this connection ?
The European Commission remains concerned by this issue and I can assure the honourable Member that we are taking every available opportunity to exert appropriate pressure on those in a position to take decisions on this issue .
As the honourable Member recognises , considerable progress has already been made and we welcome this .
The remaining prisoners ' cases are being reviewed and where convictions cannot be supported by evidence the prisoners are released .
Where there are grounds for conviction , appeals are being launched .
The ICRC monitors the condition of individual prisoners and maintains contact with their families .
As regards the transfers of prisoners from detention in Serbia to the United Nations ' Mission 's facilities in Kosovo , this matter is being discussed by the appropriate authorities .
Simultaneous reform of the judiciary with the help and advice of international organisations , such as the Council of Europe and the OSCE , which are now both present in Belgrade , is under way .
The rule of law and respect for minority rights are key conditions applying to relations with and assistance for the Former Republic of Yugoslavia and its neighbours .
Mr President , Commissioner , thank you .
Having said that , however , I should point out a certain number of things .
On numerous occasions , your colleagues at the Commission have talked about priority with regard to the transferring of the Kosovar hostages from Serbia to Kosovo .
They did so when the criminal Milosevic was still in power .
That was almost a year ago , and there has been a change of regime in Belgrade , so it is even more incomprehensible that these problems have still not been solved .
You talk about grounds for conviction , you talk about appeal procedures , but it has been established and confirmed , by this Parliament itself , that the Belgrade authorities were not competent , that only UNMIK was competent to deal with these cases , that the transfer had therefore already been accomplished , in law , and it was simply a matter of implementing it , and that has been the case for the past two years , Commissioner .
Well , that is quite a long time for us , but I think it is an extremely long time for those who are still incarcerated in the gaols of Belgrade .
In the case of Mr Arbin Kurti in particular , who was a student leader , I really do not understand what objections or other factors can still be preventing his transfer .
. ( FR ) On specific cases , I would say that direct responsibility for monitoring trials lies with the ICRC .
The Commission raises the question from a general political viewpoint , and I can assure the honourable Member that when speaking to the authorities of the Former Republic of Yugoslavia we have always urged the need for decisions to be taken as quickly as possible .
I must emphasise that there are some cases in which crimes have been committed .
In those cases , it is up to the law to decide what should be the fate of the accused , to charge them and to launch appeals so that justice will prevail in the end .
As far as political relations are concerned , I can assure the honourable Member that we have never ceased to urge a rapid resolution of all the situations that are being assessed , and I must point out that some progress has been made , but of course , any period of time is too long when one has been charged with an offence , especially when the charge is unjust , and the Commission , for its part , will continue to urge as rapid a solution as possible in those situations which are still being assessed .
Question 29 by ( H-0737 / 01 ) :
Subject : Trials in Kabul The trial began in early September before an Islamic court in Kabul , Afghanistan , of four citizens of a Member State of the Union , Germany , together with two US and two Australian citizens , all of whom are aid workers with Shelter Now International .
In accordance with the Islamic law of the country , the prosecutor is demanding the death penalty for conducting Christian missionary activities .
At the same time , 16 Afghan citizens have been charged with converting from Islam to the Christian faith , for which the prosecutor is also demanding the death penalty in accordance with the Islamic law of Afghanistan .
What representations has the European Union made to the Taliban regime in Afghanistan to secure respect for the legal rights of all the accused and their protection in the context of the European Union 's endeavours to promote religious freedom as an integral part of human rights , as enshrined in the UN Charter , the Council of Europe Convention and the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the German government has specifically requested that the European Union should neither adopt positions nor take action in relation to the eight humanitarian aid organisation workers , specifically from the ' Shelter Now International ' non-governmental organisation , who are currently on trial in Kabul , in Afghanistan , accused of attempting to convert Afghan Muslims to the Christian religion .
The governments of the three countries whose nationals are involved in this situation , Germany , Australia and the United States of America , have decided to act jointly at this stage and have stated that they would prefer to find solutions to this problem on a strictly bilateral level .
The honourable Member will be aware that the trial of these eight people is under way .
Given the current situation and climate , the Commission does not consider it to be appropriate , or even helpful , to make any further comment on this situation , since the decision must fall to the governments of the nationals involved . I can assure you , however , that both the Commission and all of the European Union ' s Member States will , of course , continue to follow developments carefully and closely .
Thank you for your answer .
Mr Vitorino ' s reply made no mention of the sixteen Afghans brought before the courts and accused of having converted from Islam to Christianity .
These people are threatened with the death penalty under Islamic law .
My question to Mr Vitorino is : have we in the European Union , in our fight against the death penalty and in support of religious freedom , in any way acted on behalf of these people who are in actual fact threatened by the death penalty ?
In what way is the European Union taking action against all those Arab and Muslim countries - in practice , almost all of them - in which converting from Islam to Christianity is in actual fact punishable by death ?
Irrespective of what happened in the United States on 11 September , we must be tireless in our campaign against the death penalty .
My question is : What has happened to these sixteen Afghans who are in danger ?
Mr President , I do not think that the honourable Member can doubt my position or that of the Commission on the death penalty or on freedom of religion .
If he had the opportunity to hear what I said , for example , in the debates on the European Union ' s Charter of Fundamental Rights , he will find the answer there , not only in rhetoric , but also in clear and unequivocal laws .
I admit that we do not have any specific information on the situation of the sixteen Afghans to whom he refers . Apparently , however , these sixteen Afghans will be committed to trial at a later date , in other words , not at the same time that the eight citizens of Germany , the United States and Australia are to be tried .
We support , of course , the statement by the troika , the ' Afghan Support Group ' , a joint contact group , currently chaired by Germany which has issued an unequivocal statement of support for these non-governmental organisation workers , whether they be citizens of the States I have mentioned or Afghans caught up in this situation .
Thank you very much for your presence and participation in this Question Time , Mr Vitorino .
We will move on to the second part .
We have twenty minutes per Commissioner , not a minute more .
A very good afternoon , Mr Bolkestein .
Part II
Questions to Commissioner Bolkestein
Question No 30 by ( H-0707 / 01 ) :
Subject : Community trade mark courts When is action going to be taken against Member States which have not set up courts and tribunals to deal with matters relating to the Community trade mark ?
Mr President , since the honourable Member , Mr Berenguer Fuster , raised a similar question last December , the Commission has addressed a letter of formal notice to Spain , France , Luxembourg , Italy and Greece in which it recalled the need to fulfil obligations regarding the designation of Community Trade mark courts .
The Greek authorities have informed the Commission that the relevant regulation , which designates the courts of justice for Community Trade marks , was approved in September .
France has stated that a decree on this matter will be approved before 31 October 2001 .
The Commission services are currently checking this information .
As regards the three remaining Member States , Spain , Luxembourg and Italy , the Commission does not yet have any information proving that these Member States have adopted the necessary provisions .
The Commission is , therefore , considering launching infringement proceedings for failure to comply with Community law according to Article 226 of the EC Treaty .
Thank you for your information , Commissioner .
I am obviously referring to the case of Spain , since I clearly do not have sufficient knowledge of the cases of Italy and Luxembourg .
On 13 December 2000 the Commissioner responded to me in saying that , in the case where there was no satisfactory response , the Commission would open an infringement procedure in accordance with Article 226 of the Treaty .
Today you have told us that the Commission has no news of these three countries including Spain which , to make matters worse , is the location of the headquarters of the Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market , having begun any procedure to create what they committed themselves to , and that they have been non-compliant since November 1996 .
If this is the case , if it was already taking place a year ago , if there has been no satisfactory response for almost a year , why is the Commission waiting to begin the infringement procedure ?
I can well imagine the impatience , or shall I say irritation , of Mr Berenguer Fuster with the fact that the government of his country has not yet taken the desired steps in order to set up this court .
Indeed , it is true that this is an infringement .
May I point out that the Commission does not hesitate to pursue infringement proceedings , but only , as the Latin expression goes , as an ultimum remedium ; in other words , only when all the avenues and possibilities of settling matters in an amicable way have been exhausted does the Commission take that step .
I take Mr Berenguer Fuster 's point that his own patience , like that of the Commission , is close to being exhausted .
We shall indeed do what he proposes , and what the Commission is also intending to do .
Let us make a last effort to convince the Spanish government - particularly in view of the upcoming presidency , when it would not do if the Commission were to open such proceedings - to do so now before the Commission takes that ultimate step .
As they deal with the same subject , Questions No 31 and 32 will be taken together .
Question No 31 by ( H-0728 / 01 ) :
Subject : Letter of notification concerning implementation of Directive 89 / 48 / EEC in Greece In reply to my question E-1336 / 01 on the recognition of diplomas under Directive 89 / 48 / EEC in Greece , the Commissioner responsible , Mr Bolkestein , stated , among other things that ' A Commission decision on the matter is expected in the coming months , and in any case in autumn , following some supplementary details that may need to be checked with the Greek authorities . '
In fact , the press reported on 9 August 2001 that the Commission had sent a letter of notification to Greece which identified a problem with the Presidential Decree transposing Directive 89 / 48 / EEC into Greek law .
What are the legal arguments on which the Commission bases its view that the failure to recognise diplomas awarded by educational establishments of another Member State under ' franchise ' agreements in Greece is contrary to the Community Directive , and on which points is the Presidential Decree transposing Directive 89 / 48 / EEC in Greece inconsistent with that Directive ?
Has the Greek government answered the points set out in the letter of notification or are there any indications as to what its legal arguments might be ?
Question No 32 by ( H-0750 / 01 ) :
Subject : Implementation of Directive 89 / 48 / EEC in Greece The Court of Justice of the European Communities has ruled against Greece for its failure to implement Community Directive 89 / 48 / EEC on a general system for the recognition of higher-education diplomas awarded on completion of professional education and training of at least three years ' duration .
Will the Commission say whether Greece has complied with the judgment of the Court and , if not , what steps it intends to take to bring Greek law into line with Community legislation ?
Mr President , in reply to the Oral Question by Mr Alavanos , the letter of formal notice sent to Greece to which the honourable Member refers , concerns a recently initiated infringement procedure regarding the failure of Presidential Decree No 165 of 23 June 2000 to comply with Directive 89 / 48 in certain areas .
On the other hand , the procedure referred to in question E-1336 / 01 earlier more specifically concerns problems surrounding the misapplication of Directive 89 / 48 to the psychology profession .
The Commission considers that diplomas awarded in Greece by another Member State and the refranchising agreements do not relate to training provided from or by Greece , but to training provided from or by the other Member State , since the Greek establishment in which the training in question has been provided is merely an intermediary without any autonomy .
In other words , it is not the Greek establishment that awards diplomas , but rather the university in the other Member State , and consequently , if those diplomas relate to professional training within the meaning of Directive 89 / 48 , they are covered by that Directive .
The purpose of the letter of formal notice is to obtain the Member State 's observations on specific questions .
Greece has not yet replied to that letter of formal notice and , therefore , no firm grounds for infringement procedings have been established as yet .
Consequently , the Commission is not able to reply to that part of the question from the honourable Member .
Given the similarity of the subject matter , I shall now continue , if I may , by answering the question by Mr Hatzidakis .
In the judgment to which the honourable Member refers , the Court of Justice of the European Communities condemned Greece for its failure to communicate measures taken to implement Directive 89 / 48 - the Directive I referred to in my reply to the previous question .
The Commission thus initiated a new infringement procedure against Greece with a request for the fixing of penalty payments .
This second procedure was closed when Greece complied .
It complied with the Court 's judgment by forwarding Presidential Decree No 165 of 23 June 2000 to the Commission .
As I pointed out in my reply to the previous Oral Question put by Mr Alavanos , the Commission considers that certain provisions of Directive 89 / 48 have not been implemented correctly .
The Commission has also received complaints from individuals who , even since the implementation of the directive , have not seen their rights respected .
The Commission has , therefore , initiated a new infringement procedure , this time for incorrect implementation and application of the directive , and the letter of formal notice to which I referred just now has been sent to Greece .
We expect to receive the observations of the Greek authorities very soon .
A specific procedure for recognition of the psychology profession is currently being introduced , and that profession , together with a number of others , has been the subject of specific implementing legislation on problems concerning the application of Directive 89 / 48 that have also been drawn to the Commission 's attention in that context .
That is my reply to the question put by Mr Hatzidakis .
I should like to make a point of thanking the Commissioner for what was a very detailed reply , including from the technical point of view .
All that remains to be seen is what the government 's response will be to the Commission 's move .
As the Commissioner knows , I have raised this matter on numerous occasions , I should just like to inform him that the Minister of Education 's public response is that I am asking the wrong questions of the wrong Commissioner and obtaining the wrong replies .
So now I am waiting to see what the Greek government 's response will be .
However , my question to the Commissioner is this : why confine ourselves solely to the psychology profession and , more to the point , to psychologists who have graduated from French universities when numerous complaints have been lodged with the Commission by other disciplines and by students studying in other faculties and graduating from foreign universities , even though they have taken part of their course in Greece ?
I can assure Mr Alavanos that the Commission has looked at this whole issue in the broadest possible sense and has not confined itself to the matter of psychologists .
The basic issue is the question of whether a degree awarded by another Member State , following a course of studies which takes place physically in Greece , is or is not assimilated to a similar degree issued in Greece itself following studies at a Greek university .
So it is the equivalence between a purely Greek degree and a degree awarded by a university of another Member State , but where the study has been undertaken at a Greek establishment .
That assimilation , that equality is the purpose of Directive 89 / 48 , to which I have referred at various times this afternoon .
The Commission is taking that into consideration and has asked Greece to explain why that directive has not been transposed and applied accordingly .
The directive does not confine itself to psychologists and , to that extent , I can assure Mr Alavanos that his fears are unfounded .
Commissioner , as I am sure you are aware , the question at issue is not a question which just concerns a few citizens in Greece , it concerns thousands of graduates from European universities whom the Greek State sends abroad to study , because we have what to me is a crazy educational system , and then refuses to recognise their qualifications .
This question in fact concerns several thousand young people who are denied a career because of the mindset of the Greek State .
This being the case , I should like to say that I welcome your finding that the Court 's judgment is not being applied properly and , because the Greek public is listening to what we have to say , to ask you : if the Greek government continues to take this view , what are the legal implications ?
What will the Commission 's next move be ?
Just so that our citizens know where they stand .
I am very conscious of the fact that the number of young people involved is large .
I must confess I have not counted them , but if Mr Hatzidakis says that thousands of young people are affected , then I am certain he is right .
That underlines the importance of this issue .
Whether the educational system is absurd is a qualification I must leave for Mr Hatzidakis .
I am sure he has political friends in his country who can raise this matter in the national parliament of Greece .
But we are in the European Parliament .
It is quite right that Mr Hatzidakis draws our attention to this untoward state of affairs and I thank him for his contribution to our debate .
As regards the legal instruments , as I said earlier in my reply to Mr Alavanos , the Commission will use all the legal instruments at its disposal .
The Commission has no particular desire to take Member States to court but if European law is not respected then it has no alternative .

Therefore I say to both Mr Hatzidakis and Mr Alavanos that , if the Greek government does not apply the rules correctly , as should be the case , the Commission will , in a well-considered and very deliberate manner , make use of the instruments it has and start legal proceedings .
Question No 33 by ( H-0738 / 01 ) :
Subject : Illegal car taxation in Finland In 1998 the Commission asked Finland to amend its system of car and motorcycle taxation .
Commission officials have admitted that Finland has in fact failed to remove the discrimination to any significant degree .
Most recently , in September 2001 , Parliament ' s Committee on Petitions received a petition signed by me and 17 000 of my compatriots , demanding an overhaul of the illegal tax regime .
Finland has been an EU Member since 1995 ; when will the Commission take action to force it to toe the line and start implementing single market rules as interpreted by the European Court of Justice ?
Will the Commission take independent legal action , because waiting for new rulings by the Court of Justice will hardly bring any additional clarity especially after the recent ruling on Portugal ( C-393 / 98 ) ?
The tax on removal vehicles also hinders people ' s freedom to move within the Community .
Will the Commission see to it that this illegality is remedied in the near future ?
Questions to Commissioner Verheugen
Mr President , my answer is as follows . The Commission is currently considering initiating a procedure against Finland under Article 226 of the Treaty , which will supplement the one initiated in 1998 .
This case will be dealt with at a Commission meeting in the near future .
The new procedure is also likely to cover problems in implementing Directive 83 / 183 , which deals with the tax exemptions granted when people move house .
At the same time , Commission staff have written to all Member States , drawing their attention to the judgment by the Court of Justice to which Mr Vatanen ' s question refers , namely the Gomez-Valente Judgment of 22 February 2001 , and the Commission shares the honourable Member ' s opinion that the judgment in question will have implications outside the context of the dispute in question , and will open up the way to second-hand vehicles being treated in a manner which is more in line with the requirements of the European internal market .
However , the Commission wishes to point out that the procedure intended to ensure that the above-mentioned judgment is complied with must remain independent of any other procedure which it has initiated or is intending to initiate .
Mr President , Commissioner , thank you for your efforts .
I feel reassured to hear your answer and I would also like to take this opportunity to thank the Commission officials for their work .
Commission officials have admitted that Finland is blatantly violating Community and single-market rules .
The Finns are desperately waiting for those EU rights that they are entitled to and which they were promised .
Mr Commissioner , I hope you do not find this too heavy , but their hopes are lying on your shoulders .
We know we can count on you .
First of all I should like to thank Mr Vatanen for his very kind remarks .
I feel the weight of all those motorists in Finland on my shoulders - a very heavy load indeed .
One complicating factor is that this is an area which has not yet been harmonised in the European Union .
The Commission 's legal basis for its actions is Article 90 of the Treaty on the one hand , which prohibits tax discrimination , and on the other hand two directives adopted in 1983 .
Article 90 gives the Court of Justice the opportunity for abundant jurisprudence .
Since interpretations of the judgments of the Court are not always unanimous , it is time to create a synthesis of all the various interpretations in order to determine clearly our future action .
That need for a synthesis is one of the reasons that led me to include in the Commission 's working programme for this year a communication on motor vehicle taxation .
It is my intention that this communication , which I hope will appear around the end of this year or the beginning of next year , will cover all the problems in connection with vehicle taxation and vehicle pricing , so that we can take a broader approach to them and settle the problem in Finland to which Mr Vatanen has referred .
I hope that will be to his satisfaction .
Thank you very much for your great cooperation with Parliament , Mr Bolkestein .
Question No 34 by Mrs Anne E.M. Van Lancker ( H-0765 / 01 ) will not be replied to since it is included in the agenda of this part-session .
Question No 35 by ( H-0695 / 01 ) :
Subject : Law on the use of minority languages in Slovakia From an official position paper of the Foreign Ministry of the Slovak Republic , sent to us by the Slovak ambassador in Brussels , we understand that the law of 1999 on the use of minority languages in Slovakia gives minorities certain rights .
When 20 % or more of the inhabitants of a village speak another language , they can receive official communications in their own language .
We have personal experience of how this law operates in practice .
In villages where more than 20 % of the population is made up Slovaks , the inhabitants can receive all official communications in Slovakian .
The law thus appears to work satisfactorily .
However , when it transpires that in the same village 75 % of the population is Hungarian and they can obtain official documents concerning births , marriages and deaths only in Slovakian and the mayor of the village may not speak Hungarian during public or official functions , then we must have serious doubts about the implementation of a language law which appears satisfactory on paper .
In connection with Slovakia 's accession to the EU , is the Commission investigating whether the law is being implemented , how this is being done and what progress is being made ?
Mr President , the Commission is paying very careful attention to the use of minority languages in Slovakia .
It takes the view that Slovakia has made considerable progress in developing a positive policy on minorities and in drawing up the necessary legislation whilst putting in place and supporting the relevant institutions .
The enacting of the law on the use of minority languages for official business was , in this regard , an important step .
It brought domestic law into line with current international standards and complied with the specific recommendations of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe , the Council of Europe and the Commission .
A further important step was the ratification of the European Charter on regional or minority languages .
It should be noted in particular that Slovakia desires to concede the greatest possible freedom to the Hungarian minority in accordance with the flexibility that the Charter makes possible .
The Commission nevertheless observes that considerable efforts are still required for the practical enforcement of all the existing legislation .
In some areas , minorities do not avail themselves of the rights guaranteed them by the law on the use of minority languages for official business , above all , it seems , through ignorance of them .
This seems to be the case above all in communities with a large proportion of Roma among the population .
The Commission will continue in future to urge Slovakia to continue its efforts to implement the provisions of its laws , improve policy in this area and make the necessary budget funds available .
The observations which you , Mrs Maes , have made in person come as no surprise to me .
They prove only that the difficulties with implementation , which I have described , continue to prevail .
We will be discussing this topic further in the next progress report on Slovakia , which is due to appear in November .
I think you are right , some sections of the population will not be fully aware of the existence of new legal provisions .
But we must still ask ourselves whether there is always the necessary goodwill present in order to allow citizens to translate the legal provisions into practice .
From that point of view , it would probably be useful if we did not only draw the attention to the very sensitive nature of the subject matter in the reports but also in the contacts with the Slovak authorities .
In our opinion , a verdict on the minority policy cannot be a verdict on what has been set down on paper .
It should also concern rights and facts .
I cannot but agree , Mrs Maes , with what you have said , and can confirm that we address this issue in all our contacts with the Slovak government .
I have , myself , done so repeatedly in conversations with the head of the Slovak government and with the Slovak parliament and press and also on public occasions in Slovakia .
The message we are communicating in Slovakia is that we see the way the numerically stronger Slovaks interact with their minorities as an indicator of how strongly democracy and the rule of law have developed in that country .
Question No 36 by , which has been taken over by Mr Miller ( H-0714 / 01 ) :
Subject : Ignalina nuclear power station , Lithuania What is the Commission 's current position with regard to the closure of reactor two of the Ignalina nuclear power station in Lithuania ?
Mr President , Mr Miller , the Commission 's view on this issue is at one with that of the Council and - in so far as I can judge - with that of the European Parliament .
The Lithuanian Parliament adopted a national energy strategy in 1999 .
As part of this , it has decided that Block 1 of the Ignalina nuclear power plant is to be decommissioned by 2005 and that the final decision on the decommissioning date for Block 2 will be taken in 2004 in the context of the national energy strategy review .
The Commission stated at the time that it understood that Block 2 had to be shut down by 2009 .
This is a matter of logic : if 2005 is the latest date for Block 1 to be shut down , it follows from the envisaged lifetime of the two nuclear power installation units that 2009 is the latest date for the decommissioning of Block 2 .
As regards Block 1 , the Commission took it into account that Lithuania had commenced extensive preparations for decommissioning and shutting down .
I am working on the assumption that the decommissioning is actually to take place before 2005 .
As far as Block 2 is concerned , the Commission has stated - as I have already said - that the decommissioning is to take place by 2009 at the latest .
Over and above that , the Commission and the Member States believe that the timetable for the decision on decommissioning should be compatible with the timetable for Lithuania 's accession to the European Union .
I spoke about this in depth only a few days ago with the new Lithuanian government in Vilna - it was actually the main topic of conversation in Vilnius - and I got the impression that the Lithuanian parliament and government had well understood the message that they now have to think about how the timetable for the decisions about Ignalina Block 2 has to be revised with a view to their own timetable for joining the European Union .
Let me take this opportunity to point out that it is precisely with regard to Ignalina that the Commission views compromises as impossible .
Ignalina is a nuclear power plant of the same type as Chernobyl , one that experts are generally convinced is not retrofittable and cannot be brought up to acceptable safety standards .
It is our firm conviction that this Chernobyl-type nuclear power plant is a source of real danger to human beings , and we will therefore be unable to withdraw our demand .
I thank the Commissioner for his answer .
I especially liked what he said about there being no room for compromises .
Is the EU position absolutely fixed , with no likelihood of it being altered in the near future ?
I should also like to raise the point about international funding for decommissioning .
Is that to come from the Commission 's own budget ?
What happens if there is insufficient money for that decommissioning ?
Mr Miller , I can answer your first question with a definite ' no ' , which seems to be what you desire .
The European Union 's stance on this issue will not change .
The situation as regards the second question is as follows : an international fund for the decommissioning of Block 1 of the plant was created . The fund is managed by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development and , to date , EUR 220 million have been made available for it .
These EUR 220 million I mentioned were the result of an international conference of donors which I convened jointly with the Lithuanian Prime Minister last year in Vilnius .
I must however add - and this clouds the picture a little - that EUR 165 million of this sum comes from our own budget , so that the amount that the international community was prepared to raise in addition looks modest in comparison .
Nonetheless , the funds available suffice to start on the shutting-down process as planned and to finance all the tasks connected with it .
I must draw it to your attention that the shutdown of such a nuclear power plant is a project lasting decades and the financial obligations resulting from it for us will last for the same period of time .
The situation with regard to the plant 's Block II is rather more complicated because the Lithuanian parliament has not to date fixed a definite date for it to be shut down .
During the discussions I have mentioned , I have however informed the Lithuanian government that the Commission is of course prepared to provide the necessary help in this aspect too , and is moreover willing to organise international aid .
A country like Lithuania can quite clearly not manage the huge task of shutting down a power plant like this one by its own resources alone .
It would , by the way , also be quite unfair to demand that of them , for it was not Lithuania that wanted the plant .
On the contrary , the Lithuanians even resisted it at the time .
It was the former Soviet Union that built this plant on the spot where it stands today , and certainly not in order to provide Lithuania with electricity , but , in the main - we believe - for military purposes .
It is , then , part of the legacy of the former Soviet Union , burdening a poor country like Lithuania .
It is in our interest that this legacy should disappear .
Mr President , does the Commission intend to issue a common safety standard for nuclear power plants which will be binding on the EU 's Member States and applicant States , or , alternatively , to start drafting lists of power plants in the area of the Union on the ' name and shame ' principle ?
Mrs Korhola , you will be aware that the Commission is not competent in matters of nuclear safety .
There are no EU norms for the safety of reactors , which I myself greatly regret , but it has not to date been possible to change this situation .
The Council has worked intensively on this issue , precisely because the Commission has no competence in reactor safety issues .
The Council 's working party on nuclear issues has applied itself to the safety situation in Eastern European nuclear power plants and presented a report just before the summer recess , which is no doubt available to Parliament .
I recommend that you study this report , which does not of course state that we have laid down European norms , but from which it is clear that the European Union , as regards the safety of Eastern European nuclear power installations , makes demands that it believes to be justified .
A list of nuclear power stations , such as you have proposed , resulted from investigations carried out much earlier , at the beginning of the nineties to be precise .
These installations , which in the view of the European Union are not capable of a retrofit - that is , they cannot be made safe - are situated in Lithuania , Slovakia and Bulgaria .
We have , as you know , made it a condition for the commencement of accession negotiations that the issue of the shutting-down of these nuclear power stations should be finalised .
Question No 37 by ( H-0743 / 01 ) :
Subject : Alleged statement According to media reports in June and July 2001 , EU Commissioner Verheugen is alleged to have stated privately that if former Czech Prime Minister and current Chairman of the Czech Chamber of Deputies , Mr Vaclav Klaus , became premier again , the Czech Republic ' s EU entry chances would be harmed .
Does the Commission stand by or does it repudiate this alleged statement and does it not consider that such statements are inappropriate and do little to build confidence between the EU and the applicant countries at a time when understanding and support is needed during the integration process ?
Questions to Commissioner De Palacio
Mr Crowley , the event to which you refer is of purely domestic political significance in the Czech Republic ; it is an expression of an internal political dispute between government and opposition .
In such instances , the Commission can do no other than refrain from taking up any position , because it strictly refuses to be drawn into internal political disputes , whether in Member States or in acceding countries .
Mr President , first of all the Commissioner is being very facetious with his answers .
The quote is directly from him .
It is not an internal matter , it is something that he got involved in when he admittedly , privately , that if Mr Vaclav Klaus became premier again , the Czech Republic 's EU entry chances would be harmed .
The Czech Prime Minister said on a radio interview shortly afterwards , and I quote directly from what he said , ' I again repeat those words were not uttered publicly , nevertheless they have not been embargoed . '
Commissioner , do you deny that you made such a statement ?
Also , on matters exclusively for the Czech people - electing their leader , what stance they should take with regard to negotiations with their accession to the European Union , and particularly at a time when confidence building is required both within the EU and within the accession countries - do you think it is right that you as an official and a Member of the College of Commissioners should be interfering with the democratic wishes of the Czech people , or indeed the people of any country ?
We would all like to see certain outcomes from elections because of our own political beliefs , but some of us have to temper our language and our thoughts because of the positions we hold .
Therefore I would ask you , once again , to specifically either deny or admit that you made the statement and also to explain why you interfered in such a way ?
Mr Crowley , I had always believed that a gentleman would not wish to know what two other gentlemen had discussed privately .
If you want to change that , then that 's up to you .
I will neither confirm nor deny anything in this matter .
Stony silence is the only way the Commission can avoid being involved in internal political disputes .
I will , however , quite gladly say something about the actual substance of your question .
The president of the Czech parliament and I have for many years been able to talk intimately and in confidence with one another .
The most recent , and , I might add , entirely private , in-depth conversation took place only a few days ago .
The president of the Czech parliament did not mention in this conversation the event that you have taken as the basis for your question .
But it means much to me that Mr Klaus , in the many , many conversations we have had , has always made it clear that he , himself , and his political friends desire and support the Czech Republic 's accession to the European Union .
That he occasionally expresses other views , views differing from those shared by the majority in Europe , is well known , but he is quite entitled to do so , and we , as democrats , must accept that .
My final point must be that it goes without saying that the European Union has the right to tell candidate countries what it accepts and what it does not ; to point out that certain criteria are required to be met for accession negotiations to begin and to be concluded , and that the most important of them is the political criterion according to which a country must guarantee that it is a democracy under the rule of law , respecting human rights , protecting minorities and sharing the values and objectives of the European Union .
It has come about that a country seeking membership has been told , on the basis of this assessment : ' We cannot start negotiating with you about accession , because you do not meet these political requirements . '
The question you have asked , whether political intervention of this sort occurs , must therefore be answered very clearly in the affirmative .
It is precisely what the Copenhagen criteria require .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
Mr Crowley has the floor for a brief point of order .
Mr President , on a point of order .
The Commissioner did not answer my question , because he said he would not reveal what took place between two gentlemen .
He went on afterwards to reveal what took place between two gentlemen - himself and Mr Klaus .
Therefore he has failed to honour and respect this House by giving a direct answer to a direct question .
It is a disgrace .
Question No 43 by ( H-0710 / 01 ) :
Subject : Alpine Convention - the environmentally sensitive Pan-Alpine region In its sections on the environment and transport , the Alpine Convention provides a definition of the environmentally sensitive Pan-Alpine region .
In the Commission 's estimation , does that definition - and the transport policy objectives thereby pursued - also form part of EU transport policy for this environmentally sensitive region ?
Mr President , the Commission is aware of the importance of a suitable definition of the concept of sensitive areas , especially in the case of the environmental integration of transport flows in the Alpine region .
At the moment , there is a series of definitions of sensitive areas created , in particular , by the United Nations and the Alpine Convention , and also by the Community legislation on the protection of the environment .
The Commission believes that sensitive mountain areas , especially the Alpine region , as they are normally classified , are clearly priority areas in terms of the application of Community measures intended to reduce the environmental effects of transport and remove the link between increases in transport flows and economic growth .
Therefore , the White Paper on the European transport policy with a view to 2010 , approved on 12 September , pays particular attention to the sensitive areas , especially the mountain regions , within the framework of the policy on charging and funding for infrastructures and the policy on the trans-European transport network .
The approach largely conforms to the guidelines expressed in the Alpine Convention and its Protocol on transport .
Commissioner , I wish to put a short supplementary question .
I was not entirely satisfied with the reply .
Above all , I am concerned about what we are doing now .
Are we to wait for technological innovations , for example the fuel cell , to at least partially solve some of the problems we have with traffic across the Alps or should we not now use the truth about the cost as an instrument to force heavy traffic , in the Alps at least , off some of the roads and onto the railways ?
Mr President , in accordance with what was said in the White Paper on transport policy for the coming years , the Commission hopes , possibly within a year , and perhaps even before next summer , to present to Parliament and the Council of Ministers a new system of charging , specifically a modification of the ' Euro-disc ' Directive , which will deal with just this type of issue , in accordance with the Costa report approved by this House a few months ago .
It will include , in the charges , concepts such as external costs , including certain perfectly quantifiable environmental costs .
Also cross-subsidisation , that is to say that part of the toll currently charged for existing infrastructures may be used to create a fund to finance alternative infrastructures , especially in the region of the Alps , in projects such as the Brenner tunnel or the Lyon-Turin connection .
As the authors are not present , Question Nos 44 , 45 and 46 lapse .
Question No 47 by ( H-0746 / 01 ) :
Subject : Mont Blanc tunnel and operational guarantees The Mont Blanc tunnel is due to reopen within the next few months .
In the light of the disaster which led to its closure , what technical guarantees has the Commission obtained as regards the ' new ' tunnel 's compliance with the relevant European legislation , in terms of environmental standards and sustainable transport ?
How does the Commission view the new Italian-French management arrangements for the tunnel ?
Mr President , the Commission does not have the power to give the green light to the reopening of the Mont Blanc tunnel . This matter does not come within our competence .
The task of assessing whether the safety level is sufficient falls to the operators and the national authorities , in accordance with their competences in France .
On that basis , it is for them to decide whether all the safety conditions are met .
According to the information available to the Commission , tests should be carried out in October to check that the security elements are operating correctly , such as the ventilation system or the electronic control centre , and the degree of training of the staff in charge of operation and emergency services .
In this respect , one of the main measures to be implemented relates to the distance between vehicles when using the tunnel .
Furthermore , this measure will contribute to restricting the circulation of lorries via that route .
With regard to organisational aspects , an important element is the creation by the two original companies , the French ATMB and the Italian SITMB , of a single company to take charge of managing the tunnel .
With regard to sustainable mobility and the great number of operators who are impatiently awaiting the reopening of the Mont Blanc tunnel , given the serious disruption caused by its closure and the saturation of the routes which have been used as diversions , it should be pointed out that , in the short term , the reopening of the tunnel is going to be very positive from the point of view of sustainable mobility , the environment and safety .
I insist , however , that the safety measures must be in place as a prior condition for its reopening .
In the longer term , the absolute priority is to maintain control of the flow of land transport in the Alpine region , without hindering freedom of movement and economic development and , specifically , access from the Italian Peninsula to the rest of Europe will be based on the elements which I mentioned a moment ago , that is , by providing the Alps with major rail crossings which will carry a large proportion of the rail transport burden .
Commissioner , I reiterate that European legislation does exist on this matter and it must be respected , that the specifications of the new tunnel are practically the same as those of the previous tunnel , that 97 % of the community of Chamonix have declared that they are against the reopening of the tunnel - which will inevitably damage all the private businesses , polluting all the typical , customary economic activities of these communities now and in future - and that the Italian government is preparing to reduce the night-time toll , thus increasing the pollution .
What guarantees does the European legislation protecting the environment offer these communities ?
Mr President , with regard to safety standards , I refer back to what I just said .
According to the information available to me , the conditions for ensuring the control and safety of the tunnel have improved and tests are being done , and when all the requirements are met and the reliability of the instruments and systems is verified , the tunnel will be opened .
This is what I can tell you in relation to safety regulations .
I must insist , however , that Italy and France are the competent administrations .
And no doubt within Italy and France , in accordance with their internal institutional organisation , there are probably certain other regional or local administrations which also have a role to play .
Having said that , I would like to say to the Member that the Community ' s fundamental freedoms are the freedom of movement of goods and of persons .
We must guarantee the interconnection between Italy and the rest of the European continent ; which clearly means a better distribution of traffic between the Alpine crossings and between the various modes of transport .
At this moment , thanks to the agreement with Switzerland , there are other types of possible access for North-south traffic and for traffic between Italy and the rest of the continent .
The Mont Blanc tunnel is one of the elements , but it is not the only one , and the traffic which has been diverted from the Mont Blanc tunnel is undoubtedly causing an overload in other areas - and I could mention other tunnels which you know even better than me .
In any event , the important thing is to carry out the work on the Lyon-Turin route and the Brenner tunnel , which are key and definitive elements , but which are going to take some time .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I understand your arguments in favour of crossing the Alps .
However , I should like to tell you that at the present time , as I am sure you are aware , the public debate on the opening of the Mont-Blanc tunnel is in full swing , and the citizens of Europe , French and Italian , are appealing to us precisely in order to plead for a different cause , for a real sustainable transport system , which is not transport by road .
Do you really think - and I am asking because you have presented road transport to us as being a sustainable form of transport - do you really think , on the basis of the studies that have been carried out , that the opening of this Mont-Blanc tunnel will be strictly in line , first of all , with requirements , and secondly , with the obligations that we have entered into , in particular with regard to Kyoto ?
Very briefly , ladies and gentlemen , I understand that the people most directly affected address themselves to you , but I can talk about other people who are asking just the opposite ; that the Mont Blanc tunnel be opened as soon as possible .
As on so many other occasions , there are sometimes contradictory interests .
With regard to the issue of safety , I will insist on what I said before .
It is not the Commission which has to make the assessment .
We have neither the competence nor the capacity to carry out that type of task .
Thirdly , sustainable mobility . That is the objective of the White Paper I have presented and which the Commission approved on 12 September .
However , that objective will clearly not be achieved through a statement of will and an approval by the Commission , but it must be approved by this House and by the Council of Ministers and then put into practice .
It will be efforts of all types over a number of years which will allow us to make progress .
But we must consider that transport sometimes resolves problems created by other types of decisions .
Decisions which relate to urban policy , to development policy , to forms of production , to a series of policies on territorial balance and other things , where transport simply offers facilities at a certain moment , resolves problems and makes its contribution .
In many cases the origins go beyond transport policy .
Question No 48 by ( H-0747 / 01 ) :
Subject : Mont Blanc tunnel and ' piggyback traffic ' The Mont Blanc tunnel is due to reopen within the next few months .
In the meantime , road traffic is causing local communities to incur extremely high public health , economic and environmental costs , especially in the mountains , where pollution levels are three to six times as high as in other environments .
What specific measures are being taken to obtain an accurate assessment of the road transport costs , including social , economic and environmental costs ?
What steps have been taken to introduce a special tax ( as has happened in Switzerland and Austria ) aimed at protecting against and making good the social and environmental damage caused and making rail transport , which has considerable potential for further development , competitive in economic terms ?
Mr President , in the Commission ' s deliberations on the Alpine regions , stress is always placed on the high environmental cost of transport in those regions .
Considerable work has been done by means of a series of Commission studies and the Fourth and Fifth Framework Research Programmes , which have examined transport expenses in the Alpine regions and other regions , including the project relating to the information systems on Alpine transport and the European strategic multimodal model and the Alp-net project which is currently under way .
The problem was also dealt with in the reports of the high-level group , which Parliament approved by means of its resolution , contained in the Costa report on charging for the use of infrastructures , which I referred to earlier .
The new Commission White Paper on common policy not only offers current estimates of the costs of road transport , but also treats as a priority the resolution of the transport problems in the Alpine regions by means of a wide range of measures which I referred to earlier .
In that context , we are studying the possibility of creating a system for testing charging in sensitive mountain regions such as the Alps as soon as possible .
Those initiatives should not only have a possible effect on the current volume of traffic , but above all promote the use of less polluting vehicles and thereby contribute to reducing the negative effects of traffic , both on human health and on the flora and fauna of the regions in question and also allow for cross-subsidisation , which I also referred to a moment ago .
Mr President , as I have said repeatedly , we believe that the modal rebalancing of transport in Europe is a key element not only for the quality of life of our citizens , for the protection of the environment , but also for economic development because , without that modal rebalancing , we will face a situation of gridlock of our road networks and our transport routes .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
I imagine that the Member ' s question has been answered .
Since the time allotted to Questions to the Commission has elapsed , Questions Nos 49 to 82 will be replied to in writing .
That concludes Question Time .
Mr Staes has the floor for a point of order .
Mr President , I have here in front of me a magazine , or at least a newspaper article , which reads as follows : ' I do not approve of the Anti-Slavery Conference in Durban .
It promotes the feeling of victimisation in people who already have the sense that they are victims .
I do not feel happy about the entire Conference in Durban , irrespective of the way in which the Middle East was presented there .
The fact that someone like Castro was cheered , is proof that this was an anti-Western meeting ' .
These are not my words but the words of a Member of the European Commission .
In a moment , we will be listening to a statement by the European Commission and by the Council on Durban .
I would invite the Commission to tell us whether it backs the statements by Mr Bolkestein in the Volkskrant in the Netherlands or not , as the case may be .
We appreciate the Members ' imagination in introducing their issues into the debate , but we are really obliged to follow the agenda .
Conclusions of the UN Conference on Racism
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the conclusions of the United Nations Conference on racism .
Mr Michel , President-in-Office of the Council , has the floor .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased to have the opportunity today to let you have an initial account of the results achieved at the Third United Nations World Conference against Racism , Racial Discrimination , Xenophobia and Related Intolerance , a conference which was held in Durban from 31 August to 7 September .
The Durban Conference can be described as a success on several counts , despite the difficult political context in which the negotiations took place , and despite the fact that this conference had been described as a failure before it even began .
Firstly , in terms of practical results , this is the first United Nations conference devoted to the task of combating racism which has ended with the adoption , by consensus , of a policy declaration and a programme of action .
The Durban Conference was , above all , an opportunity to reinforce this essential task of combating racist tendencies , tendencies towards the discrimination and intolerance that constitute a feature of everyday life for millions of human beings , who are all too often the silent victims of outrages against their dignity .
Even if in the adopted texts , which form the very essence of what we are talking about , little progress was made , the theoretical contemplation of the fight against racism clearly shows a strong , political will to banish racism .
A call is also made for taking an impressive number of specific measures which aim to fight this scourge globally .
As such , the lion ' s share of the 220 articles of the action programme consist of preventive , educational and protective measures which aim to eradicate racism at all levels , as well as strategies which endeavour to attain out-and-out equality of all people worldwide .
By way of example , I will list a few measures which should strengthen the national and regional institutions in their fight against racism , and which must encourage them to step up their mutual cooperation .
Other measures aim to educate people to respect human rights , change their mentality and to grant non-discriminating access to education .
Still other measures place the role of the political parties in the foreground , allowing them to develop internal codes of conduct which will prohibit their members from making public speeches which incite racism .
In addition , there are also measures which must help in the fight against racism in the workplace .
The action programme also contains a number of statutory , judicial , regulatory and administrative measures which must prevent racism and must offer protection against this plague .
The time was too short to bring all negotiations to a good end .
That is why it was impossible to complete the discussions on certain important points , such as the caste system or race discrimination in combination with the death penalty .
However , the European Union did manage to have important themes included in all definitive texts . These themes include the gender issue , better child protection and the fight against the trafficking in human beings , especially women and children .
Here too , I would like to emphasise the difficulties arising from the use of the concept of ' race ' .
Today , it is a fact that each theory which supports the existence of different human races is scientifically flawed .
The European Union would like the use of language to follow this trend .
( NL ) The EU is of the opinion that the use of terms which acknowledge the existence of different races needs to be avoided .
It is not our intention here to deny the diversity of the human race , but we do want to emphasise its unity , and , as such , fight the present forms of racism which are often based on these kinds of claims .
But due to strong opposition from certain States , we have been unable to make much progress in this field .
The European Union insisted on explaining its fundamental viewpoint on this matter in a last speech , which will also be included in the Conference ' s report .
As far as the strategies are concerned , the States are urged to draft a policy and action plan to fight racism , and to implement the Durban action programme .
They are also urged to continue to cooperate in a statutory international framework , especially with the Committee on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and the UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights which is responsible for the follow-up of the implementation of the texts that were adopted in Durban .
( FR ) I think I can also safely say that the political scope of the compromise achieved on the causes and origins of racism is another important successful result of the Durban Conference .
Like you , I have read some of the comments .
I certainly do not want to start a controversial debate on this subject , but I will say , on the subject of the forgiveness and excuses which those who negotiated at Durban seem to have been accused of - I was there and I know I had quite a struggle to obtain this text - that of course people of our generation , like those of the previous generation , are not and were not involved in what was all too often misguided colonisation , or in slavery , but I would ask those people the following question .
How can we be satisfied with such a banal , factual observation as that , at the same time refusing , by default , to give justice to those people who , even today , still bear the badly healed scars of colonisation and slavery ?
I should like to reply to what I have been reading in the press by saying that we are not engaged , here , in sanctimoniously and naively cultivating a sentiment of injustice .
On the contrary , we have to recognise , on behalf of our forebears , that the evil deeds that were committed were morally debatable , if not downright reprehensible .
We must also tell the victims , past and present , that we know that our history has not always been glorious and that by admitting as much , obviously on behalf of others , we are showing our intention of recognising their right to extenuating circumstances and , having said that , we must propose a true partnership , based on mutual respect , and far removed from the humiliating paternalism and miserly gestures of a self-satisfied and satiated lady of the manor .
I should therefore like , for a moment , to come back to the result .
I believe that the result obtained at Durban opens up positive prospects for the continuation of the dialogue between North and South .
The European Union has recognised and condemned the immense suffering caused by past and present forms of slavery and trafficking , wherever they took or take place , as well as the most blameworthy aspects of colonialism .
It has recognised that slavery and trafficking were crimes against humanity and should always have been crimes against humanity .
Durban was therefore an opportunity to look our common past in the face .
Some people saw that as an act of regret , others as an act of remorse , and still others as an act of excuse .
The important thing , it seems to me , is , above all else , the willingness to close the darkest chapters of our common history so as to be able to construct a new relationship , based on mutual respect , solidarity and partnership .
An appeal has been launched so that more funds can be authorised for initiatives taken by developing countries , in particular the new African initiative .
There is another element which I would not like to pass over in silence .
In the final analysis , Durban was a success because , throughout this difficult negotiating process , the Member States of the European Union remained united .
Intensive coordination was implemented with the support of the Council Secretariat and the Associated States were kept constantly informed .
It was this close cooperation which enabled the Presidency , duly mandated by its European partners , to negotiate delicate compromises with the representatives of the geographical groups concerned , and with the President and Secretary-General of the Conference , Mrs Zuma and Mrs Robinson respectively .
Regular coordination with the Western Group has also borne fruit .
The European Union and its external and common security policy have emerged strengthened from the Durban Conference .
Durban was the proof that the European Union is capable of speaking with a single voice on the difficult question - but one that is vital to the future of humanity - of the fight against racism and for respect for human dignity .
The European Union asserted itself as an incorruptible negotiating partner and mediator .
It presented an image of unity and consistency , and it supported the use of firmness , depending on the circumstances .
As a result , its credibility was reinforced , as was its position at international level .
The proof of this lies in the extreme flexibility and spirit of openness that the European Union showed in the discussions on the Middle East .
The burden of those negotiations really did rest mainly on the European Union following the departure of the United States and Israel .
The re-launching of the Middle East peace process is one of the European Union ' s priorities .
However , it believed that the Durban Conference , based as it was on the fight against racism , was not the appropriate forum for dealing with that question Since , however , the Arab and Moslem countries were insistent that the issue should be discussed at Durban , the European Union agreed to take an active role in formulating a draft consensus which was presented by the South African Presidency .
In that draft , the European Union was able to retain the principles which it believed to be essential , namely a balanced text with a strong call for negotiations to be resumed and for violence to be brought to an end , while at the same time expressing concern about the increase in anti-Semitism and Islamophobia in the world .
A reference to the Holocaust was retained , whereas the equation ' Zionism equals racism ' disappeared , as these were among the conditions and prerequisites .
That was what was achieved at Durban .
We must now look to the future and put into practice those commitments to which we universally subscribed in South Africa .
I must emphasise that everyone should be informed of the positive coverage of this conference .
Each of us , and Member States in particular , must now redouble our efforts so as to ensure that we make the most of the exemplary success achieved by the European Union at the Durban Conference .
I believe , therefore , that we can be reasonably satisfied with the outcome .
I would simply like to say that you get an even better idea of how successful the conference was if you imagine for a moment what it would have represented , in terms of a message or a negative signal , if Durban had not been a success .
I believe that in the context that we are experiencing now , that would certainly not have helped .
I think , therefore , that we did our duty , we did exactly what we ought to have done , it seems to me , in extremely difficult conditions .
I am very pleased to have succeeded , on behalf of the European Union , with the support of the Commission , with the support of the Council , and with the support of the fifteen Member States , but also - which is very important - with the support of the thirteen candidate countries , to have succeeded , in fact , in saving this conference .
If we had not succeeded in saving this conference , I believe it would have had relatively damaging consequences in the longer term .
Mr President , Minister , ladies and gentlemen , the Durban Conference represents a major step forward in the endeavour to bring about global understanding , global political agreement on questions of racial discrimination , racism , xenophobia and intolerance .
I must start by congratulating the Belgian Presidency and because , after all , they do all have names , by offering my special congratulations to the deputy prime minister , Mr Michel , who took centre stage at the Conference and managed to maintain internal cohesion between the Member States throughout and , at the same time , to shoulder the main burden of negotiations at global level .
I should like to thank the European Parliament and the mission for their extremely important contribution to the Conference and for the important part which they played throughout the negotiations and to say that the Commission is satisfied with its contribution and its efforts to support the presidency .
I should like to explain to Parliament and to apologise for being unable to appear in person one and three days before the Conference but health problems at home made it impossible for me to travel .
The Conference was exciting and difficult , with a heavy workload .
The early departure of the United States left the European Union in the position of main speaker and basically left it to shoulder the main burden of the negotiations .
I think that the European Union 's profile at this Conference was upgraded to a global profile , given that it managed , in a totally hostile environment , to bring important negotiations to a conclusion while maintaining cohesion between the Member States and maintaining excellent relations and cooperation with the candidate countries .
Of course , we see this Conference as a success , especially if you compare it with previous attempts in 1978 and 1983 .
A global message was sent out and specific , globally agreed proposals were tabled .
One comment which could be made is that , throughout consultations over the eight days of the Conference , the wrong agenda prevailed .
The main aim of the Conference was to find a modern definition for racism and to decide on measures to combat it at worldwide level and that would have been a huge success by helping us to deal with the problems of racism today .
These two issues were way down , if not off the bottom of the agenda .
On the contrary , the issues which dominated were the Middle East and past wrongdoings .
Of course , we cannot forget the past .
We need a thorough knowledge of the past if we are to learn from it and avoid repeating it .
However , when it poisons relations , cooperation , agreement and future progress , then it really is an enormous obstacle .
A hostile climate prevailed at the Conference , both at government level and at the level of non-government organisations .
And it must be said , texts appeared couched in terms of hatred which do absolutely nothing to foster reconciliation , build bridges between nations or build a bridge between the future and the past and should be avoided at all costs , especially at international conferences attended by every country in the world .
I should like to refer briefly to the question of non-governmental organisations .
The European Commission has consistently supported the participation of non-governmental organisations at the Conference .
We value their help in formulating and applying policy .
A large sum of money , EUR 3.7 million to be precise , has been earmarked to support the United Nations and , more specifically , the office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights , in order to help fund the participation of non-governmental organisations , especially from countries which cannot meet their expenses .
We have to admit that there is some scepticism as to what their participation achieved and , I think , there was some disappointment about the final communiqué , the final declaration by the forum of non-governmental organisations which Mary Robinson refused to present because it contained inflammatory remarks .
Of course , it is important not to put all our eggs in one basket .
I have to say that the main , important non-governmental organisations working on racism , such as Amnesty International , Human Rights Watch and many other non-governmental organisations failed to agree and publicly fell out in an exchange of inflammatory and awkward remarks .
Because , unfortunately , the forum was overpowered by very specific and special issues .
I already understand that certain Member States are re-examining how funding is provided and , of course , the Commission intends to undertake a similar re-examination .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , despite the fact that numerous countries , for reasons best known to themselves , were unable to make an in-depth and positive contribution to the Durban Conference , we have to say that an agreement was reached which lays the foundations for further cooperation at global level .
It sends out a clear message , as the Minister explained , about combating racism at worldwide level and , of course , every country made a commitment to national action plans , national action plans on legislation , the bases of political parties , education , employment and social and cultural life .
However , we must not rest on our laurels .
Recent events after 11 September have shown how easily and often how thoughtlessly racism and xenophobia can be revived .
If we learned anything from Durban , it was that we must avoid stigmatising groups , nationalities , societies or religious minorities .
We cannot ascribe collective crimes to collective people , but we can condemn specific political or other leaders responsible for political mistakes .
The Commission will continue to put its efforts into combating racism by cooperating with the Member States and by keeping its eye on a very ambitious agenda ; that means all Member States implementing and incorporating the package against discrimination decided last year by 2003 , it means implementing the special programme against discrimination , which is already under way , and it means mobilising and guaranteeing the efficient involvement in this issue of the Racism and Xenophobia Monitoring Centre in Vienna .
Mr President , Commissioner , Minister , there are many people who actually wondered about the usefulness of the Durban Conference .
Yet the international community must exist , and it must come together to discuss the issues , even if such discussions sometimes reveal contradictory interests , and I do not believe that walking out is necessarily a solution .
At least the Durban Conference had the advantage of bringing together the international community on an issue which is undeniably a subject of common concern to all countries , because racism is a scourge of worldwide proportions , and no country is free from racism or discrimination in one form or another .
This conference therefore provided an opportunity to take stock , to make a diagnosis , and what would be the point of such a diagnosis , if there were no treatment ?
What could we expect from the Durban Conference ?
I do not yet know , Mr Michel , whether it will constitute a success in the long term .
What we do know is how it failed , in other words the fact that there was no final declaration , no confirmation of a worldwide willingness to combat racism and to find adequate means of doing so .
The objective of the Durban Conference was to compile a whole series of worldwide instruments , to draw up a road map , to work out new strategies for combating racism , and action programmes - which you , Minister , have described - which states can exploit , subject to the subsidiarity which is the key to the issue of combating racism and discrimination .
What lessons can we learn from this ?
It seems to me that we have been able to avoid falling into three traps .
The first , which you have already mentioned , is the issue of the Middle East .
Any reasonable person knows that the problems of the Middle East would never have been solved at Durban .
Attempts were made to turn this into a major issue , but I think that this trap was , fortunately , avoided .
The second trap is the issue of reparations .
Some people would have liked reparations to be the main subject of the debate .
This was sheer perverseness , if not perversion , because it meant that there was a risk that development aid would be reduced to a form of reparations .
As Mr Michel has quite rightly emphasised , we are all aware of the burden of history borne by certain parties .
We must work towards solidarity between human beings rather than perpetual culpability , which in financial terms would have to come to an end one day , because any reparations expressed in terms of money would , of course , be finally paid off sooner or later .
Finally , the third trap that was avoided was the victim list .
Some people wanted a list to be drawn up .
In our case that would have included the Roma , Sintis and Dalits .
If one draws up a list of victims , of course , there is a risk that the next thing that will be drawn up is a hierarchy of victims , and some may be regarded as being more victims than others , which seems to me to be completely unproductive as far as racism and discrimination are concerned .
In effect , therefore , the declaration is acceptable and I would like to thank Mr Michel , officially , for the essential role that he played as mediator , intercessor and - if I can risk a neologism - explainer .
As you have emphasised so well , Mr Michel , Europe was able to make its full influence felt - and I do not believe that it did so only after the departure of the United States - because you showed great personal commitment , and because Europe consisted not only of fifteen countries , but of thirteen others as well .
In other words a large part of the human race was giving its mind to this subject .
As the Commissioner has said , some of the NGOs made themselves look ridiculous .
This raises the issue of how representative they actually are .
Fortunately , essential partners such as Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch disassociated themselves from the final declaration , but perhaps it will be necessary to sort out the assistance that we are able to give to the NGOs , many of which , over there , have lost all sense of responsibility to say the least .
We are very mindful , Minister , of the practical side .
The European Union is perhaps not at the bottom of the league table when it comes to combating racism and discrimination , but there is still a great deal to be done .
Let us therefore exploit those 225 articles to find means of action that we can put into practice .
Finally , and I should like to end on this point , I would simply draw attention to the inadequacy of our Parliament ' s representation .
This point will feature in the joint resolution .
Briefly , the European Union is represented by the President-in-Office of the Council . The European Community is represented , as an observer , by both the Commission and Parliament .
That is undoubtedly something to think about if we want the European Parliament to play a better role at international conferences , a role other than that of joint observer together with the Commission .
Anyway , this point raises the issue of the renegotiation of the Institutional Agreement of 5 July 2000 .
You will find this proposal again in the joint resolution which will very shortly be put to the vote in this House .
Mr President , at the heart of my political group 's approach to the Durban conference is a renewed determination to tackle racism and to discover what was positive about this conference .
I say renewed because racism in its many forms has reared its head again , with the tragic events in New York and Washington .
We have now a danger that a renewed wave of Islamophobia and anti-Semitism will come if we do not tackle racism and its root causes .
That illustrated the tragedy of this conference , because I felt I attended two conferences .
One was a historic conference where delegations , like our own European Union delegation , were determined to register that racism is a major human rights issue .
We were determined to define for the first time racism in its many international forms , whether caste , a contemporary slavery , or whether discrimination against minorities within our own European Union and indeed the candidate countries .
We were determined to do something about racism , to show that with Article 13 we in the European Union had something to say to the rest of the world about how we were approaching our own problems .
Yet there was a second conference that I attended , full of confusion , of individual national agendas , a determination not to define racism in different countries because of an embarrassment as to what racism represented in those countries .
The confusion arose over the much misunderstood issue of reparations , and indeed the very destructive issue of Zionism and the problems in the Middle East , overshadowed our conference .
We have to be determined that the first conference , with the ideals we as a delegation defined for it , are renewed in this House today .
That requires a united front .
It requires us not to just say that Durban was chaotic , therefore we will leave it that way for history .
Instead , we as a European Union united , the Commission , the Belgian Presidency - which did an excellent job - those who attended the conference and all of us within this House who want to tackle racism must unite to go back to the original agenda .
That original agenda is one which may embarrass some individual countries , but the action programme is now there .
It is there for us to exploit and it is there for us to do something about . The issue is not whether this is a failure or not , it is about whether we can now make it a success by renewed determination within this House to get back to the action programme and make progress .
I agree with the President-in-Office and the Commissioner that the conference can be described as a qualified success .
It did get a bad press - in some respects deservedly - but those who say an international conference on racism was not worth holding are wrong .
For the first time in 25 years of trying , international standards were set on the human rights of those vulnerable to racial discrimination .
That is something to celebrate .
We have a basis on which to build in order to tackle one of the great threats to freedom , justice and security in the world , including Europe .
Admittedly , however , the conference did start badly .
Firstly , there was the NGO forum .
Although many of the forum sessions were very worthwhile and indeed inspiring , the NGO voice was hijacked by the proponents of reparations for slavery and those pursuing the line that Zionism is racism .
These themes also dominated or sought to hijack the intergovernmental conference .
There was gross anti-Semitic abuse with , for example , cartoons circulating that could have figured in Julius Streicher 's publications from the 1930s .
The document produced by the NGO forum was so bad that the Secretary-General , Mary Robinson , was unable to recommend it to the governments .
Some NGOs , including Amnesty International , had to disassociate themselves from it .
This was a great shame , because so many people had travelled to Durban with the serious intent to tell the world of real daily suffering .
I particularly remember a woman talking about the problems of internal migrants in China .
There were also individuals from many groups who suffer individual persecution such as Roma and Dalits , sometimes known as untouchables .
Admittedly there was a degree of cynical hypocrisy shown by some states in hiding behind the demonisation of Israel and America , including some African countries with appalling records of ethnic discrimination or human rights violations , and Arab countries unwilling to come clean about their own role in the slave trade .
This lack of honesty detracted from the conference .
Opinions can differ about whether the US and Israel did the right thing in staying away .
One can say that the position of Israel , at least , was impossible .
But certainly the absence of the US pushed the European Union into the front line .
One can ask if the EU was fully prepared for that .
But , admirably led by Mr Michel , as has been said , it rose to the challenge .
I have to give Mr Michel particular credit , even if he is my Liberal political colleague .
He came for two days and stayed for a week .
He displayed great personal commitment to ensure that the European Union spoke with one voice and a determination - even if sometimes a grim determination - to reach agreement .
That success was realised .
On the Middle East the language agreed was , on the whole , balanced .
I also believe personally that the language on slavery struck the right tone in speaking of it now as being a crime against humanity .
Clearly reparations were not the right means of redress to talk about .
The irony of the situation would be that African Americans would seek to claim , not Africans , who were not subject to slave trading .
Finally , one of my disappointments at Durban was that with the spotlight on international diplomacy rather than domestic records , the European Union struggled to find the space to highlight its own growing and increasingly solid record in tackling racism .
It is a pity that the EU as such is not represented in the UN system , so that the Commission and Parliament are only observers , although the President-in-Office did a very good job .
Clearly it was a pity that the Commissioner was prevented from attending for family reasons .
We have to find a way of strengthening the ability of all the European institutions to carry on taking a leading role in international human rights and anti-discrimination work .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , participation in the World Conference in Durban was important , as a solemn proclamation of the renewal of an alliance against discrimination and the rejection of respect for human rights , and above all as an opportunity for reconciliation , the only way to reconstruct the future and future peace .
As the Minister has already said , the objective of this conference was obvious , its scope was complex , and it was necessary in order to construct the future .
At the same time , the NGO forum was held .
Although the final declaration appears to be excessive , it merely reveals , not a split , but a great deal of diversity among the NGOs .
Noticeable , in fact , is the absence of the worldwide NGOs , and the virtual absence of the NGOs involved in immigration in Europe .
The only NGOs featured in the declaration are the antiracist NGOs and the solidarity NGOs .
On the other hand , the dynamism of the international NGOs is also noticeable , in the way they challenge power , assert principles , or , then again , consolidate a power already in place , hence in some cases their lobbying activities and their nickname of VGOs ( Voluntary Government Organisations ) .
Yet within this diversity there is a certain amount of logic , the logic of powerful people .
On the one hand there is the logic emanating from the rich , developed countries , the former colonisers , and then there is the logic of the poor countries , the ones who were formerly colonised , where power remains to this day hardly what one could call democratic , yet all too often still enjoys the North ' s approval .
Words have meaning .
We have to find the right words to provide a solution .
The essential question is that of defining the terminology : slavery , colonialism , racism , genocide , apartheid or military occupation .
All these words tell of daily crises , the consequences , moreover , of discrimination .
We find that the final text talks of remorse and regrets , but refuses to give any excuses , and still less to envisage the prospect of reparations , or to reaffirm people ' s right to live in peace and equality , without having to have recourse to international law .
Finally , it is perhaps regrettable that the final declaration is a minimalist declaration which seeks to satisfy everyone by preserving a certain amount of equilibrium .
This declaration not only calls into question the credibility and effectiveness of major international meetings , but also raises the question of direct democracy , because in effect it raises the issue of how representative the limits of participative democracy really are .
I should like to make one final reference to this so-called hijacking of the conference .
Who was hijacking whom ? Why ?
For what purpose ? Remember that the United States did not want to take part in this meeting , and that they often threatened to withdraw .
The NGOs ' declaration , however hard it might have been , was a good pretext for avoiding any issues with a bearing on the major interests which it was not thought desirable to offend , as well as the issue of reparations .
Several countries , including European countries , were secretly relieved to see the conference focus on the Middle East question , which allowed them to dodge the issue of excuses and to put off dealing with the colonial debt .
Do not forget that the rich countries of the North built their prosperity on the negro slave trade and on colonial conquest , and they are not all willing to recognise this fully or to make reparation for their past crimes .
Moreover , these issues of discrimination against women , children , homosexuals and migrants , and the continued existence of modern slavery , still affect a number of countries which pursue a policy of repression and refuse to allow themselves to be put in the dock .
Those powers are still , all too often , supported , and they too prefer to focus on an issue such as that of the Middle East , where they can make a good impression , rather than be called to account for the human rights situation in their own countries .
Finally , the essential objective of this conference was achieved , but we must now hope that there will be real follow-up action enabling projects , guidelines and action programmes to be set up and put into practice , with a view to preventing and abolishing those situations in which discrimination occurs , thereby ensuring that our fine words are finally translated into reality .
Commissioner , Mr President , the final declaration and action programme adopted in Durban was only possible due to the constructive and essential role played by the European Union . It was also due to the Belgian Foreign Affairs Minister , Mr Louis Michel ' s diplomacy and ability to draw together many points of view , not to mention his natural gift for reconciling the views of all sides .
I sincerely believe that the European Union fulfilled its role perfectly , and we can only welcome the work that has been done .
I deplore the fact , however , despite Mrs De Palacio ' s apologies , which I accept , that the European Commission was not present .
I think that at least one commissioner could have represented you at Durban .
I also regret the fact that few industrialised countries were represented , and I believe that many countries interpreted this as a lack of interest in the conference .
Had they been there , it might have prevented the American and Israeli delegations from leaving .
This is even more of a shame because racist violence and support for the populist and xenophobic vote have increased in Europe over recent years ; the Freedom Party ( FPÖ ) led by Jörg Haider in Austria is only one illustration of this .
Other political forces masquerading as NGOs have rushed into the void that has been left .
Since , although the overwhelming majority of NGOs played a decisive role in preparing for the conference , and made several proposals formulating demands , I still do not agree with Mrs Boumediene-Thiery who tries to play down what happened .
This is because a small number of NGOs have been busy trying to equate Zionism with racism , and , even worse , have distributed texts and writings , examples of which I have shown to Mr Michel , in which they patently extolled the merits of the Holocaust .
And this is something that Parliament cannot play down .
These NGOs , or so-called NGOs , these pseudo-NGOs , were not at Durban to defend the Palestinians , they were not there to defend the anti-racists , they were not even there in favour of peace between Israelis and Palestinians .
In my view , it is a positive sign that the final declaration acknowledges the right of Palestinians to their own land and that , at the same time , we reject any equation of Zionists with racists , in the same way as in Durban .
I must therefore ask , as you did , Commissioner , that we know exactly who these NGOs are , what their purpose is and how they are funded before we hold another conference .
The over-representation of some delegations leads me to question how they are funded .
But this conference provided , above all , an opportunity to weigh up the importance of some demands . And in relation to this , I strongly challenge what my fellow Members , Mr Cornillet and Baroness Ludford said .
I think that acknowledging slavery and the slave trade as crimes against humanity was one of the key aims of the conference , and this is a good thing , and we are merely doing justice by acknowledging that 350 years of deprivation , raids , deportations and humiliations are crimes against humanity .
This is the least we could have done at this conference .
And I hope that all countries and former colonial powers follow the example of France acknowledge slavery and the slave trade , or are made to acknowledge it by their national parliaments , as a crime against humanity .
Personally speaking , I am still dubious about financial reparations , as Mr Michel said , I believe .
Especially when we know that there are powerful lobbies of American lawyers hiding behind the African Americans ' legitimate demand .
On the contrary , there is in fact a consensus that the continent that suffered most from slavery and colonisation , should be helped with the cancellation of its debt , and by urgently and proactively pursuing policies to combat AIDS and illiteracy .
We owe at least this to the African continent .
In addition , we have - and Mr Michel pointed this out - valuable counterparts in Africa , who are committed , through the New African Initiative , to good governance .
This is , therefore , the time to seize their demand to respond with practical measures and start talking .
Lastly , I regret that there was no mention of the death penalty in the United States , and part of the reason the United States delegation left was because it did not want to talk about racism in its own country .
I regret that discrimination on the ground of sexual orientation was not discussed .
I regret that the concept of castes was not discussed , and I regret that the statement has no binding character .
The European Union ' s task is , first of all , to carefully monitor the use of new technologies , such as the Internet , which can be used to incite racial hatred ; to speed up the implementation of Article 13 ; to explain the annihilation of the American Indians , slavery , colonialism and the Holocaust in our textbooks and history books , and also the Sabra and Chatila massacres .
I believe that racism and anti-Semitism have one aspect in common with terrorism .
On the one hand , there are those who carry out the act itself and , on the other hand , there are those who supply them with the ideological weapons .
We must also combat the group made up of the Vlaams Blok , the National Front , the FPÖ and other parties , which supply ideological weapons to those carrying out the act itself and who themselves end up attacking the physical integrity of individuals .
We have a responsibility to do this as well .
Mr President , the resolution of the World Conference against Racism held in Durban is not exactly what many would have hoped for .
I regret the withdrawal of the American delegation .
This certainly did not do it a particular service in view of its own record on racism in its own country .
This compromise resolution makes it very clear that much more needs to be done , especially in relation to our understanding of other cultures and religions . Islam , I have said many times , has in many ways been demonised , mostly by people who know nothing about it .
Durban was not a failure , nor was it indeed a great success ; but it re-emphasised the imperative to make racism a crime , something I have called for many times in this House .
It helped refocus governments ' attention on issues of racism , which is based largely on ignorance and a fear of the unknown .
European governments have a responsibility to show leadership in the area of racism and xenophobia and politicians and civic leaders are failing to address the issue of racism in their own communities .
They are showing cowardice and a lack of courage in dealing with this particular issue .
We have a long way to go in the European Union , but at least we have made a reasonable beginning in Durban . Those who participated in Durban deserve great credit .
The resolution refers to action against Islamophobia , which I support without reservation .
I want to state yet again , here in this House , that I am a friend of Islam .
Muslims around the world have unreservedly condemned these terrorist attacks .
We must all ensure that under no circumstances is there any sort of backlash whatsoever against the Muslim communities within our Union .
These terrorists acts were not carried out in the name of Islam .
They were plainly brutal terrorist acts of a premeditated and determined nature .
Just let me remind the House that no religion - or political movement for that matter - is without its fundamentalists .
Mr President , I too would like , first of all , to congratulate Mr Michel , the President-in-Office of the Council , for I feel that the tenacity and determination with which it was attempted to avoid the shameful outcome towards which the Conference was headed are , above all , due to him .
I feel that the United States and Israeli delegations did well to withdraw from the work of the Conference , just as I feel that you did well , President-in-Office of the Council , to stay on to achieve a result , for , in actual fact , the two things are not incompatible .
The choice made by Israel and the United States served to show the world public what was in danger of happening , that a group of countries , mostly non-democratic with total contempt for their own people , was attempting to exploit the Conference in order to take sides in international politics .
This is why I support most of what has been asserted by my fellow Members , namely that , in present times , the most dangerous and widespread form of racism in the Member States of the European Union and elsewhere is the conviction that democracy and the rule of law are institutions which are only beneficial for Europe , the West and the United States , and not for some of the other communities in our world , and that they must not be exported and strictly respected in other countries as well .
The image of dictatorships which oppress their own people , their own race and their own flesh and blood , of dictators and their representatives who have the gall to preach antiracist sermons at the United Nations , is an effective illustration of the obstacles facing the international community .
None of this can be tolerated , and I feel that the decision taken by the United States and Israeli delegations and the determination of Mr Michel , in particular , and the Council as a whole as well , have served to make this very clear .
I would like to end by associating myself with those who are calling for a detailed inquiry at this juncture into where , within the non-governmental organisations , responsibility for what happened lies - clearly , as always , we must avoid putting everything under the same umbrella - for there is no doubt that responsibility does lie somewhere and it must be ascertained where , not least in view of the generosity displayed by the European Union and the European Commission towards non-governmental organisations .
Mr President , the World Conference against Racism , in conjunction with the United Nations-sponsored International Decade of the World 's Indigenous People , has been a unique opportunity to consider the challenges and dangers faced by these peoples and all Stateless nations .
Unfortunately , I cannot agree with the optimistic view expounded by Mr Michel , though I recognise willingly the very important role played by him .
I was in Durban on that special occasion , and so I can give evidence to this House of a very insidious threat to indigenous peoples running through the provisional agenda of the Durban Summit , paragraph 27 of which states : " The use of the term ' indigenous people ' in the World Conference against Racism ... cannot be construed as having any implications as to rights under international law " .
Through that paragraph the United Nations Summit tried to exclude all these peoples from the right to self-determination recognised by the United Nations itself and international covenants .
In response to such inadmissible discrimination and intolerance , the NGO forum in Durban denounced very strongly the new expression of neo-colonialists that will , in the long run , provoke the decimation of the cultures and civilisations of these vulnerable peoples .
This insidious action was prepared at the Conference against Racism with a view to the future . It looks to the future , not to the past .
As the NGO final declaration clearly suggests , structural racism in the past , current manifestations of neo-colonialism and the denial of the fundamental right to self-determination lie at the root of indigenous suffering .
Mr President , seldom has a UN Conference been so well-intended and so badly understood as Durban .
In my view , this is partly due to poor preparation .
Diplomats and officials should have made more of an effort to reach consensus before the Conference .
That would have saved the world community a great deal of money , time and embarrassing moments .
Particularly unfortunate was the fact that a number of delegations ran off , for however well-founded their reasons may have been , those who run away are always in the wrong .
Against this background , it was all the more surprising that , despite the obstinacy of Louis Michel , for that is how we have all come to know him in Belgium , and now also in the rest of the world , a sound final declaration was obtained after all .
This final declaration contains a number of important provisions which , if applied , could drastically change the lives of hundreds of thousands , even millions of people .
Governments are encouraged to allow minorities to speak their own language , acknowledge their own culture and profess their own religion , to stand up to police services who display racist behaviour and are also encouraged to adjust their legal systems so that they do not discriminate against certain groups .
Roma and gypsy children must be given the same education as other children .
In the field of migration policy , race discrimination must be banished .
I also welcome the sound and balanced provisions on the Middle East , which emphasise the right to an independent State for the Palestinians as well as Israel ' s safety .
And finally , two centuries after the events , Europe has apologised for the slave trade .
After all , we should not forget that at least ten million Africans were transported to America in what is known as forced migration on the largest-scale in the history of mankind .
Millions more lost their lives during the slave hunt or one of the infamous cargo ships .
The statements Commissioner Bolkestein made in a Dutch newspaper last weekend are therefore completely misplaced .
' I am not satisfied with the excuses of the UN Conference in Durban . '
He said : ' I myself have never had a slave , so why should I apologise ? '
That kind of statement bears witness to a Western arrogance which overlooks the fact that American prosperity is partly built on the labour of slaves , and European prosperity is partly built on the raw materials from former colonies .
Can this serve as an excuse for governments in developing countries to shirk their responsibility and shift all the blame to the past ?
No , certainly not .
But rather than giving other people lessons in civilisation , we should have the intellectual integrity to describe this chapter in our history as it was : A crime against humanity .
The United Nations Conference on Racism is of particular relevance in these turbulent times , when there is bloodthirsty talk and behaviour in the name of a confrontation between civilisations .
We are witnessing armed conflicts which originate in and are sustained by racial or ethnic conflicts and we are astonished to hear statements whose content and origin are unacceptable , on the superiority of certain civilisations over others .
I would therefore like to congratulate the President-in-Office of the Council of Ministers , Mr Louis Michel , in particular , on his efforts which led to the final success of the Durban Conference , in which I participated on behalf of this Parliament .
His actions clearly demonstrated the European Union ' s firm position in relation to racism and xenophobic attitudes .
Without ignoring the social , political and economic problems which lead to racial discrimination in Europe , I would like to focus on one aspect - the development perspective - which has been somewhat forgotten in the stagnation of recent events and also during the Conference , in relation to the Middle East conflict and the seriousness of the events taking place there , and to the recognition of the suffering caused by Europe ' s history and the perversity of slavery and slave trading , the practice of which we today see as a crime against humanity .
The majority of ethnic conflicts which involve thousands of victims and regrettable human situations take place in developing countries , mainly in Africa .
I therefore believe that the success of this Conference will depend on whether we are today capable of realising everything that was contained in its final declaration .
In this resolution , we ask the Commission for financial support for the administrations of the developing countries for the implementation of national action plans to eliminate all kinds of discrimination , as was agreed at Durban .
Forums and observatories must be created , observatories in Africa , provincial observatories , regional observatories .
We also ask for support for the United Nations so that it can carry out the monitoring of the results of Durban , so that the fight against racism may remain on the international agenda until it is eradicated .
I believe that we must continue working so that the contents of the declaration may be implemented .
Of course , the United States should not have abandoned the Conference , but it was not the first time that they have abandoned it , since they had abandoned it on other occasions ; this was therefore not important .
The important thing is that we in the European Parliament are able to clearly repeat our message with one voice , to journalists , to the media , against racism and in favour of equality and integration .
The President , acting President-in-Office of the Council , and the Commissioner will have to excuse me , for one minute of speaking time leaves one very little time to say much at all .
But great efforts do not necessarily lead to great results .
A lack of effort , however , can lead to disaster .
That is why I should like to congratulate the President-in-Office of the Council for his efforts in Durban .
Sometimes , it seems as if our Commissioners are looking at a different Conference from the one Mr Bolkestein is talking about , when he states that such a conference promotes a sense of victimisation in people who already have the feeling of being victims .
That is regrettable , of course .
Mrs Diamantopoulou , you state that there was actually a hostile atmosphere at that Conference .
It is all the more important then that we are very aware of the fact that we always carry a level of latent racism and latent hostility around with us , and that we are very careful that people keep track of their sense of identity - and I know what I am talking about , for that is a very important theme in our groups .
From the moment that identity leads to a sense of more worth than , and underestimation , of others , and that that sense is instilled in an entire group and transferred across to other groups , ethnic and racist tension ensues , which can lead to major conflicts .
It is unfortunate , but we cannot say that that is not true for Europe .
This is borne out by the success of racist parties in some of our countries , the conflicts in the Balkans , or the tension in the candidate countries .
We must employ a great deal of patience and determination to make a difference .
Durban may be a start .
It was certainly not the end , for the bulk of the work will need to be done in our own communities .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I find it a very positive indicator that this conference was held in Durban ; that there were wide-ranging discussions ; that a resolution was drafted ; and that there has been a conclusion .
I find that this discussion , in some respects , looks too little to the future and considers too few definite and preventative measures to combat racism so that , if possible , it does not even come into being .
I would like to call at this point for the European Union itself to take the lead by good example , and I wish now to refer to two areas of current significance in which we can do something tangible , namely asylum policy and immigration policy .
If we succeed in what we have set ourselves , that is , in implementing a unified asylum policy with minimum standards and rapid and reliable decision-making , we will no longer have the situation that faces us now , with asylum seekers waiting for years in ghettos , constrained to work outside the law and becoming marginalised .
Rapid decisions lead to help being made available quickly and to recognised refugees being speedily integrated ; it prevents the marginalisation that at present occurs .
This would amount to the prevention of racism !
I seek progress in immigration policy as well .
If Member States , as far as they are able and presupposing that work , accommodation and educational opportunities are available , accept citizens from outside States and offer help with integration , then that is another step taken against exclusion and discrimination and in favour of integration , and I believe we should grasp these practical tools in order to be really successful in preventing racism and discrimination .
This is an opportunity for our European Union .
Mr President , Commissioner , Minister , the World Conference on Racism in Durban was overshadowed from the outset by a political strategy of discrimination .
Arab States attempted to impute racism to Israel , with the intention of making the Arab world out to be victims of Israeli racism , which was then to be condemned by the conference .
This was a perfidious strategy .
They attempted to make use of this important conference for their own purposes .
Like the conference as a whole , any attempt to seriously get to grips with this strategy was sunk by the terrible events on 11 September .
We now have a situation in which the entire Arab world is in danger of itself being pilloried in a racist way .
All people of Arab origin or from an Islamic cultural background are in danger of having the deeds of a small terrorist group laid at their door .
There are , unfortunately , already examples of how this can happen openly and violently .
It can also , however , happen surreptitiously through concealed mistrust .
Either way , it is a creeping venom seeping into our open society and becoming a burden on it .
This would represent a victory for the terrorists .
So let us not allow it to happen !
Let us not follow the bad example that cast a pall over the Durban Conference .
We Members of Europe 's Parliament , above all people , must be wary of rashly pigeonholing people by nationality and religion .
Let us be an example .
Let us continue to be open and tolerant .
But the terrorists must be in no doubt : they will be pursued with rigour , with no regard to race and religion .
We here can do something against racism .
Let us act accordingly and give an example .
That will be worth more than all the conferences in the world , something that will be demonstrated when we take this debate to its post-Durban conclusion .
Mr President , the European Union bears a particular responsibility in the fight against racism and racial discrimination .
The action plan adopted on 8 September in Durban is an important message and a contribution to creating awareness in the fight against racism and xenophobia .
The conference 's eventual agreement on a joint declaration is to be welcomed .
Although many , but not all , NGO 's and also many States strenuously attempted to convert the Conference into a unilateral forum of condemnation of Israel and to make the issue of slavery and colonialism an opportunity for demanding compensation payments , it can be counted a success that the Final Document did not take up extreme positions of this sort and that it came into being at all .
With hindsight , however , we must ask ourselves whether the European Union 's generous support for the NGOs , which I consider justified in principle and which amounted to EUR 3.7 million , always found its way to the right destinations , all the more so as agitprop arguments to the effect that , for example , Zionism is equivalent to racism , are very much part of the political vocabulary of many States , Syria being one example .
The biggest terrorist attack to date against the civilised world took place three days after the Durban Conference .
None other than President Mubarak of Egypt has pointed out that human rights issues are often misused by terrorist organisations in order to build up their international networks .
Mark well , though , that human rights and the fight against racial discrimination and xenophobia are indivisible and of global significance .
Nobody is immune , as demonstrated by the ethnic conflicts in the Balkans and the most recent tragic events in Northern Ireland .
The Durban Action Plan is an important document for every State , but also for the European Union as a whole , which bears great responsibility in this respect , above all in the framework of the United Nations .
I wish the EU 's role were more visible there as well .
Mr President , the debate on the outcome of the UN Conference on Racism is particularly topical following the tragic events on 11 September .
Unfortunately , the global coalition against terrorism appears to exist alongside a xenophobic revival , as Mrs Diamantopoulou said earlier , and a tendency to demonise whole groups of people , mainly Muslims and Arabs .
According to the international press , the majority of the public in Holland , 62 % to be precise , in a country with a long tradition of democracy , considers that the terrorist attacks in New York and Washington will seriously impede the social integration of Muslims in Holland .
At the same time , there is support in Germany for reviewing the legislative framework governing religious organisations .
A few days ago in Britain , a nineteen-year-old Muslim girl and a taxi driver were the victims of an unprovoked attack .
During this morning ' s debate on asylum and immigration , several members in the House expressed anti-Islamic views .
These developments are most worrying .
Europe ' s experiences from the horrendous wars of the twentieth century highlight the danger to peace and democracy and to human dignity of racism , xenophobia and nationalism .
In the light of recent events , the European Union and the Member States need to strengthen their legal mechanisms for fighting racism and to take initiatives at global level to reduce the gap between countries and to ostracise violence as a means of resolving differences .
Fighting terrorism and dispensing justice should never call our democratic achievements and respect for fundamental freedoms and human rights into question .
Finally , I should like to thank the President-in-Office , Mr Michel , and the European delegation as a whole for helping to make the UN Conference in Durban a success .
Mr President , racism is one matter on which there exists a great cultural unanimity : that it is wrong .
Nobody wants to be accused of racism ; it is one of those strong and highly-charged words which can easily be used not only to struggle against injustice but also to attack and to brand people .
The shadow declaration which preceded the NGO Conference on Racism , in which Israel was accused of racism - without any simultaneous condemnation of anti-semitism - created a distorted starting point for the UN conference .
We Members of the European Parliament , too , have seen with our own eyes how anti-semitism appears in the form of naked racism in Palestinian textbooks .
The tone of debate was unfair to Israel when account is taken of its past and the obvious desire of hostile States to deny Israel 's very right to exist .
I certainly do not deny the problems of the Palestinians ; these need to be rectified . But no solution will be generated by obfuscating facts in one way or the other .
It is tragicomic that , while condemning discrimination , one is guilty of that very thing oneself .
This unfairness unfortunately harmed the credibility of the NGOs and damaged the prestige of the Conference on Racism .
As a friend of the civic society and of NGOs I particularly regret this : by its lack of consideration , this body has weakened its own credibility and future operating prospects .
I very much appreciate the way in which the most respected human rights organisations such as Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch immediately dissociated themselves from the text of the NGO conference .
Similarly , I wish to thank the representative of the presiding State , Belgium , whose intervention on behalf of the EU justifiably stressed that the conflict in the Middle East is a political one and should not be treated in a conference on racism at all .
What , then , should have been discussed ?
What did all this political talk crowd out ?
According to Amnesty International , many critical matters such as the treatment of refugees , human trafficking , persecution based on the caste system , and the rights of gypsies threatened to remain unnoticed .
And , unfortunately , this is what happened .
The Indian untouchables , for example , made strong efforts to bring up their own plight in the NGO forum on racism .
Discrimination against untouchables is , according to them , a hidden form of apartheid .
Mr President , the Durban Conference provided an important opportunity to condemn the phenomenon of racism and xenophobia , sending out a clear and powerful message , the need for and importance of which remain highly relevant today .
The twentieth century bore witness to the most horrendous crimes committed in the name of racist doctrines which , we should bear in mind , took place in Europe , whose civilisation was the birthplace of the great declarations on rights .
The Durban Conference , however , was much more than an exercise in the duty of remembrance .
Durban reminded us that the modern world has proved itself incapable of eradicating racism and xenophobia from its societies and these , even in Europe , continue to create victims and underlie violent conflicts .
Unfortunately , some people have succumbed to the Manichean philosophy , lacking in any historical rigour , that gives Europe a disproportionate and over-simplified responsibility for all the evils and oppression associated with racism , such as the use of slavery .
Europe does not reject its history , neither the enlightened times nor its darker moments , but nor must it allow it to be crassly manipulated .
Europe must not allow its history to become a mere settling of accounts , with the past being placed in the dock in order to exonerate the present time and conceal modern responsibilities for the persistence of the abject and anachronistic phenomenon of slavery and , more generally , of the systematic violation of fundamental rights .
Judging history with the eyes of the present is a pernicious exercise in populism that simplifies the complex and , consequently , offends the truth .
Manicheism seeks to segregate fanaticism and use the whole gamut of crusades that interpret history as an endless struggle between Good and Evil .
A fanatic , by definition , has no interlocutors , only enemies .
History is not merely the balancing of criminal offences and civil compensation laid down in current legislation .
We reject this pointless exercise .
The European Union ' s political responsibility for affirming the universal values inherent to human dignity is both domestic and international because it is inherent to the most intimate raison d ' être of our common project .
Our collective European responsibility is expressed in the unreserved confirmation of our place in the front line of combat , by the universal affirmation of human rights and rights protecting against racism and xenophobia and in the determination to pursue and extend its constructive role on the international stage , by liberating humanity from all discrimination based on hatred , prejudice and ignorance .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would nonetheless like to briefly respond to the speakers with some considerations , and perhaps with some more detailed information .
First of all , I agree to an extent , as Mr Van Hecke said , I agree to an extent with him in believing we must ensure that we prepare very thoroughly for a conference of this kind .
I think that , essentially , we have , to a certain degree , paid a heavy price for the fact that a number of shortfalls were perceived in the preparations for this conference .
I believe , to use a term that you are familiar with , that there were still far too many ' leftovers ' at Durban , which obviously made the task at hand much more complicated .
I therefore think that this preparation is obviously extremely important .
My second comment in relation to this type of conference : I am not sure whether to want to draw up a document that provides a comprehensive list of every situation would not be a mistake , and whether or not , at the end of the day , this would adversely affect the substance of the final document .
By this I mean that , if we had a more concise text , with a specific number of principles that can be generally applied , I feel that we would probably be able to produce a stronger text .
And we can even question whether or not the European Union could perhaps at some point contemplate doing this , in other words , glean from the Durban Conference a basic framework , which would facilitate the roll-out of the Durban achievements in each Member State .
I have heard many people ask the question , ' So , that was Durban - what comes next ? '
Ladies and gentlemen , I must tell you that what happens next depends in the main on the Member States .
I believe that it was Mrs Boumediene-Thiery who said that if a State wants to apologise , present or express remorse or regret , at the end of the day , it is up to that State to know how far it can go .
Secondly , I think that each State can very easily put the finishing touches to or devise its own specific action programme to combat racism , based on what was done at Durban , drawing its inspiration from these principles and from what was agreed at Durban .
I also listened earlier to the Commissioner very clearly saying that the Commission was also planning to take some very specific measures .
I think that the Commission has already been working on this matter for some time .
I therefore feel that there will be a follow-up , that there will be another conference after Durban if that is what we want .
In fact , this comes down to the usual question of political will .
Naturally , I would also like to take advantage of this opportunity to thank all the speakers who have expressed their appreciation of my work , which is much too generous .
I believe that I had the support of some extremely competent people from the Commission , Council , and of course from my own delegation .
I was also able to count on all those representing the various European countries .
I feel that it was logical to do the work that we did . I think that it was perfectly natural .
I would like to perhaps respond to a number of comments about what is lacking in the documents .
Yes , they naturally lack a number of points .
For example , why is there no mention at all of the caste system in the documents adopted at Durban ?
This is a particularly important subject for the European Union , I am aware of this , and what is more , I share this concern .
As you know , the European Union is concerned about situations involving discrimination throughout the world ; therefore it was natural that we also express this concern .
We closely followed developments regarding this problem and we supported a paragraph put forward by Switzerland , discussing this problem . The text makes references to discrimination based on ancestry and occupation , which clearly describes types of discrimination , the helpless victims of which live in several countries around the world .
Unfortunately , despite all the efforts of the European Union and other countries , particularly South America , it was not possible to reach an agreement with India on this paragraph .
Since this conference was based on consensus , as you know , the text was therefore withdrawn , and this is something I regret .
However , we must also remain realistic and realise that we cannot achieve everything .
One speaker quite rightly mentioned the problem of the death penalty . This is a subject that is of particular personal concern to me .
As you know , the abolition of the death penalty is one of the European Union ' s priorities .
I believe that we are right to reiterate this , and we are endeavouring to use every possible opportunity we are given at international level to push forward the debate on this issue .
This was the case at the Durban conference .
The European Union supported a paragraph of the action programme referring to racial discrimination in the application of the death penalty .
The United States strongly opposed this paragraph during the preparatory process , however , and several countries , particularly those in Asia , also rejected it and , without consensus , it was not possible to retain this text either .
I am obviously giving these examples in order to convince you that your concerns were relayed and were expressed in Durban , but unfortunately we could not achieve everything .
I would like to briefly mention the behaviour of the NGOs throughout the conference .
As stressed in the documents adopted at Durban , civil society , and NGOs therefore , have an important role to play in the fight against racism .
That is why the NGO forum organised prior to the Intergovernmental Conference was particularly important for the European Union .
In my view , this is also the reason why the European Commission funded most of those taking part in the forum .
Unfortunately , although the forum provoked some interesting debates , I , myself , took part in a debate that I found extremely interesting , the forum followed a process that was , at times , dubious and , at others , totally undemocratic .
Extremist organisations seem to have monopolised the discussion , which forced Member States to disregard the conclusions of the forum .
Some NGOs , such as Amnesty International , Human Rights Watch and FIDH , also disassociated themselves from the forum ' s outcome .
Moreover , we must admit that the aggressive approach and disgraceful verbal abuse from some NGOs raises the question as to why the European Union and its Member States as well - my own country included - give their unconditional support to these organisations .
I think that we must also discuss with the NGOs such issues as their accountability , their representativeness and the confines of their responsibilities .
As I have already said , I enjoyed a very good relationship with most of the NGOs , and I also acknowledge that they have a specific role to play .
Earlier , I heard Mrs Boumediene-Thiery use a rather subversive term - which is a great credit to you , Mrs Boumediene-Thiery - but we could have a fundamental difference of opinions .
Personally speaking , as a democratically elected politician , I am not willing to give up my prerogative to assume political responsibility on behalf of the people .
I have been elected , the people can therefore reject me , which is what I call responsibility , and I must also be accountable to the people - these are , essentially , my two duties .
I am not therefore willing to let this prerogative be taken away from me because , when this system of political responsibility ceases to exist , we would no longer have a democracy , in other words .
And that is something that I cannot accept .
I did want to bring up one particular subject - which Mr Sylla mentioned , I believe - that of discrimination on the basis of sexual preference , which is one of many forms of discrimination .
The European Union was in favour of highlighting the many forms of discrimination that affect some classes of people .
This concept is certainly present in the texts .
However , when it came to defining potential sources of these many forms of discrimination , it was not possible to include concepts that the European Union considers to be important , such as discrimination based on sexual orientation .
This idea was firmly opposed by some countries , as you suspected .
The only aspects that everyone found acceptable were the sources of discrimination listed in the Universal Declaration on Human Rights , in other words , race , colour , sex , language , religion , political belief or any other belief , national or social origin , wealth , birth or any other situation .
What are we doing in terms of following up this conference ?
I shall conclude by reiterating my earlier point that it would be the task of each Member State to follow up the Durban Conference , but it has already been decided that the Office of the High Commissioner on Human Rights will primarily be responsible for providing this follow-up .
Several measures must be implemented , particularly the creation of an anti-discrimination unit within the Office of the High Commissioner and the appointment of five highly-regarded independent experts , who will be responsible for monitoring the implementation of the provisions contained in the action programme and the political declaration .
These experts will be appointed by the United Nations Secretary-General .
Naturally , I wanted to provide you with this clarification , first of all because I was also keen to congratulate those speakers who made such relevant comments , and I wanted to tell them that their strong convictions have served as a significant driving force and support enabling us to defend the points of view that we expressed on your behalf in Durban .
In accordance with Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure , I have received six motions for resolutions to end the debate .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 8.20 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

Vehicles designed to carry more than eight passengers
The next item is the report ( A5-0312 / 2001 ) by Mr Miller , on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council directive relating to special provisions for vehicles used for the carriage of passengers comprising more than eight seats in addition to the driver ' s seat , and amending Directives 70 / 156 / EEC and 97 / 27 / EC ( C5-0278 / 2001 - 1997 / 0176 ( COD ) ) .
Madam President , I welcome everybody here again tonight .
I see a good number of familiar faces .
I wish to pay tribute to my shadow rapporteur , Mr Harbour , who again is attending a late-night sitting with me .
We probably spend more nights together than we do with our respective wives .
I should also like to pay tribute to a number of people who have worked on this report , not just within the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market but also within the Commission and the Council .
It was not a difficult conciliation but it was successful and I was very pleased at the outcome .
I should also like to give the thanks of probably about a third of the population of the European Union to Parliament , for I am anticipating that the vote tomorrow will go the right way .
There are something like 35 million registered disabled people within the European Union ; we have 120 million elderly people .
The two groups are obviously not mutually exclusive , but they make up about a third of the population of the European Union .
The outcome of tomorrow 's vote will very largely decide what their quality of life in the future will be .
For years now people with disabilities have not been able to get around the towns and cities of the European Union as they should ; they have been trapped for too long in their own houses .
If this directive is adopted tomorrow , it will open up that door .
It will be one small step towards freeing a lot of people who , as I said earlier , have been trapped .
I would like to convey their thanks to Parliament .
I realise that some of my colleagues on the right of this House have had difficulties with this directive , mainly because of its technical nature .
I fully understand and appreciate that .
However , I would ask them at this late stage to consider what we are doing , because if this directive is adopted tomorrow , it is something that everybody in Parliament could be proud of , because we would be improving the lives of the citizens of the European Union .
For once we would be making a difference .
Too often we stand up in this Chamber and talk about various great plans , schemes and motions , etc. and they do not impact on people 's lives .
Here is a small thing that does impact on the lives of the European citizen and it is something we should all be proud of .
I understand my colleagues on the right will be abstaining tomorrow .
That is unfortunate but it is , at least , an improvement on voting against in the second reading .
I would ask them , however , to look at this again and cast their votes in favour , because all along I have tried to leave out the technicalities and have concentrated purely on the policy and philosophy of getting people with disabilities mobile again .
That is an aim and objective I think we would all agree with .
In that respect , I have really not much more to say , because this has been discussed at length .
The Commissioner is well aware of the contents of the report and probably could recite them as well as I could .
Finally , I should like to thank very much all those who have helped draft this report and who tomorrow will help to adopt it .
Madam President , once again it is a genuine pleasure to be working with my friend Mr Miller .
I want to pay tribute to him for his persistence in working through this , and particularly for the masterly way in which he handled the conciliation process .
This is the first time I have been involved in a trialogue , so I have been able to study the process at work .
Indeed , as he says , we have reached a very satisfactory outcome .
I fully supported the final compromise and , indeed , the benefits that it will deliver .
It is important that we finally , after five long years , bring this to a close .
In a moment I shall refer to some of the issues involved .
However , it is important to add that , in delivering the sort of benefits that Mr Miller was talking about , we need to reflect the fact that a lot of other improvements to the infrastructure associated with public transport will also be needed .
The buses are only part of it .
That is something that we have not been able to tackle but that other committees will wish to look at .
What about the principles ?
He quite rightly said - I tipped him off beforehand - that we will be abstaining on this .
It will go through tomorrow .
We certainly do not wish to obstruct it or vote against the conciliation procedure , but we feel , on this side of the House , that the principles that led us to vote against this last time - and my colleague , Mr Rübig , who will speak later , is a veteran of the previous process - are entirely consistent .
So we will not be obstructing it .
It will go on its way with our qualified support .
Mr Miller has played the role of the man riding the last dinosaur , if I may put it that way .
Commissioner Liikanen told us at second reading in the debate that he does not envisage bringing a regulation of this complexity before Parliament again .
That is absolutely the right approach .
I want to take the opportunity to say to the House tonight that I , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , have made a proposal to other committees and to the Commission on ways in which Parliament can exercise its political role in scrutinising and putting forward ideas for motor vehicle regulation .
We have suggested that the Commission should bring to us on an annual basis a comprehensive report on its plans for future motor vehicle regulation , specifying where it is going to use the Economic Commission for Europe proposals and , indeed , covering some of the voluntary regulation process that we have talked about .
That will allow this Parliament , through all its various committees , to take a serious look at the political content of regulation and not ever again become immersed for five years in this sort of complex , technical regulation - a process that we finally sign off this evening .
Mr President , one of the objectives of the directive is to improve access to public transport for persons of reduced mobility .
The European Parliament and the Council seriously disagreed on this point .
The European Parliament ' s insistence on provisions to facilitate access for persons of reduced mobility , especially wheelchair users , was vindicated , as was the rapporteur , Mr Miller .
The agreement reached in the Conciliation Committee , which is in line with the position taken by the European Parliament , proves yet again how important issues such as the quality of life can only be promoted through courageous policies which are free from technocrats ' reservations and financial considerations .
The proposed directive introduces a broader definition of the term ' persons of reduced mobility ' , stipulating that it includes all people who experience some difficulty when using public transport , especially the elderly and the disabled .
Reduced mobility does not necessary depend on some form of medical complaint .
This is an important innovation which could be used as the starting point for similar adjustments to give substance to policy on the quality of life .
To be specific , disability may take different forms , including not just physical mobility but also intellectual and sensory impairment .
Therefore , it also includes people who merely have limb impairments , are of small stature , pregnant women etc .
It also states that all sloping areas in vehicles must have a non-slip surface .
It is also worth pointing out that it does not limit itself to vehicle specifications ; in order to ensure passengers can board safely , it also makes provision for easier access through local infrastructure planning .
This should guarantee safe , pavement-level boarding by all persons of reduced mobility .
I would like to believe that the spirit of agreement achieved here will prevail over other similar endeavours .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the debate about this directive is above all a dispute about principles , about whether we , in the European Union of the future , want the principle of harmonisation , that of mutual recognition or the ' third version ' - where do we need the one and where the other ?
We have achieved only a small partial success with this directive on the EC procedure for approving vehicle types because , of course , national procedures for type approval still apply concurrently with , and in addition to , the directive which is now being laid down .
What we want matters here , and I would like to express my thanks to Mr Miller for working so hard to ensure that what we want prevails .
This is , of course , not true of national procedures for type approval , which prevail at present and will continue to prevail in future .
The success is a very modest one , and we will therefore be abstaining tomorrow , because it does not go far enough for us , because we would actually have liked a general regulation for all buses .
I must also say that the Commission 's proposal was a very , very good one in terms of content and from the points of view of engineering and technology , but must be rejected absolutely on the grounds of logic .
At first reading , we had 160 pages of detailed Commission proposals on the table , Members worked out another 110 amendments to them , and I think this House and , at the end of the day , Europe as a whole , is overburdened with this sort of detail .
The state of affairs we will be deciding on tomorrow is such that we have now even fixed the curvature of the rear panel of a bus at a normative maximum of 150 mm .
Even compared with the European standard cucumber , that is a sensational success !
Madam President , I wish to congratulate Parliament and , in particular , its Conciliation Committee and the rapporteur , Mr Miller , on their success in reaching an agreement with the Council on this very important directive .
I should like to stress that , with this directive , the European Community will be setting the pace and enabling the industry to compete under common rules to produce safe and more accessible buses and coaches for the benefit of all European public transport users .
This directive makes significant progress in three areas , namely the internal market , the transport policy and the social policy of the Community .
The access provisions for buses and coaches as regards boarding by persons with reduced mobility will ensure that a larger proportion of our citizens use public transport .
I should like to reply to the question by Mr Harbour .
I received the letter based on his proposal from the chairman of the committee , Mr Westendorp y Cabeza , and I have sent him a detailed reply , which supports this initiative .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon on Wednesday .
GALILEO
The next item is the report ( A5-0288 / 2001 ) by Mrs Langenhagen , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the Commission communication to the European Parliament and the Council on GALILEO ( COM ( 2000 ) 750 - C5-0110 / 2001 - 2001 / 2059 ( COS ) ) .
Madam President , Commissioner , we are latecomers ; time is running away from us and , above all , from the GALILEO project .
The longer the European Union hesitates in getting the European satellite navigation system underway , the more both industry and the people will react to it with apathy .
The ultimate danger is that GALILEO will one day be buried .
My anxieties increase when I recall some of the statements made to me over the years when I worked on the European satellite navigation project .
The position Parliament has taken with regard to the Commission 's communication does not , admittedly , possess any legislative character , but points in an important direction .
I hope that it will be by a large majority that Parliament will adopt my report tomorrow and thus support the position that Europe urgently needs a satellite navigation system of its own , not least in view of the special situation in which Europe and the rest of the world find themselves since 11 September .
The Council also holds this fundamental view , as again confirmed by the final conclusions from Stockholm .
How , though , may we clear away the doubts that surface again and again , even in the amendments before us ?
The fundamental issue is now as it was before : why do we need a European satellite navigation system of our own , when the Americans have already supplied a working model in the form of GPS ?
Let me quote some of the main arguments .
The first is that the American system is conceived on military lines , with resultant disadvantages as regards continuity of availability , precision , and also legal certainty .
What concerns us here is reliability , which must be guaranteed even in a crisis .
It must be clear to all of us that Europe 's sovereignty and security would be gravely imperilled if the navigation systems were to be taken out of European control .
We quite evidently need our own civilian system which , however , must be available to all - and I emphasise all - potential users .
I regret therefore that I am unable to support the amendments newly reintroduced by the GUE / NGL Group , which demand a purely civilian use .
Secondly : we are pressing for free competition not only within the EU , but also worldwide .
It can , then , be only a cause for amazement if we readily accept a monopoly from a foreign State and expose our users to the risk of provision being less than optimal .
We must commit ourselves to the best interests of our citizens and users .
Thirdly : if the European Union were to do without its own system , it would fall back massively in the high technology sector .
That can surely not be the intention .
On the contrary , we want to see Europe at the top , and for that we need GALILEO .
Fourthly : GALILEO creates employment in Europe .
The jobs created are for the highly qualified and in a sector with a future , namely high technology .
The building-up of the infrastructure and the many potential applications could create up to 100 000 jobs in the next few years and result in high earnings in the market .
Why , then , is GALILEO vital for Europe ?
In my report , I have described at length the advantages and positive aspects for the various fields of application .
These advantages become all the more convincing if we succeed in involving other countries in the project .
For example , China expressed interest only recently , at the Brussels Summit .
Europe is capable of developing its own system .
We are not going to keep GALILEO , like a confection , for our own enjoyment , but will offer it to those of our partners who are willing to have it , and we will let those partners share in the great benefits .
As we want to offer the best service possible , we set great store on compatibility with other systems from the outset .
Industry is showing an interest , as demonstrated by the EUR 200 million pledged to the Commission as a statement of intent , but we must not make excessive demands on Europe 's industry .
The wheels of industry will not start rolling without a clear and definite political signal , a green light given by us .
The preparatory work done by the Commission and the European Space Agency deserves high praise .
Now , though , I await expectantly the Commission 's financial and administrative framework , as called for in the report .
This framework will be a further building block and a weight-bearing pillar for developing our own satellite navigation system .
GALILEO is a Community project - incidentally , the first in this field , which makes it a vision for the future !
Let us now , then , get to grips with it , instead of putting it off forever and a day , for GALILEO will revolutionise transport and mobility , just as the Internet has done .
Success stories - of which we in Europe can already claim a few - require careful thought , courage and decisiveness .
Let us make good use of this historic moment when we vote tomorrow !
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets on the Commission communication on GALILEO , I will confine myself in this speech to the financial side of the project .
At the current stage , GALILEO does not comply with the statement on financial programming , which was adopted by the three institutions on 20 July 2000 .
According to this statement , ' the budgetary authority must have accurate information about the financial consequences of each new proposal presented by the Commission , in order to be able to assess the impact of the proposal on the ceilings of the financial perspective ( ... ) ' .
Furthermore , at a meeting of EU transport ministers in April 2001 , it became clear that the Union had major problems finding the extra EUR 1.5 billion required from private sources for the deployment phase ( 2006-2007 ) of GALILEO .
On the other hand , the Commission states that when it issued a call for an expression of interest in order to establish the conditions needed in order to set up a public-private partnership , several European industrial consortia responded to this , without reference to any further problems .
I would like to make it clear that I support the Commission ' s approach in principle .
Nevertheless , I would warn that GALILEO may have a much bigger impact on the general budget than initially expected .
I consider that the budgetary authority should have a clear picture of GALILEO ' s source of funding before it can commit appropriations to the project .
The identification of the sources and amounts of private funding should be concurrent with the identification of public funding . Financing needs should be met by 2002 .
Then , Parliament should demand prior consultation of the budgetary authority in the event that the expenditure to be financed from the general budget is to be revised .
This would ensure that no restrictions are placed on other activities financed under heading 3 if GALILEO does not attract the investments foreseen by the Commission .
However , following my approach , in a situation of crisis , the European Union would have the possibility to use the satellite navigation services provided by GALILEO without having to rely on other ( primarily military ) satellite systems operated by the United States and Russia such as GPS and GLONASS , although it would still be compatible with them .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we would like to give our opinion on the GALILEO programme , taking into account the decisions made , namely by the Stockholm European Council on 23 March 2001 .
At this Council meeting , great emphasis was placed on the need to launch this satellite navigation programme immediately .
Our Committee acknowledges the benefits of such a programme , the main feature of which is that it is European as well as civilian in nature , and is therefore independent of systems developed by the military , such as the American GPS and Russian GLONASS systems , and that is reliable and has greater precision than these two existing systems .
We are proposing , however , that the following points be implemented during the development and validation phase from 2001 to 2005 , the deployment phase from 2006 to 2007 , and the operation phase , which begins in 2008 , essentially under the aegis of the European Space Agency and the Commission .
First of all , we must accurately monitor the funding , initially estimated to be in the region of EUR three billion , as well as the partners chosen , particularly private industries , and their involvement .
We must also carry out an in-depth analysis of the cost-effectiveness and the implications for the economy and employment .
We are demanding the greatest level of transparency in this matter and to receive regular information from Parliament .
Secondly , we stress the fact that the structures established during the development of the programme should be used solely for civilian purposes , and we point out that it is vital , in this case , to develop the use of space for purposes related to the general interest and public service .
Thirdly , the GALILEO programme must not be applied in such a way that will jeopardise the right to or the protection of privacy and it must not under any circumstances be used for the surveillance of citizens .
It must , in particular , be developed in order to protect and safeguard the environment , to protect the lives of citizens and natural resources , and ensure early detection and even prevention of natural or man-made disasters .
It must also contribute to progress in European research , when drawing up the future Sixth Framework Programme .
Lastly , we are proposing - and this is important - to set up an advisory ethics committee , whose task would be to ensure respect for the aforementioned requirements and which would assist the Commission and the European Space Agency in their decision-making duties .
I want to emphasise - and I call on Mrs De Palacio to give us her point of view - the fact that it will be civilian organisations that set up the system .
Of course , we cannot say that , ' we will not vote in favour of GALILEO if it is used by the military in the future ' , because , when we set up transport and communication systems , for instance , anyone can use them .
What matters is that Europe is independent and that it is not dependent on the USSR or the US .
We believe that these various provisions are realistic conditions , which must accompany and justify GALILEO , and we would also hope to hear Mrs De Palacio ' s point of view on setting up the ethics committee .
Madam President , Madam Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , competition stimulates business , as the example of the motor industry over the last 100 years has shown .
The fact that there were at least three major production centres , the USA , Europe and Asia , was extremely good for business all round .
Airbus is another good example of what can be achieved by exposure to international competition , if we are not simply content for other people to make a good product that we can buy or even use free of charge like the GPS .
It will be no different with what we are discussing today - the GALILEO satellite navigation system .
Of course it is no bad thing that GPS exists .
Of course it is no bad thing , it may even be a good thing , that in many cases it is available to users free of charge .
But that there is , to all intents and purposes , only an American system is not good at all .
The Russian GLONASS is probably not entirely in the same category .
We Europeans have no real rights of access .
The examples there have been in the past have shown that we are suddenly bereft of navigation in one case or another .
Almost more important and quite central from my point of view as a university teacher is that we have no real involvement in technological innovation if we are not engaged in development ourselves , if we do not carry out research ourselves and if we do not ourselves take research to the applications stage so that it can also go into industrial production .
We need both , we need access and we need technological development .
We cannot talk about a society of knowledge and learning without taking the next logical step .
Above all , too , we also need the many potential applications in transport .
I believe that requires no further explanation .
Admittedly there are also problems when it comes to GALILEO .
The problems of finance have still not really been resolved .
Industry is still biding its time , waiting for public funding , while the public authorities in turn plead Maastricht criteria , empty pockets and the like .
Hopefully there will sooner or later be a genuine public and private partnership in this matter .
A last word on the tricky subject of double use or only civilian use .
I cannot understand the naivety of many of the tabled amendments .
There is not only good in the world .
The events of 11 September were a cruel demonstration of that .
Finally a word of thanks and appreciation to the two ladies who have made such a big contribution to this evening ' s report , the rapporteur Brigitte Langenhagen and the Transport Commissioner Loyola de Palacio .
Neither of them lost their bearings in dealing with this topic .
Madam President , first of all , I would like to congratulate our rapporteur , Mrs Langenhagen on her excellent work , which also received a notably favourable vote in the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism .
I hope that the same will happen tomorrow when the House votes on the report , since this is a particularly important , even historic text for the European Union .
The European Union is a major power .
Europe is a major player in the aviation and space industries , but the European Union does not have aviation and space power , since it has never had a policy in this area until now and , as Mrs Langenhagen said , GALILEO is a historic beginning for us , our first Community programme .
The GALILEO programme is all the more important because it guarantees that the high technology and the activity of our industries will be maintained in the future , since 150 000 jobs will be created .
GALILEO represents the political independence of the European Union , since , as you are aware , we had no frequency access during the Kosovo war due to the American GPS system , and as things stand at the moment , we cannot count on the American system being completely reliable in the coming years .
I therefore believe that it is crucial that we consider the success of GALILEO as vital in ensuring the EU ' s credibility over the next few years in an area where competition in the aviation and space industries is increasingly marked , particularly when faced with new competition , for instance from China or Japan .
We are also concerned about how this operation is funded , about the delays in its implementation and that it has been postponed on numerous occasions .
Let us be clear about one thing - in the space industry , as in all the other transport industries , nothing can be achieved without State funding and without a boost from the government , whether this is direct State funding or so-called co-funding , along the lines of the American model , where the military sector funds the civilian .
We must be aware of this situation .
With regard to infrastructure , it is very difficult to find private sector investment , therefore we must be prepared , the Commission is not only responsible for this , Member States are responsible as well .
The Council must certainly be made aware of this .
This is why the Group of the Party of European Socialists did not want to increase the number of obstacles .
We shall not vote in favour of the amendments tabled by the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left or the amendment by the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party on the funding method , whereby the GALILEO programme must be halted if private sector investment is not sufficient . This is because we believe GALILEO is a crucial programme for the future of the European Union and for the future of European space policy .
Madam President , first of all , I should like to say a word of thanks to Mrs Langenhagen for the huge amount of work she has carried out on this topic .
It has been a long haul , with obstacles and unruliness along the way , and the end is certainly not yet in sight .
However , we are taking an important decision tomorrow , which will bring us one step closer to our goal .
International developments underline the importance of having a system of our own , but at the same time , of establishing sound international cooperation , so that interoperability of the system can be achieved .
I should like to mention three other points which the ELDR Group considers important .
First of all , the management structure .
To the ELDR Group , it is important that the management is transparent , and we are already glad of a major step forward by the Council , namely the proposal to set up a single administrative structure in agreement with Article 171 of the Treaty .
The second point I should like to raise is the financial concern .
We are still not entirely convinced that that is going in the right direction .
We accept that at the beginning , public money must be invested , but industry must contribute too .
There must be a balance .
There is still no binding agreement with the private sector and there is still uncertainty in that area .
That is why we have tabled an amendment for which I should ask your support , so that the European Union does not become a safety net .
And given the high cost , we expect a contribution towards the cost of the use .
Improved geographical access and reliability must be factors in favour of which industry must choose and in which they must display willingness to invest .
That is exactly what makes the system first-rate .
Madam President , Commissioner , a great deal of work has been done .
A report has been drawn up .
That too took up a lot of time .
However , a whole host of arguments are being put forward , with which - let there be no mistake - I entirely disagree .
The wrong arguments are being used in order to sell a project .
Let me start with the technology .
Some people claim that superior technology is being used here .
That is absolutely not the case .
GPS is a similar system .
Our system is slightly better because it uses ground stations .
As a result , it is slightly more reliable and communication is possible .
But the subsequent generations of GPS II - did you think the Americans were mad ? - and GPS III are just as capable .
No problem whatsoever .
If we consider the levels concerned , the first level is an open access system , which is free .
It is similar to GPS with matching criteria : same height , same accuracy in terms of horizontality , etc .
The subsequent systems CAS I and CAS II are commercial and intended for the government , while the latter system is also used for military purposes .
To quote another point on which people appear to be misinformed : it is also possible for CAS II to be switched off at regional level if it is used for military purposes .
You may not have been aware of this , but that is the case .
All in all : GALILEO is not more accurate , and it cannot be switched off . In summary , all those technological features which have been listed , also for transport , are also very much part of the current system .
Where military use is concerned , we are agreed that we do not want this in any event .
I will not enter into the detail of the arguments , but at this moment in time , in the light of 11 September , I do not find it necessary to highlight the need of such a system once again .
It is somewhat inappropriate , in my opinion .
It is clear that the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy has agreed to the wording for civil use , and the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism has not .
It will be interesting to see what tomorrow brings when the amendments are tabled .
As for the funding , the Council has launched an enquiry .
It appears that there are actually no business partners .
One and a half billion must be coughed up .
Two hundred million is being freed up indirectly and it is suggested that that funding is now available .
The problem in this connection is that it is the same people who have freed up tens of billions for UMTS .
When I listen to Mrs Langenhagen ' s opening words , I have a feeling that GALILEO will be laid to rest in the not too distant future .
Madam President , Commissioner , Mrs Langenhagen , the GALILEO project is technologically interesting and already has a lot of potential applications .
Up until now we have had the similar Russian and American systems , but these were designed and developed and are also operated from a military perspective .
The American system does in fact hold the real danger that in times when the USA is using it for military purposes the Europeans and all civilian users will be switched off , as actually happened during the Gulf war !
The GALILEO project is now being presented as a civilian project that will make the European Union independent from the USA in an important field of technology .
In my group , too , opinions on the GALILEO project differ widely .
But we are united on one point : we want it to be used for purely civilian purposes .
We have tabled amendments that are designed to ensure its exclusively civilian use .
Mr Rack , I am neither naïve nor do I believe there are only good people in the world .
But if we do not do this , we will have the same problem as with the American system , namely that when it is being used by the military it will be switched off for civilians .
You are not solving the problem you are claiming to want to solve .
Secondly , I also have concerns about finance .
A total of EUR 1 730 000 000 of European taxpayers ' money is to be spent on development , validation and construction .
Industry wants to join in the construction phase , contributing EUR 1.5 billion , but so far only EUR 200 million have been committed .
That is 13 % .
From a business point of view , no company could afford to develop something with such a poor equity position .
I think it an impertinence that you want to pay for this out of public funds !
Thirdly , there is another aspect to this GALILEO project .
The Americans allow the GPS to be used free of charge .
You want future users to pay for the European system .
Where do you think that will land you with your much-vaunted competition ?
Competition works like this : if I am being asked to pay for something that I can get free somewhere else , I am not going to pay , and you won ' t get any users .
Then you will have thrown all that taxpayers ' money away !
Mrs Langenhagen , you described this so beautifully as a confection , and Mr Savary used the word historic !
This historic confection will cost a total of EUR 3.2 billion .
I think that is much too expensive for the present time and at this stage !
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the development of a European satellite radio navigation programme raises various questions that warrant our consideration .
This is a project of global scale , that uses cutting-edge technology and involves vast amounts of public and private financial resources .
The strategic importance of political decisions which must be taken for the project to a large extent explain the hesitation that the Council has shown , despite the commitment and enthusiasm that both the Commission and the European Parliament have demonstrated in their statements and in the documents they have drafted .
In fact , the problem is not insignificant .
First of all , because a project of this scale requires close international cooperation .
This cooperation is fundamental , not only because of the future installation in various parts of the world of control centres and communication equipment to support the around thirty satellites that will also have to be sent into space , but also because the success of a project of this nature clearly depends on its interoperability with other , existing systems : the North American GPS and , to a lesser extent , the Russian GLONASS .
It therefore makes no sense to base the argument and the need for a system such as GALILEO on a vague feeling of suspicion in Europe and amongst Europeans towards the United States due to the situation of near total monopoly that that country currently enjoys . And which could cause it unilaterally and for no plausible reason , in other words irresponsibly , to stop data transmission via satellite , or to introduce unacceptable levels of signal degradation affecting the accuracy of this data for civilian users .
The GPS system and the radio navigation by satellite that this allows have been used successfully by the whole world , particularly in Europe .
It should be added that reception of GPS signals has been completely free to users and any member of the public can access the necessary sectors at an affordable price .
The reasons that the European Union must use in its definition ' Development , installation and use ' of a system of this type are , of course , quite different .
They chiefly concern the boost that GALILEO would give to the European high-tech industry and providers of related services , thereby introducing an element of healthy economic competition in this sector of activity , which is crucial to its development .
This system would also provide enormous assistance to the development of European technological potential and to improving the associated academic and applied research .
We must also emphasise the invaluable contribution that a project of this scale would make to the creation of new jobs - more than one hundred thousand - and we are talking about highly qualified posts .
And , lastly , the installation and use of the system would enable the development of a public or private partnership of enormous strategic value to support sectors as important as transport ( maritime , air or terrestrial ) , air traffic management , search and rescue , meteorology , mobile telephony and so many others .
It is for all of these reasons , which I have briefly summarised , that we give our support to the GALILEO project , in the hope of thereby contributing to the construction of a genuine Europe of the future .
Madam President , Mrs Langenhagen predicts a rosy future for the GALILEO satellite system .
This is understandable , based on her line of thinking .
However , I , coming from a critical stance , can see major drawbacks to this project .
The calculated costs of this project are more than considerable , especially now that the contribution of the private sector is not clearly marked and secured at all .
Despite the fact that , according to the Commission , only 150 km of high-speed link can be built for the funding initially required , any amount is too high if it does not yield clear advantages .
In this case , the advantages should mainly be in the field of reliability and price .
As things stand at the moment , it is very likely that GALILEO will become a facsimile of the existing system , at least in terms of functionalities .
Despite the civil line of approach , the system will also boast a military component in time .
I have no doubts about that .
This brings to an end the advantage which GALILEO would have compared to existing systems , namely to be independent from military use and more reliable as a result .
What remains is a situation in which we obtain the same services at higher costs .
However , the most important aspect to us is that the system could play an unwelcome role in the relations between the European Union and the United States of America .
Especially in a military context , it has appeared more than once that the European Union produces little without the United States .
Not only does stirring up trouble in the relationship with the United States not make any sense , it is also very dangerous .
That is why I am in favour of accepting the existing offer and not deluding potential users with illusions .
For it is very much the question whether the use of satellite signals will be better and more efficient than it is at present .
Mr President , have you noticed that , not just the Commissioner , but the president and the rapporteur are also women , a coincidence which I think augurs well for the future of GALILEO , even if he was a man .
So , having congratulated the rapporteur , Mrs Langenhagen , I should like to make a point of repeating the view that , at every stage in the design , implementation or application of the system , the political decisions will need to be discussed and taken at European Union level and at that level only , although the role of the candidate countries will , of course , also need to be determined .
It is equally obvious that international collaboration with the United States and Russia is essential , not just in order to reduce the huge costs but also because the question of frequencies can be regulated so as to guarantee reliability by ensuring that enough frequencies are available for GALILEO to provide a broad range of services .
Of course , we need more information on the organisation , administration and funding of the implementing agency , with integrated , realistic proposals , mainly as regards private investment .
At least , from the information available to date , there appears to be no particular drive to attract private investment , given that we have not yet clarified if the system will provide services in return for a fee , which it will need to do if there is to be private investment , or free of charge , so that it can compete with GPS , which provides its services free of charge .
Finally , is there any chance of Member States being called upon to pay large sums of money from their national budgets so that the initial appropriations are not lost ?
I think the Commission should give a prompt response here .
Similarly , we must push ahead and resolve outstanding issues , by which I mean technical issues , such as incorporating EGNOS and the corresponding financial analysis and lawyers , both at Community and national level so that we can make any deliberate interference in or distortion of the system a crime and set up an authority to decide when to impose sanctions .
We trust that , one way or the other , GALILEO will progress more quickly now .
Madam President , Commissioner , I want to begin by thanking the rapporteur , Mrs Langenhagen , for her work on the report .
I am taking the floor today because I feel we need technical systems that offer environmental benefits .
Technical progress is ever more rapid .
Personal computers and mobile telephones have drastically altered our working lives and our everyday life .
We have also seen how technology is changing all the time and creating new aids and how companies are forever developing new products to be used within different areas of society .
A European satellite navigation system can , in fact , mean major opportunities for developing the transport sector , especially when it comes to combined transport , dovetailing different types of transport .
For aviation and shipping , too , as well as for transport by road and rail , the new technology can be used to make transport more efficient and environmentally friendly .
I do agree with the rapporteur that GALILEO will enable Europe to be involved in developing a new technology-based industry and to be in the vanguard of this .
There is a space industry in various parts of Europe today , for example in northernmost Sweden , and I think it important that we should use existing infrastructure to keep down the future costs of this project .
Major technical breakthroughs have more often than not taken place following development using research supported by the public sector , often with a view to the research ' s being used for military purposes .
The money and resources needed for developing completely new technologies often do not exist in private companies .
This particularly applies to the GALILEO project which is based upon joint financing by the EU countries but to which the private sector too has to contribute .
What is unique about GALILEO , unlike the GPS system , is that it is being developed for civil rather than military purposes .
I consider this to be an absolute prerequisite for the European Parliament ' s supporting the project .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to thank you once again for the European Parliament ' s constant and determined majority support for the GALILEO satellite navigation programme .
The resolution contained in Mrs Langenhagen ' s excellent report is testimony to this and I thank her for her work .
Please allow me to make some comments on the motion for a resolution based on the Commission ' s communication of November 2000 .
At the end of June , the Commission sent to Parliament and the Council the proposed regulation on the statute of the GALILEO joint undertaking .
I would like to insist on the importance of this proposal which is intended to establish a single management structure for the programme at the beginning of 2002 .
Given that the timetable is so tight , it is essential that Parliament can issue its opinion on this proposal before the end of the year .
In accordance with the conclusions of the Transport Council of last April , we have implemented a study of the services which GALILEO may offer , the income it may generate and the methods for collecting it .
This study must be finished in the coming weeks so that the Transport Council in December may take the decisions necessary for the programme to move ahead .
Of course we will send the results of this study to this House and I hope that those of you who have expressed more reservations about the programme will find that it provides better explanation and greater confidence and that we will therefore have greater support - I know that it is supported by the majority of this House , but also that some of you have expressed significant reticence , if not opposition .
As the motion for a resolution clearly states , international cooperation is essential to the GALILEO programme .
Its objective is to guarantee the interoperability of GALILEO with the existing radio-navigation systems , such as the American GPS or those in preparation , such as the Russian GLONASS .
In this respect - and some of you have wondered whether or not it is necessary - I would like to say that the idea is that they are compatible and that they benefit each other mutually .
Ladies and gentlemen , after what happened last month , the need for a second system which reinforces the existing system and which provides greater security and is , when the time comes , not only a complement , but also an alternative in the event of possible unwanted situations - when we are seeing a huge increase in the applications which affect all the areas of our lives relating to GALILEO - is absolutely essential , not only for Europe , but for the whole world , including the users in the United States .
It is also important that we have the support of third countries so that we might have the necessary frequencies , principally within the framework of world radio communications conferences - the next one being in 2003 .
As you know , the allocation of frequencies is due to be consolidated in 2003 .
When this happens , it should aid participation in the development of the GALILEO programme .
With regard to the data issued by GALILEO , the international and Community instruments intended for its protection will clearly be applied .
As Mrs Langenhagen ' s report stresses , we believe - and this is one of its special features compared to the GPS system - that GALILEO must supply a public signal , that is , a robust and precise signal which cannot be interrupted as a result of military issues , as happens in the case of GPS , and sensitive applications , whether they be public - customs , judicial investigation and so on - or private - such as banking transmissions .
Finally , allow me to sum up the next stages of the programme .
At the end of the year , after receiving Parliament ' s opinion , the Council must adopt the statutes of the GALILEO joint undertaking and decide how the programme must continue to be developed by the said joint undertaking in close cooperation with the European Space Agency .
As some of you have said , the green light must be given to the GALILEO project once and for all .
The development phase , which should last from 2002 until the end of 2005 , should allow the launch of the first satellites with a view to testing the system in reality and allow the receivers sector to bring those receivers into line .
As you can see , there is still much to do .
Your support is absolutely essential and , in any event , we will keep this House fully informed of all the steps we take in relation to this project .
Thank you , Mrs De Palacio .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon on Wednesday .
Energy efficiency labelling for office equipment
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0298 / 2001 ) , by Mrs McNally , on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council regulation on a Community Energy Efficiency Labelling Programme for Office and Communication Technology Equipment ( 6760 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0246 / 2001 - 2000 / 0033 ( COD ) ) .
Madam President , I am very pleased to present my recommendation for second reading on the Energy Star agreement .
As you will know , in a rather complex procedure , Parliament has already been consulted on the agreement itself .
This is now the codecision procedure on the regulation which implements that agreement .
I wish to thank the Commission , the Council and my colleagues , in particular the shadow rapporteurs , for their help in steering through this rather complex procedure .
I would like to thank in particular the Swedish Presidency , which went out of its way to be helpful .
The Council common position takes on board most of the points made by Parliament at first reading .
We shall have an earlier review than was expected ; we shall have an update on new technological advances in this area of energy efficiency ; we shall have a report to Parliament .
Furthermore , the United States ' authorities are absolutely clear that Parliament is involved in discussions on the Energy Star programme from the Commission 's point of view .
This has been done through a side letter added to the agreement , at Parliament 's request , which meets our wishes for them to know how we operate in the European Union .
This clearly is not the only measure which is to be taken in the area of energy efficiency .
I understand there is an update to the common position because of the new Eco-Label award scheme .
I am prepared , as rapporteur , to accept that slight modification which has been made necessary .
Even though I am pleased that it looks as though this agreement is coming into force , I do not want to exaggerate its importance .
It is a useful tool , but it is a relatively modest proposal ; it is a voluntary scheme based on a United States model .
I know many colleagues agree with me that in future we should work as a European Union and have European Community schemes rather than attempting to latch on to schemes developed elsewhere , in the United States for example .
Nevertheless , although it is relatively modest , it is welcome .
Computer equipment is sold worldwide and the educative , awareness-raising aspects of seeing the Energy Star logo on computers is worthwhile .
We know that one of the tasks in increasing energy efficiency is to improve public awareness .
It is a small part of what is needed .
Everyone in this Chamber knows that energy efficiency is the most important component of energy policy .
It is the fifth fuel - coal , gas , renewables , nuclear - the fifth fuel , with a 30 % potential , is energy efficiency .
If someone from another planet saw us acting as if we had known that , they would think we were stupid .
We are not stupid , we are intelligent and that is why intelligent energy - a phrase with which I hope everyone is becoming familiar - and certainly Mr Wijkman , Mr Turmes , Mrs Van der Laan and I are doing our best to make it a very familiar phrase - and energy-intelligent Europe depends on energy efficiency .
We look to the Commissioner to bring in a package of measures well beyond Energy Star .
They are demand-side management and two important directives : one on household appliances and one on office equipment - not made in the USA .
I hope that during this autumn , under the Belgian Presidency , we will see both of those draft directives adopted .
We have been very cooperative on the Energy Star programme .
There is only one amendment , which could be withdrawn .
If the Commissioner is able to give us tonight an appropriate assurance and accept the spirit of that amendment , which asks her to take further action on the withdrawal of inefficient equipment , it is quite possible that we can approve the common position unamended .
Madam President , Madam Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by thanking the rapporteur , Mrs McNally , on behalf of my group for undertaking this technically difficult task and for the tough way she negotiated with the Council , because Parliament ' s rights were at stake .
She was in a way having to negotiate a precedent and she showed great commitment and was very successful on Parliament ' s behalf .
I would also like to thank the Vice-President of the Commission , who over all has worked very energetically for a European contribution to solving our energy problems .
I think we are all agreed that the more efficient use of energy is a very important contribution to solving our energy problems .
Modern technology offers us ways of saving energy and using it more efficiently .
If we do that correctly , it is actually to everyone ' s advantage .
The costs of such technical innovations are small enough to be written off within months or a few years at the most , which means it is to the consumer ' s overall advantage and it also gives industry an opportunity to bring its innovations on to the market .
Here we are looking at one way , namely the Label .
It is an important step because it gives us influence over world standards since the Energy Star is used not only in the USA and in Europe , but in other countries besides .
When I took on the task of being my group 's shadow rapporteur , I asked firms in my constituency that are concerned with the subject , those that sell or make computers , for example , what they thought about it .
They said the Label alone would probably not achieve much because , when consumers buy computers and similar goods , unfortunately they do not pay attention to energy consumption so much as to various other criteria .
So we should perhaps talk about finding other ways of promoting energy-efficient equipment and gradually removing the big energy wasters from the market .
The amendment in front of us says , after all , that one such way forward might be a voluntary agreement with industry .
We should only think about legislation if that fails to work .
I believe that to be very , very important because , as the rapporteur has said , we are debating here about an agreement with the USA and about a Label , but the solution to the problem does not lie in this Label alone .
I am therefore asking the Commissioner to make very clear in her speech that the Commission is thinking of going further and also to say when we can expect other proposals .
I don ' t believe any of us would gain from having to engage in a lengthy conciliation procedure because of an amendment being tabled .
If we achieve a good outcome this evening , we can avoid the conciliation procedure .
Otherwise conciliation would be necessary and I am sure we all want to avoid that .
Madam President , on 11 September the world changed , at any rate the world as we knew it .
Suddenly a regulation that has occupied us here in this House for quite some time has become a small pebble in the mosaic of this changed world .
We know that 11 % of electricity consumption - between 10 and 15 % in other countries - in private households and public sectors - if we add those as well - contributes to power stations being operated completely unnecessarily because there would be other ways of doing it in standby mode .
On a European scale that means between six and ten large power stations , and they could be nuclear power stations .
When at this very moment the first bombers could already be flying towards Afghanistan and people are wondering what form a possible counterattack might take , we can see that such a mundane thing as this regulation could bring us greater security here in Europe , greater security , too - if we think of the consequences of 11 September - in relation to the probable rise in the price of oil .
From this point of view I therefore very much welcome the work that Eryl McNally has done .
The second aspect that should now again be given particular consideration is that we could provide a stimulus to the economy to which the Commission pays particular attention in the amendment to which the previous speaker has already referred - by finding a way not only to label good equipment but also to remove bad equipment from the market as quickly as possible .
Madam President , I should like to start by congratulating Mrs McNally for her persistence in keeping this report on Parliament 's agenda and bringing it to fruition .
I welcome the approach adopted in this proposal for a voluntary code .
That is a more pragmatic approach towards achieving improvements .
Unlike Mrs McNally I see no harm in adopting measures that are in place in the United States .
It is one of our aims in Europe to achieve common standards in the internal market .
In that regard , why should we not seek to extend those common standards to our major trading partner across the Atlantic ?
Just because it was invented in the United States does not mean it is all bad .
It is very important that we should assist people making choices about purchasing equipment in knowing what the energy efficiency is .
In my own experience , labelling materially affects one 's decision .
It certainly affected my decision this summer when I was buying a fridge and a freezer for my home .
The old ones were getting very noisy and very expensive .
It may be that my motive was also concern to stop using so much electricity supplied by a company owned by a French utility , but that is another issue .
I should like to close by supporting the comments about the amendment , namely , that we all look to the Commission to give us an assurance on the issue of the further voluntary code .
This is a healthy and sensible approach .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs McNally , for her work in relation to this Regulation .
I am aware that she has worked intensively with Parliament and the Council in order to reach the position we are in today .
I also hope that we manage to reach an agreement on the text which is acceptable to all of us .
I am sure that none of us want to go to conciliation if we can solve the problem in a more appropriate way , given that our positions are very similar .
This proposal is integrated into the Commission ' s action plan to improve the energy efficiency of the European Union .
Office communication equipment represents a high proportion of the electrical consumption of the tertiary sector and we all agree that the use of efficient and ecological office equipment can contribute to the sustainable development strategy decided at the European Council in Gothenburg .
The proposed programme for coordination of labelling , the Energy Star programme , will lead to significant reductions in electricity consumption and CO2 emissions , and is therefore very viable .
As Mrs McNally has very rightly said - and I would like to stress that I am in full agreement with her - energy efficiency is key .
The key thing is to use energy well . That is where we have the greatest margins and we stated this in the Green Paper on the European Union ' s energy supply .
After a long period of negotiation , in December 2000 the agreement was finally signed with the United States on coordination of programmes for energy efficiency labelling on office equipment .
Now we need this Regulation so that we can appropriately implement what was signed with the United States .
This programme has already been a success in the United States and has led to considerable participation by manufacturers , the large majority of which have introduced energy-saving devices into their products . It has also increased consumer awareness of wastage resulting from office equipment in standby mode .
On the basis of the positive experience on the other side of the Atlantic , the Commission is convinced that the Energy Star labelling programme will naturally lead to the gradual elimination of inefficient equipment on the Community market .
We perfectly understand the European Parliament ' s concerns in relation to the effectiveness of the proposed Regulation on this specific point .
These concerns are reflected in the amendment which Mrs McNally is still maintaining .
There is no doubt that in other circumstances I would say that I agree with her . However , on this occasion I would ask Parliament to reject it or , even better , that Mrs McNally withdraw it .
Because , although I agree with its content , I do not believe that this is the right instrument in which to include this type of measure .
The Energy Star programme is not exactly the right place to include this incitement to renovation , modernisation and withdrawal of least efficient equipment .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to tell the House that we are preparing a framework directive on minimum efficiency requirements in the office communication equipment sector , amongst others , a directive which I hope will be presented to this House and the Council during next year .
I have taken this opportunity to explain the Commission ' s position and I hope that Mrs McNally can withdraw her amendment and that we can therefore approve this report on the Energy Star programme today without having to go to the conciliation procedure .
Thank you , Mrs De Palacio .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon on Wednesday .
Innovation in a knowledge-driven economy
The next item is the report ( A5-0234 / 2001 ) by Mr Rübig , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on Innovation in a knowledge-driven economy ( COM ( 2000 ) 567 - C5-0740 / 2000 - 2000 / 2336 ( COS ) ) .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , why is innovation so important for the European Union ?
We can all see that we are having slight problems with the economy at the moment .
If we want the economic situation to improve again , we must take initiatives to get employment rising again , take initiatives to get unemployment to fall , and take initiatives to ensure our continuing prosperity in the future .
I believe we also need to be able to assess that objectively .
That is why we should use benchmarking .
I am very grateful to the Commissioner for putting the innovation scoreboard very much to the fore here , too , because it enables us to see very clearly how the various countries are performing .
And , of course , the method of best practice : to see where among our neighbours of the Fifteen in Europe they are working better than in our own countries .
That is how it always was for me at school : you can learn from your better classmates .
And we shouldn ' t just stick to Europe , but we should also be looking in particular at the countries that aspire to join us , to see what they are already doing better than we do .
There is an enormous amount of knowledge , a great deal of capacity for innovation , in the technical departments of our universities , as there is of course also in America , Japan , India and many other countries , from which we could benefit .
Innovation must not take place only in the economy , but also in the social , cultural and above all the political fields .
We would very much like to see publicly sponsored research corrected to make it in future even more geared to the market or , it would perhaps be better to say , to the citizen .
Where in future will we find services or products that the citizen would like , that he needs ?
Such market research will be very important for us in future if we are to see where our innovation policy needs to be focused .
Innovation also means repeatedly taking risks , however .
We therefore need to ensure that the necessary venture capital is available .
It is especially when times are getting hard that funding runs short .
We all know that Basle II will perhaps bring a further restriction here , too , especially for smaller firms .
Nevertheless - and I would like to correct the text here - we have 18 million SMEs in Europe with fewer than 250 workers .
We need to pay particular attention to them , since after all they generate 80 % of the tax yield and employ two thirds of the workforce .
Innovation must start in the small units .
We need subjective innovation ; that means combining familiar techniques and technologies , extending them , rethinking where they can be used and where they can be improved .
One of the central points is of course life-long on-going and vocational training .
Continuing training schemes are becoming increasingly important , and we should therefore also concentrate on the best ways of passing on knowledge .
By e-learning - to use the general term - but much more , I believe , by e-entertainment .
Learning should be fun , learning should be interesting , learning should make you curious , but learning should also be an adventure .
We ought in future to provide an experience primarily with a European content , putting our European values , our European knowledge at centre stage on the Internet and in our education and learning programmes as well as being ready to engage in international competition .
We also need new systems in schools , however .
We need new methods of quality management for teachers and pupils .
ISO 9000 is already taken for granted in firms .
It seems to me that these new procedural techniques could also be used to make appreciable progress in schools .
But enterprises also need easier access to funding .
We need people to start new businesses and the mentality to start new businesses , and we need to make it easier for businesses to pass from one generation to the next .
Tax concessions need to be offered and venture capital made available , because the life cycle of a business goes : founded , handed over and finally closed .
We need to give thought to all three phases in future .
Madam President , I should like to congratulate Mr Rübig for approaching his report with such an open mind and , of course , to agree that innovation concerns entrepreneurship and employment .
However , we need it not just to serve the economy , the knowledge-driven economy in today 's society , we also need it to serve the knowledge-driven and cultural society .
Because innovation is not just an economic and business factor , it is also an educational and cultural factor .
More to the point , it is the result of mutual and complex actions and reactions between education , research , the administration and the public .
Innovative procedures presuppose a dynamic social model which is receptive to change .
In fact , innovation does not depend solely or exclusively on technological factors , it also depends on organisational factors .
A propitious environment is the main requirement , so that new initiatives , new discoveries and scientific applications can be developed , which is why we need social components working together , we need close cooperation between businesses and scientific institutions , as well as schools and universities , and we also need the help of the media if an innovative culture is to mature in our society as a whole .
Innovation must be the property of every member of society .
That is how our society will work in new directions , opening up new paths .
Europe needs an approach to innovation which will directly serve society as a whole .
However , we know that there are quite a few negative structural factors which prevent us from progressing as far as we should .
We are quite a way behind and I think that this is a bitter but honest admission , which is why we need the measures proposed in the report , together with suitable educational systems that nurture innovation .
Innovation is a process of analysis and synthesis and young people - mainly students - need therefore to play a part .
We must take care to ensure that we do not just inflict talk and chalk on young people and that they take an active part in the innovative process during their studies and both inside and outside school .
We must cultivate this approach at all levels of education .
It is important to have cross-disciplinary syllabuses in tertiary education .
We must bring the exact and the theoretical sciences close together , however difficult that may seem .
We must also understand that we need better penetration of university research institutes and of scientific libraries via the Internet .
I should like to highlight this sector in particular , because we are still a long way from having the really efficient network of libraries in Europe that is an absolute must .
Finally , we should take steps to provide better protection for intellectual property because this is what can invigorate and foster the incentive for our scientists to innovate .
That is why it is also extremely important for us to promote the application of European patent law .
Madam President , at last spring ' s Lisbon Summit the Heads of State and Government set themselves an ambitious target .
The European Union was to become the most dynamic and the most competitive economic area in the world .
Innovation is the key to this .
It is the subject of an excellent report by Mr Rübig , whom I would expressly like to congratulate on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
His report is thorough and precise ; it is creative and full of insights .
Only an innovation offensive will create the necessary conditions for making up the ground we have lost to the USA and Japan , preventing a mass exodus of researchers and finally achieving international competitiveness .
Specifically , it means changing our systems of education .
Young people must be able to be involved at an early stage , by teaching them science in schools and specifically encouraging their talents .
Curricula must include projects modelled on professional management , by forming junior enterprises , for example .
We need new information systems and higher technological qualifications in the training and further training of workers and students .
Mr Rübig has always been concerned with revitalising small and medium-sized enterprises .
His particular concern is important given that we have 18 million SMEs .
Workers are specifically asking for programmes to promote SMEs in the European Union because over 70 to 80 % work in that sector .
SMEs need simpler tax procedures , a dismantling of bureaucratic hurdles , and active support for innovative products and methods of production .
Research needs to be integrated into operating structures .
Access to start-up capital is essential , because young people need to be able to start new businesses , to become entrepreneurs .
They need to be able to take all the current problems of the new economy into account .
I hope we have all learned something from that .
On this basis , Madam President , the European Union will be able to make a sustained contribution to the high performance , knowledge-driven economy we are looking to achieve .
In Lisbon and Stockholm , it was decided that Europe should become the world ' s most dynamic and competitive knowledge-driven economy .
Of the seventeen million companies in Europe , no fewer than 99 percent form part of the medium-sized and small business sector .
That accounts for more than 70 percent of employment , 50 percent of investment and 60 percent of the Union ' s wealth .
As such , the medium-sized and small businesses are the most important economic factor in the European economy .
The competitiveness of these businesses very much relies on their innovative capacity .
At the moment , Parliament is working hard on the Sixth Framework Programme , in which the participation of SMEs must be guaranteed at the same - or , ideally , a higher - level .
I have therefore proposed to increase the budget available to SMEs to 15 percent from the current 10 percent .
But that participation of SMEs must , in the view of the Liberal Group , take place within themed programmes .
Indeed , in that way , it is guaranteed that large and small companies will join forces , for small companies do not have the expertise and manpower to go it alone .
It is not acceptable for most of the limited research budget that is available to be spent on the flanking policy in the Member States , for that is not a European task .
It is more important to simplify the participation of medium-sized and small businesses in the Sixth Framework Programme .
That is why the ' rules of participation ' must be simplified and standardised so that research applications submitted by all Directorates-General for the Sixth Framework Programme as a whole can be dealt with more efficiently and more quickly .
I should like to conclude by giving you some food for thought : Europe is good at converting euros into research , but often fails in converting research into euros , and that must change in future .
Madam President , the Commission and the rapporteur are preparing for a more innovative Europe .
This report calls for the networks to be strengthened at European level .
This dissemination of gathered knowledge should not lead to less competition , which is another aspect of innovation , for what are the areas in which cooperation actually reinforces the ability to innovate ?
Tax benefits are in any case not a very good incentive .
They fragment the market and can lead to a shift in activities to the cheapest region .
Market-oriented attraction is preferable .
The rapporteur also underlines the importance of education .
This is an area in which only the Member States have authority .
In this connection , it is not the international orientation or the mobility of education and research itself , but the results , that deserve recognition .
National initiatives promoting the innovative environment and acknowledging achievements will have to increase competitiveness .
The aspects that make European regions into an attractive environment in terms of innovation are the knowledge available , the labour market and other local factors .
A government should therefore have a vision of regional profiles it would like in future .
However , regional specialisms can be adversely affected either by tax measures or by uniform measures which are said to result in a loss of quality for Europe as a whole .
The Commission proposal is typified - more so than the report - by a realistic approach from the bottom upwards .
If necessary , a joint approach could play an additional role to promote networks .
In that way , the Union can back the measures which increase the Member States ' ability to innovate , both individually and jointly .
Madam President , Commissioner , my colleagues , knowledge and know-how are the basis of economic competitiveness and of the well-being of society as a whole .
The ambitious objectives of Lisbon also threaten to remain so much rhetoric , and will perish like worldly honour , if the success of the European Union in global competition is not based on a high level of education and research .
There are several aspects relating to a comprehensive innovation policy , which many colleagues have already emphasised in their interventions .
As European legislators , we should pay particular attention to simplifying legislation and administration .
I subscribe to the view of Mr Rübig and of other colleagues , that simplification is a necessity .
Enterprise and development activity is excessively restricted by bureaucratic impediments , and small and medium-sized enterprises in particular suffer from this .
Besides some form of labour reform , we also need a complete administrative reform , which has already got off to a good start with the White Paper on administrative models .
As you , yourself , said a couple of days ago , our esteemed competitors the United States and Japan are further along the road of promoting and developing innovations than the EU ; one of the reasons for this is that in those countries enterprise and risk-taking are rewarded to a significantly greater degree than in Europe .
We must create conditions which encourage self-starting and independent initiative .
Enterprise can be promoted early among schoolchildren and students .
All we need to do is to create the prerequisite conditions in our education systems , for example , in the form of a special business model which young businesses can then adopt .
I also regard the development of human capital as important .
It is a significant factor in innovation .
A genuine information society must be within the reach of all citizens , and so raising the level of know-how of the entire population is important .
The copyright of innovations must also be better protected ; this has already been mentioned in other interventions .
Even before this , in the course of my work I have stressed the importance of adopting a Community Patent which will cover the entire area of the European Union .
The Community Patent would offer complete Union-wide protection for new patents , at the same time significantly reducing the administrative costs of firms .
And last but not least : we need a revolution in thinking which would free us from orthodox thinking and modes of action .
We must create conditions which make it possible to produce a whole raft of new ideas , out of which we may perhaps develop that one breakthrough innovation .
New technology is not the key to a good future ; we need non-conventional thinking in all fields , in firms as well as in public administration .
Madam President , Commissioner , with outstanding diligence and sometimes frightening consistency of purpose my fellow countryman Paul Rübig has again produced a report containing almost everything that is good and right .
For that very reason , I hope I may be allowed to question some of it .
We have been discussing why innovation is so important for the European Union .
The rapporteur has given a broad answer to that question .
We could of course ask him what innovation ?
What innovation is most in demand at the moment ?
Perhaps military technology so we can find Osama bin Laden quickly .
Is that the kind of innovation we mean ?
Is it innovation in surveillance that will enable us to uncover sleepers in the future ?
Or do we not need to define innovation ?
With our European system of values , are we not concerned here with innovation in education , innovation in social learning ?
And how will we get there ?
Would it not be an innovation finally to know how much is spent on innovation ?
Do you know , Commissioner ?
I have tried to find out how much is invested in the future in a big country like the Federal Republic of Germany .
We know what is spent on administration , we know what is invested in transfer payments , but when it comes to investing in the future , nobody knows .
We all agree that there cannot be too much funding for investment , because that is really the only way to safeguard the future .
But the question is , what kind of a future ?
Where are we heading ?
And is not the time after 11 September actually an ideal time to question much that was simply only a fixation with technology and instead to initiate research into social innovation ?
Has the time not now also come to free ourselves from old instruments like gross national product and bring the innovative instrument of a well being factor more into the centre ?
Questions on a good report .
Nevertheless , once again congratulations , Paul !
Madam President , the role played by innovation in achieving the ambitious objectives set by the European Union in Lisbon has been mentioned by the rapporteur , whom I congratulate on his detailed report , and by previous speakers .
However , the importance of innovation to our economic and social development needs to be appreciated more both by the Member States and by the European Commission itself .
Delays in implementing innovative measures under the Structural Funds and the cancellation of resources are sad proof of the fact that innovation often gets no further than the drawing board .
So we need a decisive and coordinated policy which ensures that innovation penetrates our entire economic and social fabric and that our citizens ' creative powers are give free rein .
That is why I should like to highlight the fact that this policy needs to be driven by the principle of equal opportunities .
For a start , I do not believe that innovation is the duty or preserve of the young , I believe it should affect all ages with lifelong learning and the other methods mentioned by previous speakers .
I would like to point out that we need to encourage women in their individual and collective efforts , such as setting up companies , and we need to encourage women 's non-governmental organisations to take an innovative approach to social activities which have a positive impact on social cohesion and job creation .
Equal opportunities should also apply geographically , given the huge discrepancies between the regions of the European Union when it comes to innovation .
Both the European Union and the Member States should pay special attention to disadvantaged regions , which are usually the mountain and island areas of the Union .
With the lack of innovation in Europe compared with the United States and Japan , we need to get moving and mobilise our forces .
This means that the spirit of innovation must also drive the European Union 's innovation management policy .
Special units , such as the unit set up to manage innovative measures under Article 6 of the European Social Fund , are a step in the right direction , they just need to be adequately staffed to make them effective .
The European Commission must also focus on disseminating the results of best practices , which is why pioneering methods need to be found , with much better penetration and efficiency than those available under past policies and both the Member States of the European Union and candidate countries must work with the European Union and take appropriate steps to disseminate best practices and adopt all the new models which account for the performance of the best countries .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Rübig , for an excellent report and the House for a debate displaying quality and commitment .
It is widely recognised that policies that foster innovation are an underlying determinant of economic growth .
I am particularly happy to present to you today the very latest findings of the EU ' s innovation policy performance , namely the 2001 Innovation Scoreboard , which was compiled as a follow-up to the report last year .
The 2001 European Innovation Scoreboard gives us a starting point for the Union ' s strategy to enhance its overall competitiveness , by providing a common measure of a country 's performance using 17 indicators .
I would also like to say that I share the rapporteur ' s opinion in underlining the importance of education and training , something that has been noted by other speakers .
One indicator called for in the report was added to the scoreboard to cover lifelong learning .
EU performance in terms of growth and the standard of living relative to the US and Japan highlights the key challenges that the EU faces in enhancing its competitiveness .
In the past twenty-five years , and apart from temporary cyclical fluctuations , the EU has not kept pace with the US in improving its standard of living .
The gap is now wider than it was a quarter of a century ago .
At the aggregate level , the gap in living standards can be attributed to two factors : two-thirds to the employment rate , which is lower , and one-third to productivity .
I will focus on the productivity gap .
Until the mid-1990s , the productivity gap between the EU and the US narrowed steadily .
In the second half of the 1990s , however , the rapid acceleration of productivity growth in the US again began to widen the gap .
Until the early 1990s , capital-intensive industries spearheaded productivity growth .
This changed in the mid-1990s , when research and innovation became the key determinants .
The industries that achieved the greatest productivity gains during the late 1990s were predominantly research-intensive .
The overall strategy for boosting competitiveness requires us to better combine Union and Member State efforts to develop more effective policies to foster and support innovation .
National innovation policies should be reinforced , developed , and take a more consistent approach across the EU .
This is why we need a regular benchmarking exercise to measure and compare the performance of EU countries , identify key areas of weakness and strength , and enable ourselves to design and fine-tune innovation policies accordingly .
Taking the EU as a whole , we still lag behind the US and Japan on most indicators .
We trail significantly in terms of private-sector investment in research and development .
Rapid increases in business research and development in Japan and the US since 1994 have widened the gap with Europe alarmingly .
US expenditure in this area is now 74 % higher than in Europe .
Europe ' s high-tech patenting activity is also too weak : US businesses apply for more high-technology patents in Europe than do European businesses .
Japanese patenting in Europe is almost as strong as US patenting .
This patenting imbalance is an area that requires urgent attention .
At individual Member State level , the picture is different .
I must say that , as regards many indicators , the best-performing EU countries are also world leaders , sometimes doing substantially better than the US and Japan .


I will give you some examples : the UK , Ireland and France , for example , are world-leading suppliers of science and engineering graduates ; the Netherlands , Sweden and Denmark are ahead in home Internet access ; Finland , the Netherlands and Sweden lead in public research and development ; and Sweden is well ahead in business research and development expenditure .
However , differences in innovation performance between Member States are still significant .
Countries such as Denmark and Finland , whose performance was already strong , continue to lead the field when measured by the innovation index , that is to say in terms of trends , not scoreboards alone .
Greece and Spain are rapidly catching up with the EU average , while starting from a relatively low base .
But change is important and positive .
The four largest EU economies ( France , Germany , the UK and Italy ) are improving , but at rates below the EU average .

A number of lessons can be drawn from these results .
The Union should : first , invest in education and training , as has been said here a few times ; second , improve its performance in the high-tech sectors and promote entrepreneurship ; third , help to step up business research and development by encouraging Member States to introduce or increase the necessary incentives ; and finally , promote the use of technologies in all sectors of the economy , including public administrations .
I am pleased to see that several of these aspects are well covered by Mr Rübig ' s report .
I believe this report will help to generate a consensus on the way forward .
This is necessary , as shown by the findings of the Innovation Scoreboard .
The report expresses Europe ' s wish to reduce the Union ' s innovation deficit and achieve the goal set at Lisbon and , hence , does a great deal to help improve the EU ' s overall competitiveness .
I hope that there will be an opportunity to come back to these issues in the Commission ' s 2001 Competitiveness Report , which will be presented in a few weeks ' time .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12 noon .
Exhaustion of trade mark rights
The next item is the report ( A5-0311 / 2001 ) by Mr Mayer , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on the problem of the exhaustion of trade mark rights ( SEC ( 1999 ) 2033 - C5-0354 / 2000 - 2000 / 2187 ( COS ) ) .
Madam President , I would like briefly to outline the underlying issues and the main points of my report .
The central statement is that the Commission is called upon to produce a detailed study of the possible implications of the transition to the principle of international exhaustion by 31 December 2002 .
The Nera study presented by the Commission in 1999 fails to deal with this matter adequately .
A trade mark right has its effects only in the territory for which it was granted .
Community exhaustion applies to the Community mark and national marks when the holder of the right has put his product into circulation in the Community for the first time .
If the holder of the trade mark right puts his product into circulation outside the Community , the legal effects of the marks are not exhausted in the Community .
He can therefore prevent parallel importers from importing the product into the Community .
Because of the current Community-wide exhaustion regime he can therefore quote two different prices : a lower one for countries outside the Community and a higher one for the Community itself .
This split pricing policy , however , is not what the trade mark right is about .
The main purpose of the mark is to make the product distinguishable and familiar and to indicate a certain product quality .
We could also speak about the advertising effect .
The division of markets to the disadvantage of consumers in the Community cannot be the objective of granting a Community trade mark .
Neither is there anything in competition law to argue against parallel imports .
So why should it be possible to use trade mark rights to prevent them ?
There is something wrong there .
We must do something to get back to more competition and lower prices for branded goods .
The same conclusion was reached in a study by the Swedish competition authority , as , too , did a discussion paper by the Irish competition authority .
A hearing before a Select Committee of the British House of Commons was also presented predominantly with arguments in favour of international exhaustion .
There is now an important new factor : the increasing amount of trade on the Internet .
The present exhaustion regime could hamper the development of e-commerce .
It is not in fact certain whether Internet sales with the subsequent dispatch of branded goods are permissible under trade mark law .
But legal certainty and consumer protection are essential conditions for the development of trade over the Internet .
Then there are the following points .
There are a ) trade marks that are not really matched to any particular product . For example , you order ' a Siemens ' .
' A Siemens ' can be a lamp , a washing machine or a nuclear power station .
There are b ) also trade marks that designate group products , for example Adidas shoes , whether they are sandals or high heels .
There are c ) trade marks that require absolute identity , in medicine for example .
It cannot be even one milligram different from what the mark designates .
All these points are reason enough to call on the Commission to undertake its own comprehensive study .
Such a study must also draw comparisons with the world ' s major trading nations and study and make a precise analysis of the implications for the EU labour market .
Madam President , first of all , I would like to congratulate Mr Mayer who , in spite of some extremely polarised positions , listened and put forward an alternative in the form of a proposal for further consideration , which met with everyone ' s approval .
This position is all the more important and necessary since the report refers to the crucial problems related to globalisation and European integration .
In addition to the direct interests of consumers and manufacturers , the economic position of the European Union in world trade is at stake .
Some may be in favour of a total liberalisation of trade , whereas others , myself included , believe that the system of Community exhaustion responds to the need to develop the integration of the single market , a favourable way of supporting Europe in the face of global competition .
Apart from the concept of integration , the crux of this report is to support innovation , and God knows how much we have spoken about this in the previous report , to support innovation and creativity within the Community .
Trade marks are the most important and most efficient way of protecting intellectual property .
Trade marks provide the consumer with a guarantee of a product ' s authenticity and quality , and they ensure pre-sales , shape investment and , consequently , creation .
A change in the system could lead to a drop in investment in research and development of European products and the impact on jobs could be significant .
The current system also provides the best means of protection against counterfeiting , as the channels used by parallel importers are often those used to transport pirate products .
In the studies that are currently available , and I stress the ' currently ' , we found no relevant information enabling us to justify a change to the system , which could be detrimental to innovation .
I hope that the further consideration proposed by Mr Mayer will confirm this opinion .
Madam President , I would firstly like to congratulate Mr Mayer on the report he is presenting today .
I am perfectly aware that it is not the report he would have liked to approve and , although it is little consolation , I would like to say that I also would have preferred the report finally approved by Parliament to have been the one Mr Mayer initially drew up .
Despite the powerful interests concerned with preventing the world trade in trade mark products , the unusual report by a consulting company which states that consumers would not benefit immediately from the acquisition of goods at lower prices and the lukewarm position of the Commission which does not seem interested in seeking a solution to a problem which has a very negative effect on European consumers , the rapporteur , Mr Mayer , has been able to produce a report urging persistence in the quest for formulae which prevent manufacturers of trade mark products from maintaining excessively high prices on European markets .
When , in July 1998 , the Court of Justice issued the Silhouette judgment , it caused great commotion in countries which recognised the principle of international exhaustion of the trade mark .
Either by law , as in Sweden for example , or by jurisprudence , as in my country , Spain .
Legally , the judgment is unassailable from the moment that it states that Article 7 of the Trade Mark Directive , by establishing the principle of Community exhaustion , indirectly establishes the prohibition of international exhaustion .
But this is a legalistic interpretation which does not prevent the recognition , as the judgment does , of the harmful effects for consumers of the fact that owners of trade marks can prevent the import of their own products if they originate from third countries .
The arguments used by those people who defend the prohibition of the international exhaustion of trade marks - combating counterfeiting , maintaining the prestigious image of goods , diversion of income from the manufacturer to the importer - are at odds with a reality which is demonstrated in the documents produced by the rapporteur .
When parallel imports from third countries are allowed , the prices of trade mark products drop .
The information provided on price increases in Germany , when the reform of German law prevented international exhaustion , is conclusive .
And although my experience is of little scientific value , I must point out that I have been able to note how , in the United States , a product which in Spain costs me EUR 10 , costs me just EUR 1.5 .
For all these reasons and despite the reservations involved in finding a consensus in favour of a more ambitious resolution , it is important that the Commission takes the initiative in favour of consumers and brings forward proposals to strengthen the world market , removing barriers to trade , which are not just customs barriers , but which often consist of anti-competitive practices by companies whose aim is to defend their own profits .
Madam President , at this hour brevity is a duty and not a virtue .
Although I was not a member of the committee which produced this report , I want to speak because my colleague , Mrs McCarthy , who was a member , is detained by the grave events now under discussion at our party conference in Brighton .
I am speaking as someone concerned with consumer affairs .
Like Mrs Thors , I was for a time the Chair of the Consumer Protection Intergroup .
Parliament 's Rules do not allow us to express these opinions in the way we once did .
The substantial majority which Mr Mayer rallied in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market was , of course , for a response which , as my colleague has said , was less than he would have wished .
It is also less than I would have wished and it should be less than this Parliament would have wished .
The principal recommendation here is for a further study of the consequences of a transition to the use of the principle of international exhaustion .
Fine , but how long is that going to take when a parallel importer can be prevented from giving the consumer a quality product at a price which benefits them both ?
This is not like counterfeit products , as another speaker tried to suggest .
It is not competitive selling at a loss to weaken rival products , nor is it driving down the quality of those products .
It is a straightforward blockage of trade , which will not diminish the so-called grey markets but will make them more confused and complex .
We need this to be a study which tells us of the shady side of what proclaims itself to be a respectable trade .
I do not really expect more from the Commissioner tonight than I have heard from him privately .
However , the matter cannot rest here .
The Silhouette case was not the last word on all this and nor , as he would acknowledge , is Mr Mayer 's report .
Nevertheless I salute him .
Madam President , this is an important subject and has been discussed at various places and at various times .
It is important that the exhaustion regime for Trade marks which the Community applies provides for a proper balance between the interest of consumer prices and protection of Trade mark rights .
It has been stated by those who advocate a change to the Community-wide exhaustion regime , that a unilateral change to international exhaustion of Trade mark rights would have a significant impact on consumer prices .
The Commission is not convinced that this would be the case .
According to the Nera study carried out by a consultancy firm based in London which was submitted to the Commission in February 1999 , prices under international exhaustion would probably not be very different from those that are currently in force .
Mr Berenguer Fuster and the rapporteur have referred to alleged price increases in Germany of films , perfume and cameras .
As soon as this became known , the sectors concerned supplied statistics to the Commission to show that prices have not increased as was claimed , but have remained the same or in some cases even decreased .
The purported evidence concerning Germany is not what it seems to be and , in fact , supports the case that the Commission has put forward and not the case in favour of international exhaustion .
There has also been a price study carried out by the Swedish and the UK governments .
It is very interesting to note , and significant for this debate , that of the items where comparisons between the European Union and the United States were possible , the cheapest market was often within the European Union .
For some products , the United States was even the most expensive market .
Moreover , there were considerable price differences between Member States .
In general , prices in Germany and France were lower than in the UK and in Sweden .
Those differences exist within the European Union where there is regional exhaustion for Trade mark rights and not international exhaustion .
In other words , for all Member States of the European Union the same exhaustion regime applies yet there is a 40 % price difference in electronic goods between Sweden and Germany .
This certainly goes to show that the internal market is not performing as it should be , but it also shows that the differences in prices have nothing to do with whether the exhaustion regime is regional or international .
The price differences within the European Union usually exceed the price differences between EU Member States and the United States .
In other words , the arguments in favour of the thesis that international exhaustion would lead to a decrease in prices is very tenuous .
In fact the Commission does not believe that evidence at all .
Furthermore , I should like to add that the price element is only one aspect of the exhaustion issue .
It is also very important to consider the legitimate interest of Trade mark holders in their home markets .
For many companies the Trade mark is their most valuable asset and that is not something we should take lightly .
Trade marks are also of value to consumers because they represent a sign of quality .
The Commission decided in May 2000 that there is no reason , at least for the time being , to propose any change to the current regime .
The Commission considers that there is now a proper balance between the interests at stake and that the current Community-wide exhaustion regime is an appropriate way to protect the legitimate rights of Trade mark holders .
The Commission has taken due note , obviously , of Mr Mayer 's report and of the long and difficult discussions in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
Many arguments have been put forward for and against a change of regime .
The Commission recognised all those arguments from previous discussions in other fora .
All the aspects mentioned have been thoroughly studied and analysed by the Commission services and in my view no new elements have been put forward which would require further examination or which would give the Commission reason to reconsider its decision .
Having said this , the Commission intends to monitor the question of exhaustion closely and will certainly take any action necessary should new and important reasons emerge to consider abandoning the current exhaustion regime .
In the meantime , the Commission is , of course , willing to share with Parliament our experiences concerning cases of possible abuse of Trade mark rights but in order to make the report more useful and balanced the Commission intends to take all relevant elements into consideration .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon on Wednesday .
( The sitting was closed at 11.20 p.m. )
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I have here before me a newspaper interview , from which I should like to read you an extract .
It reads ' I do not agree with the Anti-Slavery Conference in Durban .
It promotes a sense of victimisation in people who already feel like victims . '
It goes on to say : ' I am not happy with the whole Conference in Durban , quite apart from the way in which the Middle East was discussed and the fact that someone like Castro was applauded .
These are indicators that this was an anti-western meeting ' .
These are not my words , but those of a European Commissioner , namely Mr Bolkestein .
Last night in my group , our group chairman told me that Mr Nielson , on account of unfortunate statements he made concerning anti-American imperialism , will have to justify himself before the Conference of Presidents .
Would it not be fair , therefore , if you , in your capacity as President of the Conference of Presidents , were also to invite Mr Bolkestein , giving him the opportunity to explain before the Conference of Presidents these very unfortunate , extremely dangerous statements at a time when we , as the Western world , must join forces with the Islamic world to combat terrorism .

Mr Staes , I can confirm that Mr Nielson will be attending the Conference of Presidents and we shall consider your suggestion .
Madam President , I would like to draw your attention to the fact that the Finnish language programmes have been removed from Parliament ' s television network .
We wondered why that was , but got no explanation for it .
There are therefore no programmes being broadcast from Finland , while some Member States can get three or even four channels .
Could I request the President to ask those concerned to correct the situation , as it is odd , particularly during these times of crisis , that one Member State ' s programme signal should have been removed from the television network without any explanation .
Mr Paasilinna , due to absolutely exceptional circumstances , Mrs Banotti has unfortunately not yet arrived .
We shall , of course , inform her of your dissatisfaction and she will immediately find out what can be done .
Announcement by the President
The Court of First Instance has recently rejected the appeals lodged by Members of the European Parliament , the National Front and the Bonino List against Parliament ' s decision of 14 September 1999 not to recognise the existence of the Technical Group of Independent Members .
In accordance with the provision of the order , the cases concerned were joined for the purposes of judgment and the appeals were rejected .
In each case , the applicants will bear their own costs and the costs of Parliament , including those incurred in the summary proceedings in case 222 / 99 .
The judgment was delivered in open session in Luxembourg on 2 October 2001 .
As a result , the suspensive order handed down by the President of the Court of First Instance on 25 November 1999 at the end of the summary proceedings lapsed when the judgment was delivered , in other words , on 2 October 2001 , pursuant to Article 107 ( 3 ) of the Court ' s Rule of Procedure .
Therefore , Parliament ' s decision of 14 September 1999 not to recognise the existence of the Technical Group of Independent Members is once again fully effective .
I shall of course give the floor to Mr Dell ' Alba .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the eighteen MEPs belonging to the Technical Group of Independent Members have taken note of the judgment of the Court of First Instance on 2 October .
They point out that this judgment is somehow the inverse image of the order handed down by the President of the same court , who , on 25 November 1999 , ruled that Parliament was obliged to recognise the legitimate existence of our group .
It stands to reason that we shall be appealing against yesterday ' s decision and that , obviously , we ask for an interim order to suspend the effects of the judgment .
In this respect , Madam President , in order to avoid any misunderstandings , I ask you , before making further provisions to consult the Legal Services as to the effects of the suspension , which is what we shall ask the Court to do , as is within our rights .
Having said that , I would like to draw the attention of my fellow Members to two important aspects of yesterday ' s judgment .
The first aspect is that our appeal is fully admissible and , therefore , MEPs are fully entitled to question the justice of actions of the European Parliament , such as these .
This was not what Parliament wished , as it had requested that the Court declare that this appeal should not be admitted .
The second aspect is that , on several occasions , the Court recognises that disparities do exist in the treatment of the Members of the European Parliament .
The Court mentions this in Paragraphs 201 and 57 of yesterday ' s judgment .
I am not going to quote these paragraphs and I will simply say that the Court declared that Parliament must remedy these disparities , as part of its duties to manage internal affairs .

Mr Corbett , since your draft report on the reform of Articles 29 and 30 , which aims to rectify these disparities has been held in abeyance for a year , we shall continue our fight , we shall be vigilant and we shall do everything within our power to ensure that we continue this fight to eliminate these disparities and that it does not cease as a result of yesterday ' s judgment .
Madam President , I am delighted at the victory of Parliament at the Court of First Instance .
It confirms that we were right in the decision that we took .
Mr Dell 'Alba , though , is also right to draw attention to the fact that we must ensure that there are no disparities or discriminations in our Rules .
That was the objective of the report of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs which we held in abeyance pending the judgment of the Court .
Perhaps now is the time for this report to come before the full House , but if there is to be an appeal and if - although I would personally doubt this - the full Court of Justice were to suspend the effects of the decision of the Court of First Instance until they themselves rule , that would put us in a difficult position with the report from the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
Personally I doubt that the full Court of Justice would give such an ordinance giving a suspensive effect , in which case we can proceed immediately to look at the disparity that some people may feel exists in our Rules .
My report would , I am sure , go some way to reassuring people .
Mr Corbett , what I can say to you and Mr Dell ' Alba is that , of course , if there is to be an appeal , I shall examine very closely , in conjunction with Parliament ' s Legal Service , whether this appeal will have a suspensive effect .
We shall look into this matter extremely carefully .
Madam President , the judgment is very clear , but in a society governed by the rule of law there must , of course , be the right of appeal and the judgment must have no effects until such time as the highest court has reached its conclusion .
The judgment is also very clear when it comes to the duties of Parliament .
Among the grounds of the judgment , number 157 expressly states that it is Parliament ' s duty , within the framework of its relevant internal procedures , to investigate whether the disparities in treatment of the two categories of Members arising from the aforesaid internal procedures are all necessary and , therefore , objectively justified .
This is , to speak plainly , a broad hint to us to examine our Rules of Procedure to see whether they are discriminatory .
I think that all MEPs and political units such as the Italian Radical Party must have completely equal opportunities . They must naturally have the same political rights as the political groups , apart from a number of rights quite specific to the latter .
However , the rules need to be examined critically to ensure that political units have the same opportunities to work in Parliament . I would therefore call upon you to request the legal services to go through the judgment carefully and see how we are to improve the Rules of Procedure in order to ensure complete equality .
I would also call for the judgment to be brought up at the first meeting of the Conference of Presidents to be held directly after such an investigation of the judgment has been carried out . In that context , we shall be able to debate a package of arrangements for independent MEPs and smaller political units which are not large enough to form a group and , in that way , be able to secure the fair treatment of MEPs .
Madam President , I must take this opportunity to inform you that a party of schoolchildren invited by me for this week - tomorrow to be precise - has cancelled the visit .
I also heard , however , that mine was not the only group affected , but that around half the invited groups had cancelled their visits this week .
The children in question , or their parents , fear that security measures in this House are inadequate and that the children would be in danger if they visited Parliament .
Let me request you , then , to supply the public with extensive information about the adequacy of the security arrangements .
Should this not be possible , consideration should be given to a general suspension of visits .
I myself have also another concern : I would welcome it if those visitors ' quotas that cannot be made use of because visits have been cancelled , could be set aside for future dates rather than be lost , so that these groups that , for understandable reasons , are not visiting Parliament now , may make up for it at a later date .
The Bureau members will be meeting this evening and I shall inform them of your proposal .
Madam President , as regards the formation of Parliamentary Groups , our group expressed itself quite unambiguously at the time this Parliament was constituted .
We are grateful for this confirmation of our understanding of the law .
Further to certain remarks by Members , I would again like to make it clear that our Rules of Procedure , decided on by this Parliament , make a clear distinction between Members belonging to a group and pooling their rights in it , and those who do not belong to a group .
Members without a group should quite clearly not be discriminated against , but that does not mean that they , as individual Members , enjoy complete equality of treatment with the groups .
Rule 30 of our Rules of Procedure expressly states that Members not belonging to a group have the use of a Secretariat with all other details being decided on by the Presidents .
That is now the legal position as handed down by the Court of First Instance , and we should proceed in accordance with it in the coming months .
Extraordinary European Council of 21 September 2001 in Brussels - Preparatory work for the European Council in Ghent
The next item is the Council and Commission statements , firstly , on the Extraordinary European Council held in Brussels on 21 September 2001 , and secondly , on the preparatory work for the European Council in Ghent .
I would like to welcome the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Michel , and I shall now give him the floor .

Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I was keen to inform you as quickly as possible about the progress of the work done at the extraordinary European Council held on 21 September involving the Heads of State and Government of the European Union .
I felt that it was important to involve you , as MEPs , closely in the European Union ' s talks and decisions , as we have done since the tragic events occurred .
As you know , the European Council met to analyse the international situation following the terrorist attacks in the United States and to give the necessary impetus to the actions taken by the European Union .
The talks rapidly led to unanimous conclusions , the text of which was made public on the evening of 21 September .
I do not intend to read it out here in its entirety , but I would like to emphasise the salient points .
I will first inform you that the presidency is most satisfied to see the European Union decide that the fight against terrorism is a priority , and to reaffirm its unyielding determination to take concerted action under any and all circumstances .
The terrorist threat is a test for European integration .
The unanimity displayed by the European Council , the quality of its debate , and the adoption of comprehensive and specific measures all show that the Union proved to be equal to the challenge .
The extraordinary Council gave the Union an opportunity to get several important messages across .
The first message is one of solidarity and cooperation with the United States .
The European Union shares the same values as the United States : those of an open , democratic , multi-cultural society .
The Union will stand alongside the United States to bring to justice the perpetrators of these barbarous acts , together with their sponsors and accomplices , and to ensure that they are punished .
We are of the opinion that the targeted American reprisals are legitimate under Security Council Resolution 1368 .
We are prepared to commit ourselves to this line , each Member State according to its means .
However , we must not underestimate the seriousness of this scourge .
If we are to succeed , we must have the backing of a broad coalition , under the aegis of the United Nations .
This coalition would include candidates for EU membership , the Russian Federation and our Arab partners .
The second message that the European Union would like to get across following this Council is that it is fully committed to fighting terrorism , and to this end has adopted an action plan comprising five series of measures .
The first series of measures consists of bolstering essential police and judicial cooperation .
To this end , the European Council has set a number of objectives , including the creation of a European arrest warrant and the establishment of a common definition of terrorism .
The same European Council has also taken a firm decision to adopt measures for identifying terrorists and the organisations that support them in order to draw up lists of terrorist organisations .
In this connection , the role of Europol and its cooperation with the United States will be reinforced .
The second series of measures in the action plan , which I consider to be very important , involves the development of international legal instruments .
There are many such instruments that need to be implemented and it would no doubt be worthwhile examining , as India suggests , the idea of a general convention against international terrorism .
The third series of measures on which the European Union would like to work involves the funding of terrorism .
Here too , specific action will be taken at EU level , particularly with regard to money laundering and the freezing of assets .
The fourth series of measures involves air safety .
The European Union intends to swiftly devise a set of specific , technical measures for this purpose , such as baggage checks , technical training for crews and so on .
Lastly , I wish to draw your attention to the fifth series of measures , which involves the common , foreign and security policy as a whole .
The emphasis has been placed on the need to coordinate the Union ' s overall action ; the idea being to bolster the common , foreign and security policy , in order for there to be an integrated campaign against terrorism , including the systematic reassessment of relations between the European Union and third countries in the light of any support that these countries might give to terrorism .
In the medium and long term , the fight against terrorism will also require the Union to strengthen its prevention policy and to become more involved in stabilising regional conflicts .
As part of this , the European Union certainly intends to enhance its role , with the assistance of the United States , Russia and its partners in Arab countries , in order to work towards finding a long-term solution to the Middle East conflict .
In addition , the development of the common , foreign and security policy ( CFSP ) and the European security and defence policy ( ESDP ) could have long-lasting effects .
These EU policies must not be used as tools for reprisals , but as a means of prevention .
Conflict prevention also implies an unstinting commitment on the part of the European Union to integrate all countries into a global system of security and sustainable prosperity .
Finally , we must pay special attention to the problem of refugees .
On this issue , the Commission will devise projects to assist Afghan refugees in neighbouring countries .
The last message sent by the European Council was to reassure the European countries and the markets about the economy , and it will be helped in this endeavour by the conclusions of the informal ECOFIN Council held at the same time in Liège , and to stress the positive role the euro will play in this economic context that we are experiencing .
That , ladies and gentlemen , is the content of the message of the European Council held on 21 September .
To sum up , I would like to add two comments .
First of all , as is so often the case , the crisis situation created by the attacks in New York and Washington has given impetus to European unification .
The Extraordinary European Council on 21 September provided an opportunity to take practical decisions and to display genuine European leadership .
The Belgian Presidency will endeavour to follow up its commitments , particularly at the forthcoming General Affairs Council in October and the Ghent European Council .
Secondly , while making the fight against terrorism a priority , we must not be diverted from other projects that are fundamental to European integration .
I would like to confirm here and now that the Belgian Presidency will make every effort to comply with its programme on preparing for the introduction of the euro , enlargement negotiations and the implementation of the European security and defence policy .
I would now like to turn to the preparation of the Ghent European Council .
( NL ) The informal meeting of Heads of State and Government in Ghent on 19 October will consider the three subjects already identified by the Belgian Presidency , namely the euro , the enlargement of the European Union and the Laeken Declaration on the future of Europe .
In the wake of recent international developments , a fourth issue will probably be added to the agenda , namely the fight against terrorism .
With regard to the introduction of the euro coins and notes in 12 Member States on 1 January 2002 , the President of the ECOFIN Council , Minister Reynders , the relevant European Commissioner , Mr Solbes , and the President of the European Central Bank , Mr Wim Duisenberg , will present a detailed report on the level of preparedness of the Member States .
The Heads of State and Government will thus have an opportunity to influence preparations , where necessary .
They will also have the opportunity to discuss some of the more political aspects of the euro , such as the use of the euro in the candidate countries .
With regard to the preparations for the Laeken Declaration , the President of the General Affairs Council will report on the talks held to date by the foreign affairs ministers on this subject .
In particular , the focus will be on the work done in this connection by the Belgian Presidency .
The progress made to date mostly concerns the organisation of the Convention as an innovative instrument paving the way for the Intergovernmental Conference in 2004 .
The Belgian Presidency hopes to be able to consolidate this progress at the General Affairs Council in Luxembourg on 8 and 9 October and then build on it with regard to two additional aspects : the status of the candidate countries at the Convention and the organisation of a Civil Forum .
What is more , the presidency would like to see a consensus reached on the best way of defining the Convention ' s mandate .
The presidency would prefer to develop further or to reformulate the four themes of the Nice Declaration , with , of course , the objective of arriving at a broader agenda .
At the General Affairs Council of 8 October , the presidency will also give the Member States an initial indication of the possible structure of the Laeken Declaration .
The preparatory work done in the General Affairs Council should make it possible for the Heads of State and Government meeting in Ghent to push ahead gradually with the plans for the Laeken Declaration and , if possible , to make further progress in this domain .
Consequently , over the coming weeks , the presidency will strive , firstly , to convince the other Member States that the Laeken Declaration should not be limited simply to procedural matters ; secondly , to explain the nature of the new elements affecting the Declaration ' s content and , thirdly , to persuade the other Member States that this approach , in substance , should not pose any specific problems .
( FR ) I would like to take advantage of this opportunity to reassure all those who have expressed reservations regarding the approach being recommended by the presidency .
The type of undertaking that we envisage does not give rise to insurmountable obstacles .
On the contrary , it offers up a number of advantages .
In my view , the question of knowing whether or not it is advisable to stick to the four topics of the Nice Declaration is not a genuine problem .
This declaration was worded in such a way so that it is possible to widen the debate , using the four topics listed as a basis .
Moreover , it is difficult to see what could prevent the Convention from taking the initiative on whatever subject it feels it would be useful to discuss .
It has been clear since our meeting in Genval that the Laeken Declaration will simply ask the questions and will not necessarily seek to give any pre-prepared answers .
The outcome of the Convention will be presented in the form of options , which should reassure all those who felt that their hand was being forced .
Lastly , while the aim of the exercise - which was acknowledged by all - is to ask the right questions , it is quite legitimate to seek to formulate them in the most complete , clear and pertinent manner in order to optimise the future work of the Convention .
Where the enlargement of the European Union is concerned , the European Council will be asked by the presidency to consider a report drafted by the European Commission on the implementation of a specific enlargement strategy .
This report will be available as soon as it is adopted by the college .
The aim in this respect is to check that the road map adopted by the Nice European Council and confirmed by the Göteborg European Council as a general framework for negotiation is being respected .
Lastly , I would like to stress that the presidency has no intention of drafting any written conclusions for the meeting of the Heads of State and Government .
I would like to thank Mr Michel .
I shall now give the floor to Mr Michel Barnier , who is speaking on behalf of the Commission .
Madam President , Minister Michel , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Commission and its President , Roman Prodi , who is currently in Brussels attending the European Union meeting with Russia , I would like to make a statement on the recent Extraordinary European Council held in Brussels and the opportunities arising from the preparatory work of the Ghent European Council .
Before I speak about the three subjects that Minister Michel also mentioned , which will be on the agenda of the Ghent Council , I would like to briefly talk about the Extraordinary European Council held on 24 September , in the wake of the tragic attacks on New York City and Washington .
As you know , this Council was , first of all , an opportunity to unanimously express our shared sadness and solidarity with the American people .
However , looking beyond these events , whilst we too experience this sadness and solidarity , I want to reassert our belief , and that of the Commission as a whole , that the fight against terrorism is not and cannot be a clash of civilisations .
On the contrary , it is this fight that brings together all the nations of the world , as equal partners , against the forces that set out to destroy them , without regard for human life , without any respect for the values that people share and that transcend borders and cultures .
And it is the concept of humanity on which the European Union bases its action .
This is how our collective , global fight will achieve its goal .
At the Extraordinary Council , the European Union outlined the main points of a common response to the threat of terrorism , a threat that is unfortunately not unfamiliar to some of our Member States and which the Heads of State and Government now wish to combat together , using every possible means .
At the informal meeting at Ghent , the Commission will report back on developments in the economic situation , and more generally , on the various measures that were put forward on 21 September by the European Council .
The Laeken European Council will provide an opportunity to give a more detailed operational report .
In the coming months , the European Union must demonstrate that it is able to organise , take action , react swiftly and , of course , respect the fundamental freedoms , because this situation forces us , once again , to reconcile freedom and security .
The most urgent measures , on which my colleague Mr Vitorino is working , include the introduction of a European arrest warrant to replace current extradition procedures and the adoption of a common definition of terrorism .
I would point out that the Extraordinary European Council hoped to implement all the measures decided by the European Council at its meeting in Tampere in October 1999 .
With the same determination , the Commission yesterday referred to you , Madam President , a draft Community regulation enabling us to freeze the assets of individuals or bodies that may have links with terrorism .
The Laeken European Council will therefore be a good opportunity to assess very carefully the progress made on creating the area of freedom , security and justice laid down at Tampere .
In the meantime , the European Parliament and the Council will be able to make initial progress due to several measures .
In October , the Commission will present the biannual performance indicators , which enable us to monitor the follow-up of the Tampere Council .
Ladies and gentlemen , let there be no mistake : whether it be regarding these matters and the other measures announced in Brussels on 21 September , the funding of terrorism , which I have just mentioned , the situation of air transport or the aid that we must give to the Afghan refugees , the European Union has a duty to achieve results , first and foremost to the Afghan refugees , who are expecting some progress to be made .
I would like to reaffirm my belief that the most effective means of bridging what we call the democratic deficit is most certainly to respond to citizens ' expectations and to follow up our words with actions .
I shall now move on , if I may , to discuss the forthcoming informal Ghent Council and to the first of the subjects on the agenda , which relates to the major challenge of the euro and the introduction of euro banknotes and coins .
In less than three months , the euro will be here .
It is crucial to constantly reiterate , to everyone we speak to , the reasons why the majority of Member States of the European Union took the decision to share the same currency .
The euro is a political and economic undertaking ; for almost three years , we have kept inflation under control and have had sustained growth because of economic and monetary union .
The euro will provide the European Union with better protection against external economic forces and against international financial crises .
Now is also the time to reiterate this .
This is an achievement , and we can all weigh up the extent of our achievement .
By using the euro on a daily basis , people , private individuals and businesses will benefit from the greatest transparency in prices , easier transactions and better investment opportunities .
They will gain a better understanding of what an internal market can offer , one that is made up of almost 400 million citizens and consumers , 300 million of which will use the single currency .
From 1 January 2002 , the euro will , undoubtedly , make Europe more tangible , more visible than ever , and I believe that the circulation of the euro notes and coins will show in a very specific manner that the people of Europe are managing to achieve their common goals .
The euro will therefore become a symbol of stability , peace and shared identity .
Yet , when faced with such challenges , we must also hope and ensure that the changeover to the euro notes and coins is as straightforward as possible for 300 million people in 12 countries , when so many new methods of payments are introduced , along with 15 billion notes and 50 billion coins .
In other words , we must ensure that we meet this unprecedented logistical and strategic challenge .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Commission has shown that it is playing an active and willing role to prepare for the introduction of the euro , and that it is concerned that consumers and businesses , from the largest to the smallest , receive the information they need .
With the support of the European Union , Member States have put in place national plans for the changeover to the euro .
Next week , my colleague , Pedro Solbes , will present a communication on the introduction of notes and coins , so that , in Ghent , the Heads of State and Government can put the finishing touches to the preparatory work that is underway .
The European Union , working together , must ensure that this information is circulated as far and wide as possible in order to respond to the concerns that exist , and which are having a noticeable effect on price stability , and to force us to collectively resolve any technical issues in an accurate and practical manner .
The second subject which Mr Michel raised , and which the Heads of State and Government will bring up in Ghent , is preparations for enlargement .
The Heads of State and Government will discuss enlargement because it is important to keep up the strongest possible political momentum for this project , whatever technical difficulties we encounter in relation to any particular aspect .
In any case , politically we are already living in an enlarged Union .
This has been made even clearer from our intensive contacts with the candidate countries since 11 September .
In Nice , last December , the Intergovernmental Conference defined the minimum parameters that will enable the Union institutions and bodies to take in new Member States .
Moreover , the European Council approved the strategy we had proposed for bringing the accession negotiations to a successful conclusion .
These decisions unequivocally confirmed that enlargement is an irreversible process .
We now have to implement , on a day-to-day basis , the road map the European Council adopted at Nice , based on the principle of differentiating between candidate states .
We have to evaluate the progress made at each accession conference separately , which will in fact also enable those candidate states that are currently less advanced to catch up .
In Ghent , the Commission will report on the progress made with the road map , presenting a kind of mid-term review of enlargement strategy , that will allow the Heads of State and Government to determine what kind of approach or impetus is needed for the further negotiations .
In mid-November , the Commission will publish the regular reports in which it evaluates the progress of the candidate states towards accession .
Let me say a last word on this subject .
We know that enlargement is a difficult project , but we also want it to be a very ambitious one .
It will succeed only if it enjoys the support of the people of all the countries concerned , by which of course I mean the candidate countries and their citizens , but also the citizens of the present EU Member States .
At the instigation of Mr Günther Verheugen , and in liaison with the European Parliament , the Commission has proposed measures for informing the citizens of the present and future Member States and explaining the issues involved , the chances and the opportunities , without , however , concealing the problems or risks of enlargement .
To that end we want to mobilise the Commission delegations in the candidate countries and our representatives in the Member States .
But everyone must play their part , the institutions and the European elected representatives , as also the national authorities and , more broadly , all the opinion-formers in Europe .
Madam President , let me raise a last point , which will be debated in Ghent , prior to Laeken , and concerns the future of the Union .
The Heads of State and Government will have to extend and confirm the positions defined at the recent foreign ministers ' meeting in Genval .
Obviously this is the same subject the foreign ministers will or may debate in Luxembourg on 8 October .
In Genval , the Commission reported on the situation and called for a new approach in the preparations for the future institutional reforms , taking account of the limitations of the methods applied in the past , for Amsterdam and Nice .
For a long time , in fact , the European Parliament and the Commission had shared the interest shown by several Member States in a method inspired by the convention that prepared for the Charter of Fundamental Rights and brought it to a successful conclusion .
The Commission obviously hopes the next General Affairs Council will formally mark the support of all the Member States for this formula .
Let me just point out here that at a very early stage the Commission highlighted the importance , in view of preparing the future institutional reforms , of involving the various sources of democratic legitimacy that coexist in Europe and of preparing for these reforms as openly and transparently as possible .
That is why we would also like to see special attention devoted to establishing a structural link between the activities of the convention and the future Intergovernmental Conference .
Another link we would like to see is between the activities of the convention and the more general debate that will continue to be held and in which a growing number of associations , interest groups and citizens is already taking part .
This forum on the future of the Union , for which more and more people are perceiving the need , should encourage an exchange of views that very closely reflects the concerns of civil society .
I believe the convention must listen carefully to these discussions .
As to the procedures for organising this future convention , several questions still need to be resolved before the Laeken European Council .
Let me note here the very thorough work done by your Parliament 's Committee on Constitutional Affairs , especially in the report by Mr Leinen and Mr Méndez de Vigo .
This report very carefully and skilfully analyses all the questions at issue .
It also discusses something I consider most important , namely how to consolidate and deepen the Union 's policies .
Like the rapporteurs , I too would conclude by emphasising the need to maintain the link between the institutional architecture and the European projects .
It would be rather paradoxical to try to strengthen Europe 's institutional structure , to strengthen the Community model , while at the same time weakening the major , or some of the major Community policies or allowing them to ' unravel ' .
The four main themes identified in Nice must be tackled .
I listened very carefully to Mr Michel 's very coherent and , I think , ambitious words on how to consolidate the achievements of 50 years of European integration .
That could mean that when the environment itself changes we have to make changes to the course of European integration , although without losing sight of its points of reference or its raison d 'être .
We will have to keep to a simple and effective decision-making system , but also strong common policies .
For the European Union cannot confine itself to producing legislative rules .
Through political union , through economic and monetary union , and also through certain major common policies such as the one for which I am responsible , cohesion , European integration must lead towards solidarity between peoples and nations , the stability of the continent , the balanced development of its entire territory and its regions .
It is these principles and these common objectives that we must reaffirm at this moment in time when it appears so necessary for Europe to stand united beside our closest allies .
When the Heads of State and Government meet in Ghent , they will certainly discuss the future Laeken declaration .
So I would like to conclude by emphasising that the Commission attaches great importance to this Laeken declaration , which should in a sense set the tone and determine the spirit in which , as Mr Michel just said , we need to approach all the institutional questions , so as to ensure that our institutions are in a position to achieve our common goals .
Moreover , ladies and gentlemen , since we have some time at our disposal before the year 2004 , rather more than usual for a change , which is rare , no doubt we can and , I believe , we must spend some of that time reflecting together on what we want to do together , checking that we really do agree among ourselves on what we must and can do together and , of course , integrating this fundamental political reflection process into today 's new and grave international context , which emphasises and underpins the necessity , the value and the relevance of the European project .
( Applause )
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the terrorist attacks on New York and Washington on 11 September have changed the world , the drama of which event is shown by the way yesterday Article 5 ( the assistance clause ) of the North Atlantic Treaty was invoked for the first time in the history of the North Atlantic Alliance , thereby declaring that all NATO countries were required to engage in defence .
It is important , though , to point out that this challenge has been thrown down not only to the United States and the West but also to the community of nations as a whole .
I was told yesterday by someone from China - the People 's Republic , not Taiwan - that fifty Chinese people were killed in New York .
That means to say that these terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center were an attack on nearly all the nations of the world .
It is therefore necessary that we act in solidarity with each other .
Getting to grips with terrorism is an intellectual , political , economic and military task , and it can only be done in the long term .
We say again that terrorism , in so far as its causes lie in Islamic lands - for that is where the terrorists are - is not to be confused with the peaceful Arab and Muslim world .
This must be repeated again and again !
I thank you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , for travelling to many countries in the company of Mr Solana and Mr Patten .
We will now also - Madam President , I thank you for your initiatives - be calling a meeting of the Mediterranean Forum , in order to consult with our parliamentary friends from the Mediterranean region .
I would counsel strongly against any inappropriate rhetoric !
I am not satisfied with what was said by Mr Nielson or by Mr Bolkestein .
We must be able to rely on a Commissioner ' s speaking appropriately and in cautious terms .
We will discuss this on Thursday in the Conference of Presidents and , subject to the way these discussions go , our group reserves the right to call upon the President of the Commission and , if need be , the two Commissioners to elaborate here in the European Parliament on what they have said .
We now need more of Europe .
We will be no more than a partner of the USA even if we are capable of dealing not only with foreign , security , and defence policy , but also with internal security issues .
We need to cooperate with Russia .
We welcome the fact that President Putin is having talks today with Mr Verhofstadt as President-in-Office of the Council and with Mr Prodi as President of the Commission .
We want partnership with Russia , but the events of 11 September must not mean that we close our eyes to the human rights violations that are still going on in Chechnya .
On the contrary , we must say ' Yes ' to combating violence and terrorism if it originates in Chechnya , but ' No ' to war on the Chechen people .
We must also be an advocate for the rights of the Chechen people , within the Russian Federation of course .
For this reason , there must be recognition for the identity of peoples , which is one of the core values of the European Union .
It goes without saying that we must proceed with the World Trade Agreements as planned , for nothing could be worse than for us not to transact our normal day-to-day business .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you mentioned Ghent .
We support what you have said .
We ask you to send out a signal for renewed close cooperation in combating terrorism .
Not only should Europol and Eurojust , too , closely cooperate , but - in my personal judgment - this close cooperation is best guaranteed by their being based at one location .
We ask you to send a signal to the acceding countries , that they are welcome in the European Union if they comply with the conditions .
I am saying this as a German , for eleven years ago , on 3 October 1990 , we were celebrating the unity of Germany , which was only possible because the road towards it was prepared by those Europeans who now wish to join the European Union .
What you have said about the preparation for the Laeken Convention meets with our approval .
Let me express my gratitude for the way your conception of it coheres with our own .
My final remark will be a personal challenge to you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , as much as to anyone else . We are all facing a challenge as regards the security of our institutions .
I must tell you that I feel safer here in Strasbourg - which has nothing to do with the place itself - but because we know that , here , the police are French .
When the President of the European Parliament gets a response from the Belgian authorities to the effect that greater protection for Parliament in Brussels is not necessary because there are no indications of attacks or such like , I find that justification far from adequate ...
( Applause )
... but I call upon you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , to have the European Parliament in Brussels more securely guarded by the security forces of the Kingdom of Belgium .
I am given to over-reaction even less than I am to panic , but we need protection and security wherever possible .
I ask you , in your capacity as the currently responsible President-in-Office of the Council to use your influence with the Belgian government so that the security of the European Parliament in Brussels may , so far as possible , be assured by Belgium .
( Applause )
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Socialist Group endorses the conclusions reached at the Extraordinary European Council at Brussels . The Council came at just the right time politically , and resulted in a sea change in the Union ' s collective conscience .
I should like to recall that this change was initiated by the Watson Report in early September .
Unfortunately , it was not until after the attacks on Washington and New York that the Council woke up to the situation and began to press ahead , and we do welcome the change in approach .
I should like to emphasise that in our view it is very important for this action to be included in the framework of United Nations ' Resolution 1368 ( 2001 ) , as stated in the Council ' s conclusions .
Kofi Annan ' s proposal to establish a global convention against terrorism is also important . It is already under discussion in the United States and will receive the European Union ' s full support .
Global responses to the globalisation of terrorism are called for .
However , in addition to this universal approach , there is a need to express solidarity with the United States .
Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty was therefore invoked yesterday .
A clear definition at all levels of the nature of the fight against terrorism is also needed . This fight will not curtail freedoms , it is a fight to defend the intrinsic freedom of every individual , namely the right to life and the right not to be subjected to indiscriminate violence .
In this connection , Madam President , I believe the activities of the Justice and Home Affairs Council must be supported , as it works to consolidate both Europol and Eurojust . Common instruments must be developed , not only at European level but also within our respective countries .
In this connection I feel it should be pointed out that Parliament can come under pressure from lobbying groups . This is already happening .
The lobbying groups are very adept at exerting pressure or influence on the Commission and the Council . Please take note of this , Mr President , and pass it on to Mr Verhofstadt as President-in-Office of the Council .
I believe we should respect the activities of others . I have in mind , in particular , the criticism of our activities in connection with the directive on money laundering .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I should also like to express my group ' s disquiet concerning the legislation passed by the Italian Senate yesterday . It is entirely contradictory to your aims , and will hinder judicial cooperation and the fight against terrorism because its provisions make cooperation at judicial level quite impossible .
( Applause from the left and protests from the right ) Madam President , I must appeal to my colleague Mr Poettering ...
Surely , Madam President , this is a civilised House and those who resort to barracking have no place in it .
I am addressing my colleague Mr Poettering too .
He is very concerned about the statements made by certain Commissioners .
My group would like all Commissioners to explain themselves before this House .
Mr Poettering ought to confer with his political friends , especially with the Prime Minister of Italy , to ensure that no statements are made to undermine the European Union 's action here and in the wider world .
In addition , Madam President , I should like to comment on the Ghent Council . The measures taken so far concerning the euro are good , and it is an important issue .
However , we need to strengthen our economic capacity so we can respond to the world crisis . It is for the Council to do so , because it is essential for us to define an anticyclical policy and put it in place .
Further , with regard to enlargement , and here I am addressing all the political groups in this House , we must make a commitment on the basis of what you achieve at Ghent , and of the Commission ' s progress report . This has to come back to Parliament .
I should like to highlight one point .
There is a lot of talk of progress along the road , and about the road map . However , we need to check whether the road and the road map will eventually lead to the same destination and whether it will be possible to comply with Parliament ' s request that the countries involved should participate in the 2004 elections .
In conclusion , Mr President , I should like to make three comments on the Convention . Firstly , I understand that the Convention has already been adopted .
Secondly , the Convention is to be established on the basis of its composition when preparing the Charter .
Thirdly , when you refer to options , are you not speaking of coherent proposals by the Convention ?
The Convention is not a research body , nor is it a seminar .
The Convention is required to present proposals . The latter sometimes involve two options , but they are never options to be accepted or rejected .
We do not wish to be involved in that kind of game .
( Applause from the left )
Madam President , the Liberal Democrats in this House welcome the decisions of the extraordinary European Council .
We are pleased that it took on board proposals from this House in the field of justice and home affairs on combating terrorism and indeed that it reviewed the Union 's policies in other areas to ensure that we have joined-up thinking in our approach to this very serious problem .
We regret , however , that it took a shock like the bombing of the Twin Towers and the Pentagon to push the Union into using the legal powers that it has under the Treaty of Amsterdam to act in fighting terrorism .
Liberal Democrats welcome particularly the Commission 's proposals of yesterday for a Council Regulation to freeze the assets of terrorist groups .
We note its request for urgency and will be pushing this morning within the committee I have the honour to chair to make a recommendation to Parliament this afternoon to adopt those proposals .
I hope that the Committee of Permanent Representatives meeting this morning will add its request for urgency to that of the Commission .
The need for action in this area throws into sharp relief the weaknesses and the contradictions of the European Union post-Amsterdam .
These were not dealt with properly at Nice .
I hope they will be dealt with at Laeken and through the convention which will be established .
Commissioner Patten yesterday rightly lamented the inability of the European Union to act fast in situations like this and thus to enjoy the confidence of its Member States and to coordinate the policies of its Member States in an area where a supranational threat requires a supranational response .
At times like this the Union must act fast , but finds it cannot act fast .
The mechanisms of the third pillar leave Mr bin Laden laughing all the way to the cash machine .
I challenge the national governments to explain to our citizens why Europe has been incapable of acting fast because of the curious and complicated mechanisms of the third pillar .
When we act fast we find that we need urgency and urgency frequently leads to bad law .
We cannot continue to adopt the necessary security measures for our citizens in a way which is infelicitous for the Union 's institutions , incomprehensible to our citizens and ineffective because it allows for no proper legal , democratic or administrative control of decisions .
I hope that the convention set up by Laeken will look at invoking Article 42 of the TEU to bring these policy areas fully within the core competences of the Union .
Many measures will be needed in the coming months .
Commissioner Vitorino has provided us with an anti-terrorism road map outlining such measures .
Clearly , in our consideration of these , a delicate balance will need to be struck between the security needs of our citizens and the civil liberties which make our democracy what it is .
The President-in-Office said this morning that we should not be blown off course on our other agendas .
I agree with him .
Those agendas include our agenda to consolidate citizens ' rights within the Union and our agenda of anti-discrimination .
Liberals in this House will defend , with the President-in-Office , the rights of EU citizens .
The House has received a proposed regulation on the freezing of assets .
That regulation could potentially , depending on its implementation , have a disastrous effect on many legitimate Muslim-owned businesses .
Therefore Liberals will be calling for a sunset clause in that regulation giving it a limited life to make sure that it is not being abused in its implementation .
We look forward to proposals from the Council for the involvement of the European Parliament in determining the names that will be put on the list in the annex to that regulation .
In conclusion , Article 6 says that the Union is founded on rights .
The Charter defines those rights and we hope that the convention will agree to insert the Charter fully into the Treaties .
Commissioner , the European Union is facing several major challenges , which it will have to meet as quickly as possible if it wants to mount an effective , coherent and long-term campaign against terrorism , with particular reference to breaking up the terrorist networks .
Several colleagues have already discussed the first challenge , namely to avoid a clash of civilisations with the Islamic world .

In that context , let me take advantage of Mr Michel 's presence and congratulate him on his diplomatic activity over the past weeks , which , I believe , is bound to produce positive results in terms of establishing a very broad coalition against terrorism and its supporters .
Creating a very broad coalition means , of course , securing the participation of as many countries as possible , but without losing sight of the fact that our enemies ' enemies are not always our friends and realising that no state that forms part of this coalition is exempt from its duties in regard to democracy , the protection of human rights and respect for minorities .
I am thinking in particular of Russia and China , which are of course important players but also cause us serious concern in this respect .
The second challenge , and it is certainly not insignificant , is to strengthen police and judicial cooperation without compromising individual rights and freedoms .
In fact here , in the European Union , the parliamentary control is totally inadequate .
I therefore think , and I believe we agree fairly unanimously , that it is important to include judicial and police cooperation in the first pillar .
That would certainly be one answer .
Furthermore , at international level , we urgently need to set up the International Criminal Court , a process that has been underway for several years but is now marking time .
Let me point out that we vitally need this kind of court to try crimes against humanity , such as those committed in New York and Washington .
We will have to mount a large-scale diplomatic action to persuade as many states as possible to support this project , in particular the United States , which is after all a vital player .
The third challenge is the problem of depriving the terrorist networks of their means of action , both financial and technical .
We have already raised the subject of financing ; we have a draft directive on money laundering that is currently making little progress and I think an effort needs to be made in the dialogue between the Council and Parliament to ensure that this directive is adopted quickly .
Moreover , we must realise that this is a first step ; it does not go far enough but it is a determining step .
In the long term , I am convinced we will be forced to take large-scale action to outlaw and abolish offshore banking and tax havens .
Money laundering is obviously an important weapon in the hands of international terrorist groups and international terrorist networks .
I was struck by some information , which has not been denied , to the effect that even before the New York and Washington attacks it appears that shares in some companies - and I am thinking in particular of the two American airline companies and several insurance companies that were affected by the attack - were jettisoned just before the attacks .
This could be regarded as insider dealing and I think that at the very least we need an international inquiry to check this information .
Finally , let me turn to the technical level , technical being , of course , a euphemism for arms .
Clearly the European Union will have to intensify its fight against illegal and uncontrolled exports of light arms and keep a close eye on the fundamental problem of the proliferation of chemical and bacteriological weapons .
I believe that we cannot avoid the need to take a longer-term look at the vulnerability of some of our technological tools to acts of terrorism .
I am thinking , for example , of energy , of the risks posed by nuclear power stations , the majority of which are highly vulnerable to the types of action committed in the United States .
Madam President , once again , we declare our condemnation of any form of terrorism , whatever its source .
As well as destroying human life , terrorism takes any possibility or capacity for democratic initiative away from the huge numbers of men and women who are fighting to change the unjust social and economic system of this world .
Moreover , we condemn any attempt to assert the non-existent superiority of the moral , cultural or political systems of the communities of the European Union over other communities .
We believe that , at this moment in history , one of the ways in which the European Union can combat and isolate any form of violence is to make a concerted effort to achieve the objective of giving the peoples of Israel and Palestine two autonomous , sovereign States , as stipulated in all those UN resolutions which Israel has been violating for years .
The internal security of the Union must be reinforced - and I agree with much of what Mr Watson said - but always and only in respect for fundamental rights and the constraints of the rule of law .
Therefore , any extension of the competences or spheres of operation of bodies such as Europol or Eurojust must go hand in hand with the creation of a system of judicial and , most importantly , democratic controls , with Parliament playing an active role .
Any attempt to use the danger represented by terrorism to restrict or eliminate , by any means including Union or national legislative instruments , the huge democratic waves of dissent and opposition to the dominant social and economic system which are now sweeping through Europe and the world , must therefore be rejected , just as those legislative practices also referred to by Mr Barón Crespo such as the Italian laws on international letters rogatory , which are of practical assistance to terrorist and organised crime groups , must be condemned .

We hope that the fight against terrorism , which is a crime against humanity , will increasingly be seen as the responsibility of the entire international community , that is of the UN , rather than the responsibility of a small number of wealthy , powerful nations who often use their wealth and power not to combat terrorism and its causes but to consolidate their economic and political power .
The fact that the majority of the people in the world live in a state of despair , poverty and underdevelopment can never justify terrorism - never . This situation must be fought and eradicated by action , not just formal declarations , if we want our world to be at peace .
This is another area in which we must take action if we genuinely want to eliminate terrorism .
Mr President , EU leaders met in Ghent on 21 September to evaluate how the Union should react to the horrific terrorist attacks in America .
I welcome the solidarity which all EU leaders showed with the American government and the American people in their time of mourning and grief .
I also very much welcome the concrete plan of action that EU leaders are now going to implement in an effort to tackle international terrorism head-on .
But let me be clear about one point .
As a result of the terrorist attacks on 11 September it is now clear to us all that people are willing to engage in well-organised suicide missions to further their own political goals .
That means , in the simplest terms , that we are going to have to implement wide-ranging measures if we are going to be in a position to defeat the scourge of international terrorism .
In line with the conclusions of the Tampere Summit , EU leaders are committed to introducing a European arrest warrant , designed to supplant the current system of extradition in Europe .
Easing extradition , while protecting civil rights , is an important weapon in the fight against terrorism , and in particular within the Union , where free movement of persons exists .
The United Nations Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism is also going to be ratified in all Member States of the European Union .
Our finance ministers are going to bring forward proposals outlining a timetable for the implementation of the draft directive on the prevention of the use of the financial system for the purpose of money laundering .
The financial task force run by the OECD will be broadened to cover the issue of combating money laundering .
There is agreement to implement the framework directive permitting the freezing of criminal assets within the Union .
There has also been agreement on paying closer attention to the draft directive on insider dealing so as to guarantee that all activities linked to terrorism come under the auspices of the directive .
Intelligence agencies within the Member States of the Union , together with Europol , must work together more closely in terms of exchanging intelligence information if the terror networks operating in Europe are to be broken .
Finally , fanatical terrorism is difficult to defeat , but we must be prepared to be determined and vigorous in the counter-terrorism measures that we introduce .
We must all work together .
A united front , spearheaded by the Union and the United States , will be the only means of enabling us to defeat these cold-blooded and ruthless murderers .
Mr President , the summit is now to discuss the composition of the Convention that is to draft the EU ' s constitution .
A majority of MEPs want to see the European Parliament ' s representation doubled from 16 to 30 .
The argument is made in terms of equality with the national parliaments which each had two Members in the Charter Convention , making a total of 30 .
The name of my political group refers to a ' Europe of Democracies ' in order to emphasise that we want democracy in the individual countries and democratic control of the EU .
Democracies can govern the EU jointly , but there is no European people , as such , to have given the European Parliament a mandate to negotiate a new constitution for the EU .
My group and the intergroup SOS Democracy instead proposes that we let each individual national parliament present proposals for the next treaty and then let representatives of the national parliaments prepare the draft treaty that is to replace the Treaty of Amsterdam .
The Commission , Parliament and the governments could be observers in such an assembly .
We would , at the same time , call upon the prime ministers to pledge that the next treaty will be subject to referendums in all the Member States .
A treaty adopted in a referendum could bear the insignia ' more democracy ' rather than ' more Union ' .
We should like to create a slimmer EU with greater freedom for the Member States : an open and democratic EU that is close to the people and is governed by electorates and elected representatives in the Member States ; a more flexible Europe , open to the candidate countries and to all other European nations .
' A democratic EU ' sounds all well and good , but it can only come about when there is a European public .
A living democracy requires a common language , culture , media , treasury of songs and sense of internal interdependence : in short , a European people .
A ' Europe of democracies ' is the art of the possible .
The EU should be put on a slimming course and the focus shifted to cross-border matters which we cannot control as individual nations .
In that way , there would be no loss of democracy but a benefit in terms of shared influence , and the people of Europe would vote in favour of the next treaty .
Would they do so today , Mr President-in-Office of the Council ?
Dare you allow the Belgians to vote on the Treaty of Nice ?
Mr President , Mr President of the Council , Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck , Mr Barnier , ladies and gentlemen , first a word on the defence aspect .
Much has been said about air safety and security , many measures have been taken at European level .
Curiously , though , there is not a word about our secret services ; in fact , if there are a number of organisations that did not work , at any rate in the 15 Member States , they certainly include our secret services .
Today we see them digging away and finding out all sorts of things .
Perhaps it would have been better if they had discovered some of them beforehand .
They cost us dear .
Nobody is quite sure what they do ; sometimes we wonder whether they do anything .
No doubt that too could be a subject worth considering at European level and subjecting to parliamentary control , for they can present a risk : so long as we leave them total freedom of action , they will sometimes take inappropriate action .
Turning to the offensive aspect , yesterday the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Michel , provided the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy with a great deal of information .
He strongly emphasised the value of dialogue .
However , I think that unless this dialogue is accompanied by a political project , it may risk merely reinforcing certain positions .
We are currently endeavouring to forge an anti-terrorist coalition .
There are , in my view , two main risks .
Mr Poettering highlighted one of them : the measures to combat terrorism risk - and it is more than a risk , since they have already produced some very adverse results - provoking and encouraging state terrorism .
Mr Poettering specifically stated - and I thank him because authorised voices in his country , like that of Mr Schröder , seemed to agree with Mr Putin , who has still not provided us with a shred of evidence that the Chechens were responsible for the Moscow attacks , a point Mr Lannoye also emphasised - that it can be tempting to use this great anti-terrorist battle to settle a few scores at home , in Tibet for the Chinese , in Chechnya for the Russians , etc .


That is an aspect we must bear in mind .


The other issue is the Arab world .
There has been much criticism of certain statements that were made .
I believe we all agree that this is not a clash of civilisation between Islam and Christianity but , obviously , a clash of civilisation between democracy and non-democracy and that we have to take the offensive in that conflict .
We must help all those people in the Arab countries , in the Muslim countries , who are fighting , often at the price of their freedom , at the price of torture , and often at the price of death ; and this Parliament , our European Union , is certainly not doing enough in that respect .
Examples such as Morocco and Jordan show that the Arab countries can move towards democracy .
Other countries that might have gone the same way have in fact done the opposite , such as Tunisia : in fact , it would not take much to change the course in that country , which has a ruling class , a cultured class , an education system , and which recognises the rights of women , the equal rights of men and women .
In that respect our policy is aiding and abetting Mr Ben Ali in consolidating a regime that is moving further away from the rule of law every day and is becoming enclosed in a vicious circle of state gangsterism .
An offensive policy means supporting the people of Tunisia who are working for the rule of law , for freedom .
Mr President , the MPF delegation members approve both the ' solidarity and cooperation with the United States ' and the ' European policy ' headings of the action plan against terrorism adopted by the extraordinary European Council of 21 September .
However , we feel the practical value of introducing a European arrest warrant and a common definition of terrorism have been rather overestimated .
Similarly , it may seem a good idea in theory to give Europol new powers , but this organisation is not doing very well as it is and first we would have to call for an independent and objective audit of the way it operates .
But these are all secondary issues .
Overall , we approve the Council 's conclusions .
In particular , we welcome the establishment of Eurojust , which is to develop forms of judicial and police cooperation and create synergy between the existing systems instead of trying to demolish them .
Like the Council , we also call for the speedy ratification of all existing international conventions , like the convention on the financing of terrorism , whose implementation has been seriously delayed .
However , in spite of all that , Mr President , we are still not happy .
That brings me to my main point .
Although the Council adopted long lists of actions to be undertaken , they remain one-off measures and the European Union is still not really prepared to examine its own conscience .
It would be difficult to deny that the inquiry into the 11 September attacks is currently concentrating on Europe and that it shows that , for years now , the terrorists have been centring their preparations in Europe , which they have used as their base .
All this is not pure chance .
The day after the attacks , a French newspaper interviewed the current president of Eurojust , Mrs Coninsx , asking her the following question , and I quote from the article : ' is the loose Islamist conglomeration strongly established in Europe ? '
Mrs Coninsx , head of Eurojust , replied : ' Europe may act as a logistical fallback for these terrorists .
It is , indeed , fairly easy to cross frontiers because of the Schengen area ' .
Everyone knows that .
It is true for the terrorists , but it is also true for fissile materials , it is true for stolen works of art , it is true for illegal immigrants , etc .
In fact it was only yesterday and in this very place that I accused the Commission of all too often concealing the problems of illegal immigration .
Europol informs us that 500 000 illegal immigrants enter EU territory every year , a figure that I actually think is an underestimate .
At any rate , it means that millions of foreigners live on our soil permanently and illegally .
So let me ask you : if countries let in millions of foreigners without discovering them and allow them to live there illegally , can they be regarded as in control of their territory ?
Obviously you will all say ' no ' .
It is now up to the Council , and the Council alone , to issue strong instructions in order to restore some balance .
The President of the Council has rightly said that the fight against terrorism will be global and sustained .
We have to draw all the necessary conclusions from that , discard outdated points of view , give priority to security , review all the old strategies that are no longer appropriate and begin by admitting that controls do not prejudice freedom of movement ; while they harm criminals they protect citizens ' freedoms .
The Council must , therefore , call immediately for a list of all the documents that need reviewing from a security point of view and , in particular , that disastrous Article 62 ( 1 ) of the Treaty of Amsterdam , which promises a total absence of any kind of control of individuals at the internal frontiers five years after its entry into force .
We need a general review plan , of which the Council must be directly in charge .
That means we need to review Article 67 of the Treaty of Amsterdam ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Since the attacks of 11 September , the world has been on tenterhooks .
People are shocked .
They feel for the victims and those left behind , and their own sense of security has reached an all-time low .
People expect their governments to guarantee their safety .
They realise that this is not wholly possible but they are asking for efficient and conclusive action , and rightly so .
Anyone who is responsible for security these days has a complex task to fulfil .
The need for true , European integration and international coordination has been brought into focus more than ever , both in words and deeds .
Mr President , I very much hope that you will be able to carry out your action plan of 21 September effectively , and that the Belgian Presidency will be able to take specific decisions in this connection .
We have all asserted that the attacks were not so much directed at innocent victims as at the symbols of freedom , democracy and human rights , including the right to life .
Nobody will deny that the European Parliament too is a symbol of these values .
Of course , we do not want to proclaim ourselves as targets , nor do we want to spread panic , but many MEPs are worried , as already stated by group chairman , Mr Poettering .
In Strasbourg , the entrances and the immediate surroundings of this building are under police surveillance .
In Brussels , however , we are even denied the illusion of security .
If , moreover , we infer from the words of the Belgian Minister for the Interior here that he sees no indication of a need for tighter security , then we have a real reason to worry .
For terrorists do not give warnings , something which a Minister for the Interior should realise .
That is why , Mr President-in-Office of the Council and Minister for Foreign Affairs , I would like to ask you to persuade your Minister for the Interior and the police in Belgium to think again .
Not only in the interests of the safety of the MEPs of the 15 Member States , but also in the interests of their colleagues , their visitors , the safety of the city , which is the capital of Europe , and in the interest of the values for which we all stand .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , what are Europe 's tasks in these times ?
First , Europe must support the victim against the aggressor .
We hold to our treaty commitments .
We salute the firm and considered attitude of the United States government .
We also welcome the European Council 's expression of solidarity with the USA .
All of you must make it your concern that Europe is not divided into doves and hawks !
Secondly , the European Union must play its part in forging a worldwide political alliance against terrorism .
We appreciate what you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , with Mr Solana and Mr Patten , have undertaken not only in the Arab countries but also in Russia .
We ask that you continue your efforts as intermediaries in the Middle East , above all between Israel and the Palestinians .
They are in the best interests of us all .
Thirdly , we must , join together in reinforcing our internal security .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , it is regrettable that the European Council , and the Council of Interior and Justice Ministers as well , have only now got around to partially implementing plans that already existed and had been thoroughly worked out .
We expect action against terrorism , not reactions to terrorist attacks .
In doing this , Europe must continue to be an example of how to maintain the balance between the right to individual liberty and the security of all .
Fourthly , we want Europeans not to be distracted from their common commitment to a more just world order , in which law for all replaces force exerted by the few .
We are not making this effort for a more just world order solely out of a belief that we will thereby be depriving terrorism of its breeding ground .
On the contrary , we seek a more just world order because that reflects our values and our dignity as Europeans - a dignity we share with all the peoples of the earth !
Fifthly , if it is true to say that the world is no longer what it was before 11 September , then the European Union cannot stay as it is .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , we welcome your intentions for Ghent and Laeken .
We hope they do not remain only as intentions but that what you have put before us will indeed become the opinion of the Fifteen and a basis for our further work .
Europe could be broken by the crisis now facing the world .
It could , though , equally , emerge stronger from it .
It is at this crossroads that you and all of us will be standing in Ghent and Laeken .
In this crisis , Europe can - and I would add - must show its citizens what the European Union is really worth .
By this yardstick you and all of us will be judged .
Mr President , 11 September will go down in history .
It will create a new framework for our daily lives and our political work .
The subtitles on CNN have read ' America at war ' for a long time now .
Europe has been there .
Europe has been at war .
Europe has experience of being a theatre of war .
The United States has helped us in the past , and we in turn must therefore , of course , help the United States now .
However , Europe also knows that wars are not won with weapons alone .
Conflicts cannot be prevented with weapons .
Wars cannot be won with weapons alone and , above all , peace cannot be built with the aid of weapons alone .
It may be the case that weapons are necessary , but we must be clear that other things are also required .
I should like to highlight two things that are necessary to the European agenda .
The first is the urgent proposal we are debating at present .
It is regrettable that it is only now that we are debating such a proposal .
I wish to endorse what other speakers have said .
I should like to emphasise that there is , of course , a reason why we are only discussing the proposal now .
Far too many people have too many financial interests in this matter .
There are too many people who do not wish to reveal what is in their hidden accounts . That is why it has been impossible for Europe to do anything before now , and it may well also prove quite difficult now .
The second thing I want to say is that , if we do not gather grassroots support for further European cooperation , we shall lack the communal spirit needed to stand firm against terrorists .
Mr President , yesterday , Mr Nielson stood here and reported on the situation in Afghanistan .
Afghanistan was on the list of forgotten countries before 11 September .
Now , however , the situation has become all but catastrophic .
The World Bank has produced a report showing that between 20000 and 40 000 children per day will die of hunger because of the economic recession caused by the events of 11 September .
In the EU ' s Member States , we have received a report to the effect that foreigners and refugees are being persecuted .
This is shown by the Monitoring Centre on Racism in its report .
We are , of course , all appalled at what happened on 11 September , but what these events showed us first and foremost was , of course , that the world has shrunk and that no one is safe .
The American missile shield would not have helped in this situation .
Nor did all the American military hardware help , either .
Now , we are moving on to talk about the need to strengthen democracy and dialogue .
However , the anti-terrorism package we have debated - not the one concerning the economy , but the other - reeks of distrust .
The ambition to strengthen the police and intelligence services completely overshadows the fight to strengthen human rights , democracy and the rule of law .
We will not accept increased powers , either for Europol or the intelligence services , until we have got them under democratic control .
Combating terrorism must not overshadow freedoms of expression and assembly .
I should like to ask whether there is anyone who believes that our world will become safer when we prohibit certain organisations .
Terrorism , killing , robbery and the destruction of property are to be forbidden , Well , they are already forbidden .
Those responsible must be caught , and they must be punished .
I do not wish to defend anti-democratic organisations , but the question is whether our world will become safer if these organisations go underground and are made illegal .
There are limits to the number of problems that can be solved by legislation alone , and I think that the first package is evidence of more haste , less speed .
Our task must be to remove the basis for terrorism .
I therefore think that the Troika initiative was a step in the right direction and one that favoured dialogue and the creation of a broad alliance to combat terrorism .
However , there are problems in the alliance .
When China demands , as a condition of its being a part of the alliance , that we close our eyes to what is happening in Tibet ; when Russia demands that we close our eyes to events in Chechnya ; when Turkey demands that we close our eyes to the fate of the Kurds ; and when Israel demands that we close our eyes to the situation of the Palestinians , then we do not have a safe world .
There must be security for all , including oppressed people and also the 20 000 to 40 000 children who will die of hunger next year .
Mr President , the writing on Commander Massoud ' s tombstone reads : " Here lies a man who was like an angel : let him guide you .
His name is Massoud " .
We must follow him and defend those who are fighting terrorism , trying to restore their people ' s freedom , democracy and human rights .
Yet we did not help Commander Massoud when he came to Strasbourg in April to condemn the crimes of the Taliban .
Let us at least help the Afghan people and the civilised world to overcome terrorists and fundamentalists .
However , our statements of condemnation must be followed by practical action : words alone are not enough .
Therefore , we wonder why it is that the terrorists ' bank accounts are only being frozen now , if the governments and intelligence were already aware of these accounts before .
Why have the Internet sites which continue to promote terrorist initiatives and maintain links with subversive cells throughout the world , recruiting new terrorists all the while , not yet been condemned and closed ?
We call for the Community funding and financing programmes aiding those governments which are not joining the alliance to combat terrorism and , in any case , continue to harbour terrorists on their territory , to be frozen immediately .
Mr President , the possible establishment of a Convention is taking up most of the attention in the debate on the future of the European Union .
This morning , I would like to draw your attention to another point , namely the timeframe for the preparation of the next IGC .
It is understandable that this Parliament does not want an IGC in 2004 , for that is the year when elections will be held and the Commission steps down .
However , would 2003 , as Parliament suggested , be a good alternative ?
In the Netherlands , we have a saying ' haastige spoed is zelden goed ' ( more haste , less speed ) .
When one considers the weighty subjects on the agenda , it very much confirms that more time should be taken to reflect .
Moreover , the topics of the IGC are sufficiently interesting to be the subject of the election battle .
In addition , it is also necessary to give the applicant states a vote in this important debate .
In short , 2003 is far too early and 2004 is far too hectic .
Could the Council not decide to hold the IGC in 2005 ?
Mr President , the attacks in New York and in Washington also claimed many of our own citizens .
That means , therefore , that there is more than simply a display of solidarity on our part .
We are united in our fate .
It is therefore logical that Article 5 of the NATO Treaty has been invoked , which means that we are involved in NATO responses every step of the way .
We carry full responsibility , and we must therefore be aware of the reactions that are heading our way .
All the terrorists wanted to attain was chaos and unreasoning revenge .
The response to that must be measured and specifically targeted at the people and organisations responsible .
The security instruments must be comprehensively reinforced .
That is why I agree that Europol and Eurojust should clearly be given more scope and be integrated into a constitutional state structure .
The European arrest warrant , the common definition of terrorism and organised crime , more flexible extradition : these are all vital instruments .
Member State Ministers who tire themselves out producing objections will undoubtedly be considered ' useful idiots ' - to use a term from the cold war era .
What more is needed to enable us to safeguard our common internal security , whereby the sovereignty of Member States is used to benefit the citizens in a way that does not conflict with their interests ?
Every Member State should realise that if they offer sanctuary to criminals who seek the necessary peace and quiet to plan their crimes , they themselves can become targets .
The improvement of international relations also strengthens international security .
That is why we need to make good use of the structures in place , such as the Mediterranean dialogue and the United Nations .
Contact with certain sections of the Afghan population is necessary , particularly in the interests of providing relief to those in need .
The resolution which came about under the competent guidance of Mr Collins receives our full support .
We would only like to adopt one single amendment from the old , socialist resolution , and replace Article 26 on Gibraltar with our own wording .
Apart from that , we give our wholehearted approval to the joint outcome .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I will reply quickly to some of the questions ; unfortunately I have to be fairly brief because I cannot stay till the end of the sitting .
Let me begin with some further information about the convention .
Several Members raised this matter .
I think it is important to say , since the question was asked , that the principle of holding a convention to prepare for the IGC has , I believe , been accepted .
It has also , of course , been agreed that representatives of the governments , the Commission , the national parliaments and the European Parliament , that is , a quadripartite group , will take part .
This participation could take the following form : government representatives - possibly numbering 15 - 16 MEPs , 30 members of national parliaments and one Commission representative .
However , I am not going to start a debate about numbers at this point .
What is important to remember is that the number of participants in this convention must be reduced somewhat .
It must not be exponential .
Of course , we could try to please everyone , but then we would end up with a convention that was not viable .
I believe we have to remember that .
The Laeken European Council will , no doubt , or , at least , that seems the most likely road , appoint a president , assisted by a bureau made up of at least one member of each component of the convention and assisted by a secretariat .



The convention 's brief would not be to adopt a final text but , at this stage - I think that answers Mr Barón Crespo 's question as to whether these are proposals or whether these are options - simply to decide whether we are in favour of options rather than proposals , leaving it , of course , to the bodies concerned to choose from among these options , since options are never more than variations on proposals .

I am not embracing any one point of view : I am simply describing things as they are .
If it was just up to me , believe me we would go much further than proposals .
We would be more radical .
However , I simply have to adjust to toeing the presidency 's line ...
So I am telling you what I believe I have to tell you for the sake of transparency .
I can do no more .
The convention should become operational as soon as possible , during the Spanish Presidency , that is , during the first half of 2002 .
Let me also touch on two questions relating to this convention : it is important that you remember them but also that you can discuss them and make your views on the subject known .
First of all , it is important to gain the support of the candidate countries .
We saw a fairly strong convergence of views in Genval on the need to involve the candidate countries in the convention .
Although , in effect , we are moving towards giving them a status and right of say there , obviously we still have to define the precise procedures for their representation .
Here , the presidency is putting forward three possible formulas : representation modelled from the outset on that of the Member States , namely one representative of each government and two members of each national parliament - that is conceivable ; or one representative per country for the duration of the convention 's activities ; or , the third formula , progressive representation , consisting of a single representative until the accession treaty has been signed , then representation in line with that of the Member States after the signature .
Representatives of the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions could also be invited as observers .
Those are the ideas now on the table .
The next question is how to involve civil society .
On the whole , the idea of a civil forum was well received by the delegations .
Nevertheless , some questions came up about the composition of this forum , that is , the selection of representatives of civil society - its organisational procedures and the nature of its links with the convention , which could , for example , take the form of hearings or a variety of other formulas .
In the presidency 's view , this forum could take either of two forms .
Either it could be like an enlarged assembly , in which case one would need to define its exact composition , role and modus operandi ; or it could be a structured network , made up of organisations representing civil society , established at European level .
The organisations making up that network would be kept officially informed of the activities of the convention and their written contributions would form part of the official documentation forwarded to members of the convention .
They would be heard by the convention , in accordance with procedures to be defined , and , where appropriate , they could also be consulted by the convention on specific issues .
If that option were adopted , it would probably be advisable to appoint a coordinator at political level , who could be chosen either by the Laeken European Council or by the convention itself .
That is the additional information I wanted to give you on the convention and you are , of course , welcome to come back to us with any ideas this might suggest to you or inspire in you , since that is the purpose of this kind of exchange of views .
I am entirely open to any comments , ideas or suggestions on the subject .
Several Members raised the issue of security in Brussels , so I will address their concern .
I do not think there are any difficulties in principle , except for one aspect where we do come up against certain problems - I will endeavour to analyse this matter and take a closer look - namely the question of unconditional access to Belgian territory .
I do believe this could pose a number of problems .
That aside , it looks as though we can certainly reach an agreement fairly soon .
I promise I will discuss it with the Home Affairs and Justice Ministers immediately after my return so that I can give you practical answers to your questions as quickly as possible .
Let me highlight something that has emerged from our debates and to which I too am paying close attention .
If we take a whole range of measures to combat terrorism effectively , they will necessarily - and we must not pretend otherwise - involve the risk of taking measures that curtail freedoms .

Mr Barón Crespo said so and Mr Lannoye also drew our attention to it .
I have heard statements in this Chamber that show that some people have not entirely understood this : for instance , if I had to translate Mr Berthu 's programme into action , it is clear that this would lead straight to a society which restricts freedoms , which would have nothing to do , let me say , with the quality of life , with the democratic quality of our societies .
That is the way it is , that is my opinion and I am sharing it with you .
I think we must be very watchful here , for this really is an important issue .
We cannot bring back the olden days on the pretext of fighting terrorism .
I think that would be very dangerous , so I am not in favour of it .
I believe the difficulty we will keep encountering will be , precisely , how to evaluate our margin for manoeuvre constantly .
But let us please not give in to a security phobia , because sooner or later we would all end up as victims and that would be democracy 's loss .
Mr Lannoye and several others made a most important point in relation to our foreign policy and I entirely agree with him here : the enemies of our enemies are not necessarily our friends .
Of course , I agree with him .
It is true that , under cover of this kind of consensual coalition , necessarily based on immediate needs and , admittedly , to some extent also on feelings that are justified , it might well be tempting to overlook , to look away from or to forget certain aspects .
I think it was yesterday , in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy that I was asked whether I had put any questions to my interlocutors about State terrorism .
I think we must not , indeed , lose sight of that aspect in considering our approach , our European commitment and our values .
It is true that we will have to be very vigilant here too ; in other words , sometimes we must not forget that countries , organisations and bodies that form part of the coalition should also , to some extent , render account for some of their own practices , forms of behaviour and policies .
I therefore agree that we must avoid any kind of naive optimism in this respect and not forget to continue to fight for and campaign for a democratic society wherever possible in the world .
I therefore agree that we must strengthen the role of the International Criminal Court .
As time goes by , we come to realise that it is absolutely crucial to have that vital tool at our disposal .
I was asked whether I am in favour of incorporating the Charter of Fundamental Rights into a constitution .
You all know my views on this .
Unfortunately , I do not think everybody is quite ready for it yet .
Nevertheless , I believe that there are all sorts of arguments that can be put forward and that we must , therefore , pursue this debate .
We will get there in the end .
Another important aspect on which I was questioned was the danger of curtailing freedoms .
It is true that if we take a range of measures - Members have referred to the freezing of assets and various other measures - we must ensure that , however urgent , they are accompanied by a systematic evaluation process , preferably conducted soon after their adoption , whatever their nature .
I think that it will , of course , be necessary for urgent measures to be re-evaluated fairly early on and fairly regularly .
We must avoid a practice often seen in some countries - and I know this happens in Belgium - where temporary measures are still being applied 50 years later .
So I support those who call for guarantees .
In the event of urgent measures , we must indeed lay down a procedure of regular re-evaluation of those measures .
Apart from that , I basically agree with the ideas and concerns that have been expressed .
Mr Dupuis spoke of the effectiveness of the secret services .
I must admit that I know little about the secret services , since they are secret .
I suppose that , from that point of view , they certainly are effective .
I would simply appeal for more regular exchanges of information , deeper integration and closer coordination .
I think others will agree with me on this point .
I also replied to Mr Dupuis on the question of the risk of encouraging State terrorism or , at any rate , concealing certain facts about certain countries .
I also agree that we must not abandon our action ; we must persevere and continue trying to persuade certain countries to move towards democracy .
We must not conceal that aspect or pretend the problem no longer exists in certain Arab countries .
We must nevertheless continue to bring it up .
I , personally , am convinced that we must strengthen political dialogue wherever we can , a political dialogue without taboos .
I think it is quite possible to impose that dialogue in our relations .
It is a minimum condition and , during my visit to Iran , for example , we agreed to set up a European Union-Iran group , which would have human rights questions as the only item on its agenda .
This was accepted . We definitely need to take more initiatives of this kind .
Ladies and gentlemen , Mr President , I believe I have answered as fully as possible although I may well have omitted some aspects .
Let me say , however , that , in general , I broadly share the concerns you expressed .
I heard them clearly . In any case , I undertake to pass them on to the quarters concerned .
I will do my utmost to transmit faithfully the information , ideas , criticisms and suggestions Parliament has offered me today .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the European Council of 21 September initiated the forthcoming review of our fundamental concepts .
Since 9 November 1989 Europe has known that the cold war is over ; but since 11 September 2001 the world has known that this cold war is over and it is now time to form global alliances against terrorism .
Today the right to speak will go to those who can demonstrate their full solidarity with the United States and commit themselves unreservedly to this fight against terrorism .
But that also means forbidding any sideslipping within our own ranks , for neither obscurantism nor fanaticism are permissible weapons in the fight against terrorism .
We will also have to inquire into the root causes .
The European Union knows that not all acts of terrorism are the consequence of poverty , but frustration and humiliation do feed terrorism .
We must , therefore , review our development policy again .
We must cancel the developing countries ' debt .
We must resume our work on light arms trafficking .
We must urge everybody to play their part in the multilateral structures .
Within our institutions , we must give ourselves the means to prevent all forms of conflict , for they are also a source of tension .
I do not believe this is the moment to drop one of Parliament 's initiatives , namely the prevention centre , which we are now told may be under threat .
The European Council showed that it was able to draw the consequences of the fight that lies ahead .
To mention only a few issues , let us turn first to the question of the financing of terrorism .
Yes , the Union put itself in a position where it could fight the Talibans ' money and freeze their assets , thanks to the regulation of 4 July 2001 .
Some European countries , including France , Germany and the United Kingdom , have already frozen these assets .
Yesterday the Commission proposed a new initiative .
Perhaps the Commissioner could tell us on what basis the Commission envisages the revision of that annex .
It is an important question because this is the first time Parliament has been consulted on measures of this kind .
Then there is the fight against money laundering , the fight against tax havens ; we will have to give new impetus to all these tasks on which the European Union has embarked .
These upheavals have come at a moment when the European Union is entering the final stage of its transition to the euro , when it is engaged in vital projects : enlargement , but also the definition of a genuine common foreign and security policy , the establishment of an area of freedom , security and justice .
These projects will be given a strong boost , circumstances will sweep away any hesitation , force us to be resolute .
But if we are to be able to seize this opportunity for Europe , Ghent will have to live up to our high expectations .
I can tell the Council representative that while we welcome the adoption of a convention , Parliament will not support a system of options .
On the other hand , Parliament will certainly support the Council when it comes to broadening the agenda of that convention , to asking useful questions , for instance whether we need to maintain the pillar structure .
What kind of presidency will the Union have ?
Mr President , it is only natural that the issue of the fight against terrorism should be given a certain amount of attention in Ghent .
The European Union has acted with impressive unity and decisiveness .
We can look forward to a long-term battle on several fronts , including the political and the legal fronts , with a sensitive balance regarding respect for legal rights .
In terms of the long view politically and economically , we may also be able to establish a better legal system with a stronger UN .
It is gratifying that the US has realised the importance of the UN and is paying its debts to that organisation .
Perhaps the EU can also get the US to ratify the protocol on the International Criminal Court .
Of course , we must also work in the long term to achieve peace and democracy throughout the Middle East .
In Ghent , enlargement will also be discussed .
The Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party believes it is vital that each country be assessed on its own merits and that the principle of differentiation be genuinely upheld .
That is a message I should like to send to the presidency .
Finally , when it comes to the Convention , I should like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council for the concrete explanations .
However , there is still a certain amount of concern in this area .
The Convention is not a debating club for talking in rather general terms about various alternatives regarding the future of Europe .
The Convention is not an alibi for the Council , but a serious and democratic partner in this discussion .
Regardless of its composition - I hope that the candidate countries will be given a strong role to play in this context - the Convention will contain a large number of hard-working parliamentarians who need to know that the work that is put in is taken very seriously .
Mr President , war is not the answer .
Our message of suffering for the victims should not turn into a war cry .
These were the main signals sent out by the thousands of American demonstrators who took to the streets of Washington last Saturday .
On our side of the Atlantic , tens of thousands of demonstrators in Athens , Rome , Berlin , Paris , Amsterdam , Prague , Barcelona , Stockholm , Istanbul and elsewhere raised their voices in protest against the warmongering plans of the American and European imperialists .
What has happened is that those who systematically engage in state terrorism , those who made the Bin Ladens and the KLA what they are , those who turned whole nations into terrorists have found a golden opportunity , following the hideous terrorist attack in the USA , to settle their accounts with anyone and everyone who opposes their world dominion .
At the same time , in the countries of the European Union and the United States , suppressive policing measures have been stepped up in order to gag anyone who stands up against or questions their anti-grass roots policy .
The President of the United States said that the war against ' terrorism ' will last a long time . The resistance of peace-loving grass-roots forces will be equally long-lasting .
We are certain that the justice of peace will prevail against the barbarism of imperialist war .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , although I fully support the conclusions of the extraordinary European Summit in Brussels , I can only condemn the amount of time it is taking Europe to make a practical response to terrorism top priority .
It took thousands of deaths for us to be able to come to an agreement on establishing the European search and arrest warrant ; it took thousands of innocent victims for us to be able to agree on defining a common strategy to combat terrorism .
Only now is the Union being called upon to participate more actively in the prevention and stabilisation of regional conflicts .
Where was Europe - we wonder - when the Mediterranean sea was seen as the border between two opposing worlds , between Islamic fundamentalism and religious tolerance ?
Will the Union please realise , at last , that we can only define a European security and defence policy if we take the Mediterranean as our starting point .
I live on the farthest edge of European territory in the Mediterranean , just a few metres away from the most advanced NATO base - the Sigonella base - and a few minutes away from the Middle East by ' plane .
I know how willing the moderate Arab and Muslim world is to cooperate ; I met the mayor of Jerusalem and the mayor of Gaza last year .
Well then , I am convinced that it is now up to Europe genuinely to start to turn what have hitherto just been good intentions into practical action .
There are quite a few worrying messages from the Brussels Summit .
First of all , it is glaringly obvious that the summit reflects a shockingly small degree of self-knowledge , which also characterises the United States ' s government .
There is no understanding of the fact that there is a political background to the horrific massacres on 11 September .
In keeping with this small degree of self-knowledge , at odds with the insights of international conflict researchers , alliances for combating terrorism are being entered into with the world ' s most effective State-authorised terrorists .
Russian genocide in Chechnya is being legitimised , and alliances entered into with oligarchies in Pakistan , Uzbekistan and Chechnya , not to mention Saudi Arabia .
Any intervention is legitimised in this way and , at the same time , attempts at international conflict resolution under the UN system , including the international administration of justice , are being set aside .
Moreover , the adoption of new police measures is tailored to the same pattern and based on the same low level of self-knowledge .
It is the end that justifies the means .
In this case , the means will deprive us of the very democracies we are supposed to be defending .
I believe it will subsequently be possible to say , ' The operation was a success , but the patient died . '
Mr President , Commissioner , representatives of the Council , I hope that the terrorist atrocity on 11 September had the same effect on the Council , that is to say the Interior and Justice Ministers , as it did on the Heads of State and Government , namely that of shaking them awake and bringing it home to them that national resentments and animosities have no place in the fight against terrorism .
I see these resolutions overall in a positive light .
We must , though , be able to expect a rapid start to be made on putting them into effect .
I also expect the Union at last to embrace the possibilities already open to it ; that the Member States will at last comply with their obligations and supply the necessary information to Europol in The Hague ; and that the counter-terrorist Conventions will at last be brought into force .
I also look forward to Europol being supplied with the personnel and technology it needs to its at last being put in a position to carry out an investigation into the state of terrorist networks in Europe and to a joint investigation team soon being set up .
What I look for from the Summit is that new projects will be called into being , such as intensive cooperation between Europol and the United States security services and the networking of police databases , ranging from Europol to Schengen via Olaf , so that these might be used against terrorism ; that Eurojust should become the reality to which Mr Poettering has just referred , working closely with Europol ; and that Europol should be developed in the direction of the first pillar , with authority to conduct investigations ; and that the intergovernmental level should be abandoned in favour of the European in closely circumscribed areas of organised crime .
In other words , to take this cooperation in security policy as an example , Europe has a great opportunity to bring the added value of the European Union home to its citizens .
Let us make use of this opportunity without delay !
Mr President , the tragic events of 11 September have shown , once again , how wide the gap is between the Europe that is and the Europe that ought to be .
The shock we felt at the inconceivable level of violence reached by terrorism must now give way to a practical endeavour to provide Europe with the political and institutional tools it needs to play a role combating terrorism and working towards peace and justice in the world .
We therefore welcome the decisions of the extraordinary European Council of 21 September in the field of judicial cooperation and home affairs and on combating money laundering .
Against this tragic backdrop , the decision of the Italian government and the majority supporting it to make changes to the judicial cooperation treaty with Switzerland appears even more serious and irresponsible , changes to its own code of criminal procedure which are in direct conflict with the commitments made at the extraordinary Council and the Justice and Home Affairs Council .
This law would mean that evidence gathered abroad could not be used in court proceedings and that , since this measure applies retrospectively , it would jeopardise hundreds of trials which are currently in progress , nullifying evidence already established .
It is this kind of decision which made the Public Prosecutor of Geneva say that this law is a disaster for international justice and that , in twelve years of judicial cooperation with countries throughout the world , he has never , ever seen rules like this adopted .
Since I feel that this is not the right place to express an opinion , I call upon the Commission , the Council and the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs to ascertain whether this measure is in line with the decisions of the extraordinary Summit .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as the mayor of New York , Rudolph Giuliani , stated before the United Nations General Assembly , the terrorist attack of 11 September was an attack on the very ideal of free , inclusive , civilised society and on its practice of openness and tolerance .
The attack will be unsuccessful only if we are able to enhance these characteristics rather than weaken them .
Our initial response , our initial reaction must be to switch off the psychological ' emergency ' mode and get a grip on our agenda .
Therefore , I welcome the commitment to be made at Ghent to proceed with the debates on the euro , enlargement and the political integration of Europe at Laeken and through the Convention .
It is in this sense that the fight against terrorism must be seen as part of a series of structural operations .
In the area of air safety , for example , we must proceed on two levels : on the one hand , there is an urgent need for a revision of the Regulation establishing the European Air Safety Authority , extending its responsibilities to include accident prevention and - if we can call it that - terrorism prevention ; on the other , we need incisive action from the International Civil Aviation Organisation to ensure that the rules we are seeking to adopt for Europe become rules which are binding upon the whole world .
Europe must be capable of taking the initiative in this and many other minor areas to express all that potential for peace and democracy which is its strength and must become the strength of the whole world .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think we Europeans should be clear in our own minds that we are going to be weighed in the balance in the times that lie ahead .
The United States of America and world public opinion will be looking to see whether we demonstrate our solidarity and our capacity to act in the face of the new challenges of international terrorism which have just become visible .
European effectiveness has hitherto often fallen at the hurdle of national sovereignty .
Effective joint action has often been blocked by invoking national sovereignty .
Now , national sovereignty is not an objective in itself , and certainly not if it tends to hinder rather than promote the defence of national independence against terrorists and the effective protection of citizens against terrorist attacks .
It is for that reason that the future will see us having to develop effective Community instruments and examining whether national sovereignty helps or hinders us in doing so .
Solidarity with the United States is a principle invoked on every side , and this is right and proper , as this attack has been not only on the United States but also on our fundamental values , as was intended .
That is why it is so perilous for a member of the Commission , namely Mr Nielson , to abandon Europeans ' solidarity as a community .
His remarks are dangerous because they blur responsibility for the terrorist action , transfer the guilt for it onto the victims , and pour scorn on the solidarity we affirm in the resolution on which we are voting .
These remarks , then , must be withdrawn .
We can expect Mr Nielson to apologise for them .
Mr President , it was as if Europe was drowsing .
Its one dream seemed to be comfort and peace .
Suddenly the shock of the brutal terrorist attacks in New York profoundly shook its confidence and its hedonism .
Europe suddenly felt vulnerable and unprepared .
After all , its hard-won fundamental freedoms were being threatened by mysterious terrorist networks , which nonetheless appeared to be dominated by Islamist religious proselytism .
This violent and anti-modernist proselytism is anti-Western by definition .
However , this does not authorise cultural cretinism and historic ignorance leading to an abusive fusion between Islam and the aberrant , irrational and sectarian assertions of the perpetrators of the attacks .
It was not only the United States , the target of these sinister attacks , which was put to the test .
Europe was also put to the test and the European Union has to do some deep soul-searching .
In the immediate aftermath , still in shock , the European Union proved equal to the occasion at the Brussels Summit .
It was fast , clear and precise in its emergency responses .
But , now what ?
Europe cannot in future act in such a spontaneous , opportunistic and superficial way .
Europe cannot be a plaything of destiny , a destiny plotted by others .
What has been established in Ghent and Laeken is that Europe should completely rethink its project and its role in light of the new world order and adopt a clear guideline for the troubled times ahead .
Without becoming unduly pessimistic about the human condition , Europe must be less ingenuous in the face of the dangers that will arise in the future .
Europe must unite more strongly on the economic level , the political level , the military level and in its internal security .
That is obvious .
But how is it to do so ?
What are its priorities beyond fighting relentlessly against terrorism ?
What are the new aims of the European project ?
Will enlargement continue to take place on the same terms ?
Will it not be necessary , from now on , to speed up the accession of , for example , Turkey to the European Union ?
Will it not be the most elementary common sense to give absolute priority to the strategy for the Mediterranean and provide new impetus to partnerships with the Muslim countries ?
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , that we support the anti-terrorist measures announced by the presidency , both these measures and any others needed , goes without saying .
We stand shoulder to shoulder with the United States in the global coalition against terrorism , although we have little advice to offer about the technical , policing or military measures which will need to be applied .
What we can do , however , is to speak with perhaps greater authority about the political preconditions to success .
No campaign of this sort and no war , at least no war in which democracies have taken part , has ever been able to create the necessary alliance of nations - because that is the alliance which counts , not the alliance of governments - without offering a vision of a better world at the end of the campaign .
Politically , we need to point out yet again that we support all the democratic regimes and , more to the point , that we reject any tyrannical regimes which may promise to help fight specific terrorist organisations but which , in the long term , work with secret services which collaborate with them like terrorist recruiting offices .
Socially , we need to recognise that environmental catastrophes , epidemics , poverty and misery threaten the security of the world and need to be dealt with as threats which are every bit as serious as terrorism .
We need to state that , in a globalised society , our wealth and our military power do not offer the man in the street any security .
The only realistic solution is to find ways of taking the tension out of social and ethnic fights , of reconciling all men of good faith , irrespective of nationality , religion , social position or ideology , in fact everyone who is determined to put an end to the scourges which inflict mankind and which , even if they do not result in terrorism , prepare the ground for terrorism and we need to remove this ground if we are to guarantee the security of our citizens .
Mr President , a great Italian writer , Oriana Fallaci , breaking years of voluntary silence , has written a major article seeking to stir the consciences of many Europeans involved in the fight against terrorism and to promote the values of freedom , democracy and tolerance throughout the world .
At a time when fresh threats are being made to American targets in Italy , it is the European Union ' s duty to take the lead in defending these values , which apply to all citizens .
That is why , while I support the decisions taken by the Council at Brussels , I feel that it is vital that , as we implement the inevitable specific military initiatives , we must step up political and economic initiatives as well .
In any case , I cannot remain silent regarding a controversial point raised in this Chamber : Mrs Napoletano ' s call for the Italian Parliament to be monitored by the Council is irrelevant and devoid of any legal basis .
I would remind Mrs Napoletano and Mr Barón Crespo that the Italian Parliament is sovereign , like all the parliaments in consolidated democracies .
The statements of the Chairman of the Group of the Party of European Socialists are , as far as we are concerned , extremely serious and unacceptable , for they amount to interference in the internal affairs of a Member State of the European Union .
And before making pronouncements on legislative affairs such as international letters rogatory , with which he is clearly unfamiliar , I would suggest that he read Article 3 of the European Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters , signed right here in Strasbourg , where he will find answers to his unfounded concerns : I would advise Mrs Napoletano , who also is clearly unfamiliar with this provision , to read it as well .

It would , in any case , be appropriate for the Chairman of a Parliamentary Group , and also for those holding positions of responsibility in the European institutions - I refer to the absent Mr Michel - not to make statements either of approval or condemnation in this Chamber on the internal affairs of a Member State .
Rather , we would like to hear what action the Belgian government intends to adopt , at last , to ensure the safety of the thousands of people who work within the European Parliament in Brussels , especially the staff based permanently on that site .
Declarations of intent must be followed by practical action .
Mr President , the conclusion and the action plan of the extraordinary Council offer a solid basis for a focused , measured , coordinated response to the attacks of 11 September .
The following are examples of the proposals which receive my full support : developing international judicial instruments , freezing the funding of terrorist networks and exchanging intelligence in conjunction with the US by setting up an anti-terrorist unit within Europol .
We are also pleased that the Council , the Commission and Parliament have spoken with one voice over the past three weeks , embarrassing slips by Commissioner Bolkestein and Prime Minister Berlusconi apart .
This suggests that European cooperation , both internally and externally , is growing up fast .
The weapon of new terrorism is fear and disruption , and hunger for power .
An effective line of attack protecting the international rule of law must spring from a worldwide coalition against terrorism under the aegis of the UN and on the basis of UN resolutions .
Provided that that coalition is based on international rule of law principles and not , as was the case in the past with the Taliban , by financing future enemies , for that is misguided Realpolitik .
I support a worldwide dignified response , irrespective of race , nationality or religion , proportional across the legal , political , diplomatic , financial , military and economic fields , whereby an appeal is made for extreme caution with regard to innocent lives .
Furthermore , we should not lose sight of the long-term perspective , particularly now .
Let there be no doubt about this : the direct causes of terrorism do not lie in creed or poverty . In the climate of globalisation , there are certainly links between economic development , contrasting poverty and trade .
For example , the World Bank expects that , as a result of the terrorist attacks , economic growth in the developing countries will drop from 5 % to 2 % .
The expected effects are enormous , with ten million additional people under the poverty line and between twenty to forty thousand more children under the age of five who will die .
If we fail to formulate adequate responses in the face of this harsh reality , we in Europe will be applying double standards .
Investing in worldwide security means taking safety measures , but it also calls for international solidarity , which is a basis for international cooperation and , along with this , a basis for the worldwide coalition against terrorism .
Mr President , terrorism is a scourge attacking and afflicting our societies .
It resorts to violence and terror in an effort to impose its views by force . At the same time it attacks the very core of democratic systems , namely our system of individual and collective freedoms .
Terrorists are aware that our democratic societies are more open and consequently more vulnerable . They therefore resort to the advantages offered by globalisation .
It follows that the response to the terrorist phenomenon must likewise be a response at global level .
In this connection , I should like to congratulate the Presidency-in-Office on convening the Extraordinary European Council at Brussels and on placing terrorism on the agenda for the next Council .
I think congratulations are also due to the European Commission on the initiatives it has proposed .
On the basis that there is no good terrorism as against bad terrorism , I believe that terrorists the world over need to be aware that there will be international resistance to put an end to this scourge .
I also feel that it is important for us all to appreciate that the existing balance between an individual ' s right to safety and the principles of legality and individual freedom which underpin our system of values cannot be altered . It is very important for us to understand that the horrendous attacks perpetrated on 11 September must not result in the eventual dilution of the culture of freedom in democratic countries .
Mr President , I wish to concentrate my remarks on the issue of terrorism .
I welcome the fact that we are building a worldwide alliance against terrorism , but I would argue very strongly that we also need to build a worldwide alliance against poverty , exploitation and oppression .
The battle against terrorism is above all a battle of values and a battle of ideas .
We will not defeat terrorism , whether it be national terrorism , whether it be driven by fundamentalism of any kind , unless we do battle with the ideas that underpin that terror .
We have to recall again that no country has ever been defeated by terrorism and I am certainly confident that the terrorism which we now face on an international scale does not have that capacity unless we allow it by failing to grapple with the ideas underlying it .
This is not an argument for business as usual .
It is an argument for avoiding the trap set for us by terrorism .
We have to be careful also not to fall into the trap of seeing Muslims as an enemy .
The statements by our European leaders and President Prodi are very much welcome in this regard .
I condemn utterly the statements by Prime Minister Berlusconi .
It is a disgrace that a country of the European Union is led by a man who can present these ideas in this day and age , particularly when the country is Italy , which in my view has always led in terms of modern ideas .
I would add my voice to others ' condemnations .
The question is how do we respond ?
The very best response , apart from the obvious security measures that we have to take , is to defend our ideas of freedom , of democracy , of justice and of ending exploitation .
This European Union has a key role to play on the European stage in leading that battle and not falling into line behind those who only see security as an answer to this appalling problem .
Mr President , so much has now been said and written about the tragedy , the crime of 11 September .
I will , therefore , confine myself to three issues : terrorism , Europe and the world .
Yes , we must resolutely declare war on all forms of terrorism , from wherever it comes , the IRA , ETA , the assassins of Claude Erignac , Prefect of Corsica , Osama Bin Laden and his clique and all the others , but without making the stupid and suicidal mistake of lumping them all together .
Our capacity to take in terrorists is now beyond the limit ; it is probable that the insane attacks of 11 September were prepared in Europe .
So , let us spring to action and pool our resources , our activities , our objectives in the field of intelligence , justice , security and defence and let us be implacable towards the terrorists , their networks , their support structures , their dirty money .
Yes , the Commissioner was quite right to refer to the obligation to get results !
Solidarity with our friends , our American allies , does not imply mindless alignment .
With its tried and tested experience of the world , Europe can and must play a specific role here .
Others place hope in us , await us , call on us , alas , too often without response .
Let us not disappoint them any longer .
In the Middle East , a constant source of tension , the issue has to be resolved by the establishment of two sovereign states - Israel and Palestine - with absolute security guarantees for both .
Even the Americans are , for the first time , considering this obvious arrangement .
It is up to us to initiate the process of opening the doors .
Let us finally realise that the post-Yalta organisation of the world needs to be rethought to take account of the incredible developments since the last war : the emergence of nuclear powers , whether official or not , the fall of the Berlin wall , more than a billion Muslims around the world desperately seeking recognition and respect , new giants like India , limitless technological developments in every field , developments that are accessible only to the few , the ever-widening gap between rich and poor .
Let us finally take account of these positive or disturbing trends and organise a world in which each individual is recognised , respected rather than despised , involved rather than ignored .
There is a burning need to fulfil that obligation .
Mr President , following the attacks on 11 September , it is incumbent upon us to come up with a response appropriate to this tremendous challenge , to ensure justice is done and to prevent further attacks .
Europe ' s response must amount to more than the solidarity called for earlier in the House . It must be an active response , defending specific values .
I am not referring , as Mr Berlusconi might , to Western values or to Christian civilisation . I have in mind genuine democratic values .
These must be defended wherever the freedom to do so exists .
Where it does not , they must be established and nurtured . Success can only be guaranteed through long-term support by the governments committed to this fight .
In the face of the serious threat to humanity terrorism represents , we are called upon to take action and to get it right .
We must abide by the rules when taking action against those who have no rules . We have to get it right , but getting it right cannot in this context mean taking spectacular action .
Getting it right has to mean identifying those responsible and dealing with the key figures .
It involves destroying their networks and preventing them from organising new ones . All this takes time , and calls for cooperation between judges and police at international level , together with mutual political trust between governments .
It will be a long and difficult process but believe me , it is the only way to defend democracy from fanaticism and barbarism .
A genuine common foreign security and defence policy for the European Union is called for .
The Union also needs a common approach to legal and home affairs . The European search and arrest warrant will be an essential element of this but by no means the only one .
Clearly , this joint European action requires us to set ourselves high standards .
No European leader should jeopardise the joint response , as Mr Berlusconi ' s government has just done . The legislation it has recently endorsed is diametrically opposed to the approach adopted by this House .
It is also in opposition to the 21 September Council resolution we all applauded here today .
I should like to put some questions to the Council and the Commission .
What action will the Council take to ensure that it speaks with one voice , as Mr Michel was saying this morning ? Also , how does it intend to deal with that thorn in its flesh , namely the Berlusconi doctrine ?
Mr President , in light of the seriousness of the terrorist attack of 11 September , there are several important questions to be discussed and clarified , relating to our intention to resolutely fight terrorism .
The first question is the need to find effective means to combat terrorism , which do not necessarily entail legislative reform on matters of security .
It is worth recalling clearly that it is not effective , and never has been in democracy , to curtail freedoms in order to fight the enemies of democracy itself .
Indeed , we think the problem lies elsewhere .
It is not only the lack of legislation at national or European level , or the lack of coordinated policing at international level .
The problem has much to do both with hesitancy and weakness in the fight against terrorism , which manifest themselves in laxity towards activities of a terrorist nature , in the hope that terrorist acts would always be carried out in the country next door , or in the slow deterioration of methods of defence and security , police forces , information services and armed forces .
European governments which thought that wars had ended once and for all and which often cut the financial resources available for defence and safety cannot , of course , talk loudly about terrorism .
The second question concerns political awareness of the times in which we live .
If we denounce what happened in New York and Washington merely as a criminal act , we will from the start be limiting the scope , the meaning and the effectiveness of the fight against terrorism .
What happened is in reality an act of war , no doubt of a war different to previous wars but , unfortunately , all wars are different to previous wars .
They are usually more deadly , affecting more civilians and not hesitating to use any means to massacre . They are increasingly total wars .
To classify what happened as an act of war is not a mere question of semantics .
It has had major implications , starting with the right of the nation or nations affected to respond with military actions , if necessary , in relation to the country or countries shown to be responsible for supporting or carrying out terrorist acts .
At present this is a basic condition for effectively fighting terrorism , which cannot attain the magnitude of the attack of 11 September without the support of one or more States .
Unfortunately , there has been little discussion on this subject , but it is necessary to know the position of the Council , Parliament and the Commission concerning the need for military intervention against States which perpetrate or support terrorist acts .
Mr President , we all understand how fragile our society is when civil aircraft with people on their way to meet others are turned into bombs targeting citizens of the world in the metropolis of New York , a city in which people , at the start of their working day in the service industry or finance , become innocent victims of fanaticism and fiendishly well-organised terrorism which will stop at nothing to vent its hatred of the open , civilised and diverse society in which we live .
At the same time , however , all democrats throughout the world have realised that this open society is worth defending and that we have to work together to combat terrorism and lack of freedom .
US President George W. Bush has therefore , to his credit , been successful in creating global coalitions for freedom .
The UN , NATO and the EU have acted vigorously in this common struggle .
The common will in the European Union must manifest the ideals of the open society .
Let us not panic and introduce legislation which eliminates the principles of a state governed by law .
Do not let the protection of human rights be seen as incompatible with the fight against terrorism .
Do not let the prevailing mood be exploited for the purpose of closing borders or increasing prejudices between people .
Madam President-in-Office of the Council , make sure that Ghent is used to strengthen the EU ' s ability to promote the open society .
Trade is increasing links and understanding between the people of Europe and the rest of the world .
It is therefore disgraceful that certain countries in the EU are at present outside the common currency , which is one of our best tools for increasing partnership .
It is therefore also foolhardy of the Belgian Presidency to play the anti-globalisation game by bringing up the Tobin Tax , which would directly counteract economic recovery and increased trade .
Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , Europe ' s best long-term contribution to a more open , freer and safer world will be in terms of obtaining concrete results now on the reuniting of Western and Eastern Europe through enlargement .
You must not only handle an emergency and increasingly clear threats , but you must also fulfil the EU ' s most important and historic task .
I wish you the best of luck in Ghent .
Mr President , I believe it to be clear in the aftermath of this terrorist attack that we need a far more integrated policy , not only as regards its European scope but also in respect of its content .
We must combine foreign and home affairs policy so as to take into account the worldwide nature of the enemy and their presence in our towns and cities .
Mrs Carlsson is quite right ; we must not do it at the expense of abandoning the liberal state under the rule of law .
Another issue is that of how the causes of terrorism around the world are to be fought .
We know very well that none of these three aspects can any longer be coped with by the Nation State . Rather , it is only as a European community that we can get to grips with them and , to some extent , only together with the Atlantic Alliance and with our friends in North America .
I believe that we cannot be content with mere slogans , but , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , that we must , through the post-Nice process and by pressing on , in Ghent and Laeken , with enlargement and so extending the zone of stability , create the practicalities , instruments and preconditions for , in time , casting what would have been mere slogans into durable forms enabling us to comply with these requirements .
It is for this reason that the preparation for Laeken , with a rationally conceived Convention , is of such decisive significance .
We must see clearly that in these fields too , technology is extraordinarily important .
We must ensure - and I am sure that you will take the right direction in your role as Belgian Presidency - a Convention that is workable and represents the necessary legitimisation , on the basis of which to present to the Heads of State and Government a document that will facilitate the really great reform of the European Union over and above the agenda laid down in Nice .
Please permit me a final word to the chairman of the PSE Group .
There is a difference between a person who is a Prime Minister and one who , like Mr Nielson , is a Commissioner and thereby subject to the European Parliament 's immediate right of control .
If someone is directly subject to the European Parliament , it must be possible to express clear criticism of him here in this House and to call him to account if he talks nonsense , as he has done .
I have to tell you that the situation in Afghanistan , especially for the Afghan refugees , is tragic .
If we close our eyes and think of the impact this situation will have on millions of people , we , as the European Union , should really take action .
I believe it is of the utmost importance for the Council too - and I am addressing Mrs Neyts at this point - together with Parliament , to consider the question as to what we can do to make more resources available .
Mr President , if our humanitarian aid efforts do not run smoothly , we will create a new breeding ground for the Bin Ladens of this world .
It is therefore crucial to get it right .
I would like to denounce the statements made by Commissioner Bolkestein .
It is now the umpteenth time that he has acted beyond his remit .
He makes statements and gives an analysis in the Volkskrant of 29 September in which he says that the Arab world is indignant and feels weak vis-à-vis the West , partly as a result of the Gulf War .
But they are quite welcome to supply oil , he says .
Mr President , this analysis is not shared by Mr Patten .
Mr Bolkestein goes on to say that the EU ' s asylum policy is not coming off the ground .
In my opinion , that is a direct attack on Mr Vitorino ' s policy .


I would like to ask Mr Barnier to consult the President of the Commission , Mr Prodi , on the matter of Mr Bolkestein adhering to his remit , being the internal market .
We cannot end up in a situation where the Commission as a whole would ultimately be harmed because it is judged on statements by Mr Bolkestein .
That is inopportune under these circumstances .
I think it is useful and necessary for the President of the Commission , Mr Prodi , and Mr Bolkestein to hold a discussion , with a view to the latter concentrating on his own task .
Mr President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , I fully share the sentiments of Mr Van Velzen concerning Mr Bolkestein .
As far as the debate on terrorism is concerned , I share the views of Messrs Van den Berg , De Rossa and others who have recommended a broader approach .
But since I was absent during the last debate , I would like to come back to it .
Following on from the debate on terrorism , I would like to add that we in Europe too must prevent grounds for frustration from developing or continuing to exist .
This is also relevant to enlargement .
Commissioner , it is vital for the political criteria of democracy , human rights and rights of minorities to be just as much respected as the quantitative aspects of enlargement .
With enlargement will come a number of small countries such as the Czech Republic , Slovakia and the Baltic States .
We therefore wonder what , in future , the place and rights of the constitutional regions will be , some of which see themselves as nations equivalent to others that have their own state .
They must be given their place .
Not only Flanders , but also Scotland , Wales , the Basque Country , Galicia and others spring to mind .
I am thinking of all those constitutional regions which might feel obliged to apply for Member State status , simply because Member States are the only States acknowledged within Europe .
In other words , if we fail in a future debate to give regions and nations a place in Europe , we in fact further separatism . That is not what I want .
I would like regions to be able to help build a federal Europe , a federal Europe that is often curbed by the Member States themselves .
I would therefore urge you to include a paragraph on regions .
Mr President , at the close of this debate let me thank all the speakers , although I will not be able to reply to each one individually in the few minutes that remain .
Let me say , on behalf of the Commission , that I was touched by the support several of you gave to the work we are doing during these difficult and serious times , side by side with the Council and the European Parliament .
Turning to the most important issue , which almost all speakers addressed , the fight against terrorism , let me remind you of the spirit in which we are undertaking it .
We , and in particular my colleague and friend Mr Vitorino , take account in our activities of the important work done by Parliament , and in particular the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs under its chairman Mr Watson .
In fact we were working with that committee this morning on the final text submitted to you on freezing the assets of organisations linked to terrorism .
At this point , I can confirm that the Commission , like the Council , is prepared to take on board any suggestions or proposals from Parliament where at all possible .
To echo Mr Poettering 's concern , let me repeat what I said in my statement this morning about the fight against terrorism .
That fight certainly involves all the states ; in no case can it be reduced to some kind of conflict between the different civilisations of the world .
As Mrs Béres and Mr Salafranca said , we must build a global alliance and wage a global fight against terrorism .
Let me also point out - in response to a number of speakers , Mr Lannoye , Mr Michel and Mr Di Lello - that we are most concerned during our activities with steering the best possible course between the need for freedom and the need for security .



Perhaps , as Mr Michel advised , it would be a good idea to carry out regular , careful evaluations to ensure that we remain on course .



I listened carefully to the recommendations of several Members , in particular Mr Collins , who called for determined and vigorous measures ; I also noted the encouragement offered by Mr Berthu , calling on us to continue to work towards an objective that has clearly emerged since Amsterdam and since Tampere : a common judicial area , with the necessary cooperation between Member States and between all the services - and let me say to Mr Dupuis that I certainly mean all the services - and the necessary harmonisation or communitarisation in some areas .
Nor am I forgetting , just as you must not forget , that in Amsterdam and Tampere we also looked at ways of tackling illegal immigration .
Finally , on terrorism , as part of our collective action , we , the Commission , the Council and Parliament , must implement our common foreign policy by establishing a political dialogue , by preventing and stabilising all the regional conflicts , by giving marked support to development .
A number of you discussed this in relation to long-term action .
I am thinking here of Mr McMillan-Scott and Mr van Velzen .
And then , of course , in the shorter term , there are the support and cooperation measures to help the refugees .
Overall , looking at this serious challenge of fighting terrorism , let me emphasise what Mr Klaus Hänsch and , in a sense , Mr Nassauer said a moment ago .
We are facing a moment of truth and it is likely that the European Union will emerge stronger from this crisis in terms of the values and rationale of the European project .
As I said myself , it is also likely that we will have to step up the pace and find additional reasons for taking this European project further .
Ladies and gentlemen , even if it is difficult to explain this to you at this time of the day and with all this hubbub , I believe there is a link between , on the one hand , the political lessons we have to learn from this crisis and from the tragedy of New York and Washington , which tell us to speed up , to intensify , to prove once again the value of European integration and , on the other hand , that broad debate that began after Nice and is due to conclude in 2002 .
There is a link with the activities the convention will have to undertake .
Speaking of that convention ...
Ladies and gentlemen , it is appalling that Commissioner Barnier should be forced to end the debate on terrorism under these conditions .
It is a matter of responsible behaviour and manners . I therefore invite you all to take your seats and listen quietly .
I am sorry to be so harsh but this behaviour is truly unacceptable .
Mr President , unfortunately it was not I who chose the moment for my replies .
I have tried to be as precise as possible and to keep to the speaking time .
I will come to a close soon .
Nonetheless , turning to that convention , may I , following on from Mr Michel , establish that there is a link between the political debate that is beginning and the new dimension , the new gravity it has acquired as a result of the lessons we have learned from these tragic attacks .
I believe that the candidate countries must be given a place , the best possible place in this convention .
I believe the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions must be given a place as active observers .
I believe , as Mr Belder also suggested , that we must work as quickly as possible to bring this convention and the IGC that will conclude it to a close no later than the beginning of the year 2004 .
I believe we will have to find a structured link between the citizens ' forum with civil society and the activities of the convention .
Lastly , I believe that this convention must not confine itself to setting out the options but must be authorised or take it upon itself to make proposals .
Finally , addressing Mr Bonde , I do not share his fear about the convention .
I do not see why he should have any fears about its activities .
We have to learn from earlier weaknesses or failures .
I am speaking of the weaknesses of the intergovernmental method ; indeed we saw its limitations before Amsterdam and before Nice .
We are fortunate to have time between now and 2004 .
We are also fortunate to be able to work more openly with the four institutions , the four sources of legitimacy , in order to make the future Intergovernmental Conference a success .
So I believe that through that convention , the Ghent Summit , followed by the Laeken Summit , will confirm both our political ambition and our use of more transparent methods .
I apologise once again , Commissioner , for the conditions under which you were forced to speak .
Mr President , I think we should apologise to Commissioner Barnier , because it is intolerable , when we are discussing such grave matters , to see our Parliament not conducting itself in a courteous manner or listening to a particularly important statement .
I profoundly regret this and I would appeal to my colleagues ' sense of responsibility .
The same has happened under other circumstances .
When we are holding such a weighty , such a serious debate , I think at the very least Members could keep quiet and show respect for the Commissioner by listening to him .
I believe we have a real problem of dysfunctional behaviour within this Parliament .
( Applause )
It is a question of irresponsible behaviour as well as poor administration .
Mr President , my card has disappeared .
I put it here on my seat and when I came back it was gone .
Someone has taken my card , meaning that I cannot vote .
Mr Patakis , you will have to go and get another voting card .
Mr President , the accusations made in this Chamber against the Italian Parliament by certain Members of this House represent an extremely dangerous precedent , in terms of both the democratic nature of this Parliament and the credibility of its decision-making process before the European public .
A Parliament which becomes a vehicle for accusations and a political campaign against another democratically elected parliament is nothing more than a forum for subversion , political racism and the intentional dissemination of inaccurate information .
I have received seven motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Mr President , for the whole week we have been unable to hear the original sound out of this system .
The acoustics in this Chamber are very , very poor .
This is not a new thing , though .
To add to that , we have been getting a terrible noise out of the loudspeaker today , which interferes with everything .
Because of the noise from the loudspeaker , we cannot hear anything .
Somebody must do something about this sound system .
I am sure your comment has been heard by all those who need to take action to resolve the issue as well as me .
I hope that they will do so without delay so that there will be no need for further speeches on the matter tomorrow .
Announcement by the President
The House has been requested to approve an extension of the deadline for the appointment of the members of the Court of Auditors .
The Council submitted the names of the candidates it has proposed for appointment as members of the Court of Auditors in two letters dated 22 and 28 June 2001 respectively . These letters were received on the 27 and 28 June 2001 respectively , that is , just before the summer recess .
For practical reasons , and to enable both the candidates and the members of the committee responsible to prepare the necessary hearings , the hearings were planned for 11 September and 8 / 10 October 2001 .
Rule 35 ( 3 ) provides that the vote in plenary is held within two months of receipt of the nomination , unless Parliament , at the request of the committee responsible , a political group or at least 32 Members , decides otherwise .
In view of the fact that the debate and vote in plenary are planned for the October II part-session , that is , after the two-month deadline laid down in Rule 35 , the committee responsible has submitted a request that the House be asked to approve an extension of this deadline .
Are there any objections ?
Then it is decided to postpone the deadline .
We shall now proceed to the votes .
VOTE
Mr President , this first vote on our order paper today relates to the request from the Commission for urgent procedure on the measure you have outlined .
In exceptional circumstances , following the attack on the Twin Towers and the Pentagon , the Committee on Citizens ' Freedom and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs met this morning and approved , without report , the proposal submitted to us .
I understand that we will also receive , following this morning 's Coreper meeting , a request from the Council for urgency , to add to that from the Commission .
It is the recommendation of the committee , which I have the honour to chair , that we accept that amendment .
If that is approved by the House , I hope you will confirm that would give the political groups until 6 p.m. this evening to submit amendments to this proposed measure .
Are there any objections ?
Mr President , I was present at the committee ' s meeting this morning , and I would therefore like to add to what the Chairman , Mr Watson , has said .
There was substantial concern regarding precisely the request for urgency - there were even three votes cast against the motion and three abstentions - because we are being asked to approve an urgent procedure not on the mechanism for identifying money launderers but on a list .
It is with regard to this fact that we expressed our opposition .
( Parliament adopted the request for urgent procedure )
Mr President , I too should like to protest in the strongest terms against the uproar during Commissioner Barnier 's speech and to say that I share Mrs Grossetête 's indignation .
However , this is not the first time this has happened and I should like to propose a practical solution to the problem , because otherwise there is nothing left for us to do but apologise to the Commissioners .
I think there should be quarter of an hour 's break between the end of the debate and the vote .
Mr Marinos , what you are saying has already been said by Mrs Grossetête .
There is no need to repeat it .
If you have a precise , practical suggestion , you should write a letter to the President and it will be considered by the President and the Bureau .
You cannot bring the matter before the House for we are currently here to vote , not to open a debate on the way the plenary is organised .
Thank you for your contribution , however . Please would you send your proposal to the President .
Simplified procedure - Initiative of the Kingdom of Sweden with a view to the adoption by the Council of a draft Decision amending the Decision of 29 April 1999 extending Europol 's mandate to deal with forgery of money and means of payment [ 10528 / 2001 - C5-0360 / 2001 - 2001 / 0822 ( CNS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the initiative )
Simplified procedure - Initiative of the Kingdom of Sweden with a view to the adoption of a Council Framework Decision amending Framework Decision 2000 / 383 / JHA on increasing protection by criminal penalties and other sanctions against counterfeiting in connection with the introduction of the euro [ 10527 / 2001 - C5-0361 / 2001 - 2001 / 0823 ( CNS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the initiative )
Report ( A5-0312 / 2001 ) by Mr Miller , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council directive relating to special provisions for vehicles used for the carriage of passengers comprising more than eight seats in addition to the driver ' s seat , and amending Directives 70 / 156 / EEC and 97 / 27 / EC [ C5-0278 / 2001 - 1997 / 0176 ( COD ) ]
( Parliament adopted the joint text )
Recommendation for second reading ( A5-0296 / 2001 ) , by Mr De Roo , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive relating to the assessment and management of environmental noise [ 6660 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0245 / 2001 - 2000 / 0194 ( COD ) ]
( The President declared the common position approved )
Recommendation for second reading ( A5-0298 / 2001 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council regulation on a Community Energy Efficiency Labelling Programme for Office and Communication Technology Equipment [ 6760 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0246 / 2001 - 2000 / 0033 ( COD ) ] ( Rapporteur : Mrs McNally )
Mr President , I had expected to recommend the House to adopt this draft regulation unamended at second reading .
That depended , however , on a statement from the Commissioner last night .
Unfortunately , the statement by Mrs de Palacio was insufficient .
However , I would now like to ask the Commission again whether it will undertake to bring in measures complementary to this agreement in the first three months of next year .
This is the only commitment which we will accept as reasonable , otherwise I will ask the House to vote for the amendment and to invoke the conciliation procedure .
I therefore ask the Commission to clarify its position on supplementary measures .
In any case , Mrs McNally , I should have asked for the Commission ' s opinion on the amendments tabled .
I therefore now give the floor to Commissioner Barnier .
Mr President , last night at the close of the debate and on the basis of the supporting studies , Commissioner Bolkestein clearly contradicted those who say that prices rose after the introduction of the Community exhaustion system .
On the contrary , in some cases they fell .
Those who pretend they are defending the consumer are in fact protecting the parallel import circuits that pose a threat to quality , innovation and jobs by promoting counterfeits .
Hence the three amendments I tabled .
They seem to worry the rapporteur .
In fact the PPE-DE Group has called for a roll-call vote on all our amendments to check how its members are voting and the undertakings given by certain coordinators .
I fear that once again pressure and bargaining will carry the day and that a bad decision will be taken .
Mr Bernié , you requested the floor to tell me whether you are withdrawing the amendments .
This is not the place for political reasoning or an explanation of vote . Please would you tell me whether you withdraw the amendments or not .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the process of drafting European law should concentrate on fundamental issues rather than pointlessly wasting time and energy on details .
This was written by Mr Prodi in a guest column in the ' Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung ' on 27 July this year .
I indeed hear this gospel , but I have no faith !
The Miller report is evidence to the contrary , defining things that are self-explanatory .
It tells us , for example , what a floor is , what is meant by ' behind ' and ' in front ' and informs us that provision must be made for passages through which two coaxial cylinders must be able to pass .
The whole thing is actually absurd , but - and here I refer back to the quotation from Romano Prodi - Europe 's citizens will rightly ask themselves whether we have nothing more important to occupy us .
It was therefore with extreme annoyance that I took part in this brief vote on the Miller report .
In many spheres , the imagination of regulators is positively inexhaustible .
Yet there is a lack of real political will where really explosive legal issues are concerned .
It will not be in that way that we will bring Europe and its citizens closer together .
The freedom of movement on which this European Union is founded is daily denied to our continent 's 37 million disabled citizens .
There is no more important question in the campaign for comprehensive human rights for disabled people than the pursuit of accessible public transport .
The directive finally agreed today , is a historic step forward in that campaign .
It shows that the cost of access for industry is affordable , if only designed-for-all principles are included at the beginning .
It shows that European regulation really can make a difference in enforcing rights for disabled people .
Above all , it shows that eleven years of tireless campaigning by the disability movement , by Buses for All in my own country the UK , was absolutely worthwhile , necessary and ultimately victorious .
Congratulations to all of you .
I am proud that the European Parliament has helped deliver your demands .
de Roo report ( A5-0296 / 2001 )
Mr President , the report by our Green colleague , Alex de Roo , will no doubt mark a milestone in the European Union 's environmental legislation .
Until now , we had an almost total legislative silence about the environmental damage caused by noise .
Our parliaments lent a deaf ear , although this in no way reflected the real-life experience of the citizens of the Union .
More than a quarter of them , one hundred million , believe they are the victims of noise and the economic repercussions of this noise in the environment oscillates at between EUR 10 and 40 billion .
So we can only welcome the pioneering measures set out in this report .
We do indeed need to introduce noise mapping .
It is as necessary and salutary as the mapping of dangerous sites , which we now realise , all too late , is a vital measure .
This information is useful only if it is given to the public quite transparently .
It is meaningful only if it is constantly updated in terms of geography and choice of indicators .
Lastly , identifying these noise nuisances will only be useful and effective if it is accompanied by penal and coercive measures against the noise-makers , be they civil , public or military .
Over and above these practical imperatives , we can really only combat euro-noise today if we do so at European Community level .
We therefore continue to call for common European standards .
Noise respects no frontiers ; noise penetrates every wall , resounds through every space .
We therefore urged all our parliamentary colleagues to support this report and we welcome the outcome .
Noise pollution reaches us in diffuse , sporadic and intangible ways ; often it even forms part of our daily environment .
Noise is not as black as oil , or as acrid as chemical waste ; yet it is just as harmful , in condensed form .
I hope therefore that the demands set out in this report will not be regarded simply as sound and fury but that the European Union will manage to make them resound for a long time .
- ( FR ) We voted for all the amendments calling for limits to noise pollution caused by road , rail or air transport or for imposing binding and uniform noise ceilings throughout the European Union .
At the same time , we reject the arguments about competitiveness put forward by transport firms .
The crucial factors must be safety and limiting noise levels , not competitiveness .
We also voted for the amendments fixing shorter deadlines for implementing these measures .
What is the point of deciding to take measures in the interest of society if the implementing date is put off to a more or less indeterminate future time , to enable special interests to find a way round them ?
- ( FR ) We know what an impact noise emissions can have on the daily life and the health of our fellow-citizens .
But Europe must not come along and act as a kind of noise extinguisher to make up for mistakes in land use planning .
I am not calling the general objective into question ; but if our action is to be effective , it must be pragmatic , like the action we took on air quality .
It is not up to Europe to introduce unilateral standards and impose them on everybody throughout its territory with no regard for specific local conditions .
Europe is already intervening in relation to tyres , aircraft engines , road surfaces ...
It is important for the measures to take account of these territorial disparities .
Europe must do more to make the Member States aware of their responsibilities here , it must urge the local authorities to take the necessary measures on the basis of the local situation , rather than deciding on their behalf .
In this case I subscribe to the principle of subsidiarity .
Let us take airports as an example : it would be ineffective to set uniform noise limits for all airports .
Conditions vary widely from one airport to another .
Each airport is unique ( runway configuration , distribution of traffic and so forth ) .
The impact of aircraft noise differs from one airport to another and it would make more sense to take measures to reduce noise emissions at national , regional and local levels .
Moreover , it seems quite incredible to find no distinction drawn between international and regional airports !
Nor should we forget that airports are important to the area concerned .
Air transport infrastructure is a vital factor in industries ' choice of where to locate their plant , and therefore vital in terms of jobs too .
Let me also remind you that the title of the directive is ' Noise evaluation and management ' .
So evaluation comes before management .
How can one think of fixing limit values without first carrying out a precise , horizontal study , based on agreed , common evaluation criteria ?
Furthermore , the first stage would be to set up a system for evaluating noise levels in the different Member States and to draw exact noise maps region by region .
Only when this information is available should Member States be encouraged to formulate an effective action plan , working together with all the local authorities and elected representatives .
. ( NL ) In densely populated urban areas , the traffic noise and the noise around airports , in particular , is a disaster .
People ' s night rest is increasingly being threatened by continuous noise .
Unfortunately , the Council and the Commission ' s standpoint still harks back to the first half of the twentieth century , a time when cities , traffic and the economy were on a much smaller scale and growth was still welcome .
That is apparent from , among other things , the fresh attempts to protect the position of airline companies .
Instead of tackling overcapacity by imposing a tax on fuel , thus removing the competitive edge compared with more environmentally-friendly modes of transport , there is now a renewed attempt to reduce the tax burden for the sake of continued growth in air traffic and airports .
Mr De Roo is right - also at second reading - to adhere to previous choices made by Parliament with regard to the restriction of night-time pollution , short terms , clear definitions of noise pollution , and daughter directives on noise emissions of lorries , buses , motorcycles , trains and aircraft .
It is now only the need for a majority of 314 votes to break the opposition that threatens to lead to a long-term stalemate .
- ( FR ) I wanted to explain just why I voted for this report as amended .
Firstly , I believe it adopts a balanced position and takes account of the well-being and health of the citizens who are , indeed , being more and more exposed to noise pollution .
With regard to the substance , I agree with the Commission 's idea of harmonising the noise indicators and the methods of evaluating ambient noise .
Next , thanks to these common indicators and evaluation methods , it will indeed be possible to compile information on noise exposure , in the form of ' noise maps ' without , at least for the moment , fixing noise limit values for the entire European Union .
Moreover , I wanted to continue excluding military airports from the scope of the framework directive .
I am glad no amendment calling for their inclusion was tabled at second reading .
I am also satisfied with the deadline for incorporating the directive into national law ( 30 June 2003 ) and for proposing the daughter directives that will ensue ( namely three years after the entry into force of the framework directive ) .
However , let me emphasise that the subsidiarity principle must be respected fully and that Member States must have some margin for manoeuvre , based on common indicators and methods , so that they can take account of special factors ( different geographical situations , for example ) especially in relation to airports .
Joint resolution on the accident in Toulouse

- ( FR ) While expressing our indignation at the accident at the AZF factory in Toulouse and its terrible consequences , as also our solidarity with the victims and their families , we have not associated ourselves with the joint resolution , to show that we do not condone the hypocrisy of discussing this disaster without implicating the TotalFinaElf trust , the owner of that plant .
This trust puts profit first , that is , the profits of its shareholders , to the detriment of safety .
It did not take all the necessary measures to avoid an accident happening or , at any rate , to prevent it having such tragic consequences for the factory workers and the local population .
Furthermore , we refuse to join in the congratulations addressed to the French authorities .
These authorities , from the town council to the government , were not able or not willing to take steps to check the AZF factory in Toulouse properly , as is also true of the many other high-risk sites , and to force the TotalFinaElf trust and its ilk to take the essential precautions .
As for providing ' appropriate aid ... to the populations affected ' , even after the accident , that assistance did not match the scale of the damage .
The sum of one and a half billion released by the government will cover only a quarter of the damage caused .
How long will those who have lost their homes and are living in precarious conditions have to wait to be housed ?
However , quite apart from the fact that this aid is inadequate , the taxpayer was supposed to pay it .
Why should the taxpayers have to use their money to pay for the damage for which TotalFinaElf is to blame ?
That company should pay for this in full , including of course the total wages of the workers forced out of work , both at AZF and its subcontractors and in all the local firms that had to shut down .
. ( EL ) The catastrophe in Toulouse , a tragic accident indeed , should give us an incentive to overhaul the Community directive on highly dangerous installations and ensure that it is applied more strictly .
We all know that numerous Member States of the EU have not applied the revised ' Seveso ' directive , even though they should have been doing so since 1999 .
Even worse , a number of countries are clearly not even applying the original ' Seveso ' directive properly .
I am delighted that our joint resolution calls on the Commission to publish a table , within the next three months , of all the industrial plants in the EU which are highly dangerous and are located in residential areas and which , were an accident to happen , could cause damage on a scale similar to that caused by the accident in Toulouse .
One such plant , Petrola Hellas plc , is located a stone 's throw from the densely populated areas of Elefsina , Aspropyrgo and Mandra and has already applied for planning permission to extend over a 130 hectare plot of land located in the buffer zone between the current Petrola plant and the Pyrkal munitions factory .
I should also like to point out that , according to witnesses working in the factory in question , the factory operator has not provided the public with the safety report or the emergency plans setting out action to be taken in the event of an accident , as required under the Seveso directive .
Other factories in the area are guilty of similar practices ( no plans , failure to inform local authorities and the public ) .
The usual procedure is to send a very basic file to the ministry and ignore the rest of the provisions of the Seveso directive .
Just how interested and concerned the Greek authorities are in preventing major disasters and limiting their impact is obvious from the environment Commissioner 's reply to my question on the matter .
The Commissioner replied that he had written to the Greek authorities on 7 June 2000 asking for information on the extension to the Petrola plant but that the Greek authorities had not yet replied to the letter in question .
- ( FR ) Following Monday 's statement by Mrs Christine de Veyrac , Deputy Mayor of Toulouse , I want to express the sympathy and solidarity of the entire French delegation of the PPE-DE Group towards our compatriots struck by disaster at the AZF factory in Toulouse , and , in particular , towards the victims and their families .
Let me also pay tribute to all those who responded with such extraordinary courage and provided help , medical care and assistance to all the many victims .
Information to date suggests that this was an accident , although it is too early to be entirely sure .
If that is indeed the case , we will have to check whether all the necessary safety measures and precautions were taken , given that this factory was classified as presenting a major industrial risk .
The real question is to find out whether the provisions of the 1982 and 1986 Seveso directives , which provide for all the necessary procedures and all the danger scenarios , are being observed on such sites in the European Union and to check whether the risk reports are updated on a regular basis .
We also need to check whether the plans are operational and tested , whether the national administrations have the means of inspecting all these installations and whether the no-construction zones are being respected .
Above all , we must learn from this tragedy that has struck the inhabitants of Toulouse , to ensure that in future the people of the European Union are protected once and for all from such terrible explosions .
Evans Robert J.E. report ( A5-0304 / 2001 )
I voted in favour of this report , but I am disappointed that some of the most important aspects were rejected .
It seems that Parliament does not accept the common definition of a refugee , based on the full inclusive definition , which would cover gender-related persecution , include both state and non-state persecution and take account of the applicant 's fear of further persecution .
I cannot see how people can justify voting against such principles .
In relation to the issue of a safe country of origin I do not think there is such a thing as a safe country anywhere .
For certain people in certain sections of society , there is a danger in any country .
In Ireland we have signed a bilateral agreement with Romania and Nigeria and we are planning to sign more such agreements in the future so that we can speed up the procedure of deportation .
This really falls short of what we are required to do under international law .
Individuals are not being treated as individuals , they are being treated as groups coming from the country concerned .
The idea of a safe country , the idea that governments can actually claim that certain countries are safe , is quite incredible .
We have to remember that there is no such thing as a safe country for certain people .
- ( FR ) We voted against the Evans report , which echoes the main Commission position on the common asylum procedure .
Like the Commission , the rapporteur believes this procedure should be refocused towards giving greater right of asylum to applicants who want ' to find safety ' .
We already established , at the last part-session , what practical consequences this policy would have , when we considered the Commission 's proposal on minimum standards for the procedure for granting refugee status .
It quite simply overlooks the fact that today the right of asylum is being distorted and manipulated to such an extent that it has become a if not the prime source of illegal immigration .
How many applications are unfounded ?
Probably nine out of ten .
The Commission forgets these figures , just as it minimises the total number of applications , which it puts at 200 000 for the entire EU in 2000 , while according to the figures we have it was as much as 375 000 , counting only 10 out of the 15 EU countries !
This underestimate is made deliberately .
It allows the problem to be minimised .
In fact it is immense .
The member countries must not accept the Commission 's proposals , for they would constrain them to observe a common procedure that would start out flexible , only to become increasingly rigid , as is clearly stated on page 8 of the communication .
That procedure would end up by granting unlimited rights of asylum and , in addition , broaden the concept of ' refugee ' set out in the 1951 convention by extending it to other forms of temporary protection .
All this is totally ill-timed .
The Commission would do better to present us with proposals for establishing a policy on the return of applicants whose claim has been rejected .
It would also do better to present us with proposals aimed at giving priority to assisting refugees in their region of origin .
- ( DA ) The report ' s detailed requests to the Commission and the Council are based upon an appealing ambition to improve legal protection for asylum seekers in relation to the rights applicable under the Convention and particularly with regard to the procedure for dealing with asylum seekers . The proposals could therefore mean a long overdue strengthening of legal protection in our own countries .
We also find it encouraging that the proposal seeks the reasons why refugees are persecuted .
Even though we are able to endorse by far the majority of the report ' s recommendations , we have not been able to vote in favour of the report , partly because quite a few of the proposals are too vague and partly - and especially - because the proposals are based upon asylum and immigration policy ' s being defined supranationally by the EU .
These policy areas are a part of the Member States ' own area of responsibility and ought not to be ( mis ) used to construct a supranational policing and legal system .
- ( FR ) First of all I want to thank both Mr Robert Evans , our rapporteur in the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , and the committee as a whole for the quality of the work they have done and for the courageous social choices they have asked us to make today .
In my view , voting for this report means , above all , endorsing the ambitious approach set out by the Tampere European Council , namely not just the statement that ' in the longer term , Community rules should lead to a common asylum procedure and a uniform status for those granted asylum valid throughout the Union ' , but also the commitment of that same Tampere European Council to the ' full and inclusive ' interpretation of the Geneva Convention .
In other words , to vote for this report means to support the idea that a common asylum policy must adhere to high standards for the protection of the refugees , include a common definition of the concept of ' refugee ' and give a full and inclusive interpretation of the Geneva Convention , taking account of persecution both by state and by non-state agents , as well as the asylum seekers ' fear of future persecution .
I therefore believe it is important to draw your attention to the fact that the common , ' full and inclusive ' interpretation of the Geneva Convention must include the possibility of granting asylum in cases where the persecution is not carried out by the state .
The Member States take many different views on this particular point .
In other words , the further development of the common policy calls for further harmonisation of procedures throughout the Union .
We must , however , note that while it is important to encourage this kind of single procedure , this must not restrict the possibilities for the individual to obtain refugee status under the terms of the Geneva Convention .
In my view , voting for this report also means emphasising the fact that the use of concepts such as ' safe third countries ' , ' safe country of origin ' , ' accelerated procedures ' and ' procedures for manifestly unfounded applications ' must only be used where justified and include legally binding guarantees .
( Explanation of vote cut short pursuant to Rule 137 of the Rules of Procedure )
. ( EL ) The two reports , one on the procedure for granting asylum to refugees and the other on ÅU immigration policy are in fact both an attempt to deal with the same problem .
The problem of the influx into the Member States of the ÅU of people who have lost everything , of people who are in danger in their own country , either because they are being politically persecuted or for reasons of economic survival .
Reports and other EU documents on the matter always contain a paragraph referring to the need to combat the causes of asylum-seeking and immigration .
Of course , what they fail to mention is the criminal responsibility of imperialism , which has exploited the natural and human resources of third world countries for centuries and which has no hesitation in setting up and bringing down what are usually authoritarian governments in order to serve its economic interests .
The furious struggle of the imperialist forces to overturn Socialism , the war which they ignited in the Balkans and the recent tragic example of the war planned against their own Taliban and Bin Laden resulted and will continue to result in millions of unfortunate people hanging about in the countries of the ÅU and elsewhere , looking for a place in the sun .
Consequently , we should have no delusions about the fact that , as long as imperialism prevails , asylum-seeking and immigration will live and rule .
So the question is , how can we manage the problem better ?
In this respect , the Evans report on granting asylum contains a number of positive points and proposals .
However , it is still a wish list .
For example , it quite rightly points out that the concept of ' safe ' countries of origin or ' safe ' third countries is very fluid and the danger here is that people will be deported to countries in which they are at risk , that is , they will literally be sent into the lion 's den .
A typical example is Turkey , a candidate country , which the ÅU considers has made steady progress in the field of human rights .
In reality , as we all know , people are imprisoned in Turkey for their ideas , hunger strikers and other people fighting for democracy are murdered , parties which represent millions of Kurds or opponents of the regime ( such as the Communist party ) are banned , trade unionists are arrested and so on .
And yet there are countries in the ÅU , including Greece , which deport opponents of the regime to this ' safe ' country .
As far as the conditions of survival of refugees are concerned , a typical example is Greece , where thousands of Kurds live in shanty towns in Lavrio and Afghans and other refugees sleep in cardboard boxes on the beaches in Athens , deprived of even the basic necessities .
Likewise , the report quite rightly highlights the huge delay in processing asylum applications and the fact that the Member States are unwilling to grant asylum .
In Greece , for example , an average of 5 % a year are approved and only this year did this rise to 7 % .
We shall vote in favour of the Evans report because it proposes improvements to the current system of protection for refugees .
However , we feel that only solidarity and a united fight by both refugees and workers in the Member States of the ÅU in a bid to claim dignified living conditions for everyone and , more to the point , wipe out the reasons for refugees and poverty will provide a definitive solution to the problem .
. ( NL ) Huge discrepancies between the rich and poor in the world encourage migration , which only solves the problem for a small number of people and not for humanity as a whole .
It is often the best educated and the most privileged who manage to enter Europe , often at the expense of useful roles they could be playing in their countries of origin .
Such individual solutions , however , are necessary to those whose only chance of survival is to flee from war and suppression .
It is not acceptable to send people to their deaths by establishing quota and to refuse access to others .
Neither is it justifiable to send people back before the problem in their country of origin has been solved .
Moreover , some refugees will want to stay on because their children and grandchildren have meanwhile been raised in the new country of residence .
Some EU Member States admit many more refugees than others .
It is remarkable that both those in favour of restricting and those in favour of extending the permits have for years been calling for a more centralised and standardised European policy .
I can only agree with this if it means that the EU Member States will be more generous in applying minimum standards than those agreed in the Geneva Convention .
It is easier to organise and supervise the protection of refugees on a small scale than by a remote bureaucracy .
- ( FR ) According to Article 1 of the Geneva Convention , refugee status applies to anyone who rightly fears being persecuted on the grounds of race , religion , nationality , membership of a certain social group or political opinions , is outside the country of his or her nationality and cannot , or because of that fear will not , seek the protection of that country .
It is time that the Member States of the European Union applied that Convention in full .
Yet France , in its hypocrisy , refuses to grant that status to Algerian refugees .
In the same way Europe refused , at the height of the war in Kosovo , to give refugee status to Serbian deserters or to the Kosovars who were being persecuted .
How many Bosnians are still mouldering in refugee camps in Turkey because the Union has refused to take them in ?
How many Afghan refugees are flocking to Sangatte in the hope of getting to England because they know they have no chance in the Schengen area ?
However , despite these reservations , because the text proposes minimum standards for receiving asylum seekers ( a minimum level of assistance , such as the provision of full legal aid , at public expense , to each applicant , or justification , by the authority or by the court , of any rejection of a refugee ' s application , as well as specific aid for vulnerable persons ) , we shall be voting in favour .
Pirker report ( A5-0305 / 2001 )
I voted against this report .
It sends out the wrong signals .
It suggests that Europe will take in the people it wants , the people it needs ; in other words , human beings are being classified as commodities that certain Member States will want .
This goes against all the international principles of basic human rights .
It suggests that people who have a certain trade or a certain profession can come in , but other people who may desperately need to get in are not allowed in .
This whole policy is completely restrictive .
In relation to the idea that we all have to share the burden of quotas , that immigrants are a burden , that we must all spread this burden , that immigrants are not people at all , that they are basically problems , this report sends out completely the wrong signals .
It establishes the concept of a fortress Europe whose door will be open to a privileged few .
Mr President , I share some , if not all , of Mrs McKenna 's reservations on the Pirker report .
However , I voted in favour of this report on a common immigration policy , but with an extremely heavy heart .
I did so because although the report as amended is , as we would say in English , all over the place - some points do not correspond with others and there are contradictions left , right and centre - there are a few ( and I am sure Mrs McKenna will look at them ) but significant positive aspects to the report .
For example , it recognises the right of third-country nationals legally resident in the European Union to free movement in Europe .
Equally , it gives the right to vote in local elections .
However , there are negative aspects .
I doubt whether all the people who voted for paragraph 35 could have read it , because it restricts the right of residence , accommodation and education .
That is inherently racist and we should oppose it .
However , to have rejected the report would have placed in jeopardy the positive points ; hence my support , although with the reservations I have expressed clearly here .

Mr President , the Pirker report is extremely important because it includes certain declarations of principle which we consider to be fundamental and to clarify the issue : firstly , the principle that immigrants are expected to respect the Community of values , as enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union , and to have a genuine desire to be integrated into the society of the Member States .
Today , let us grasp the full extent of the now tragic dimensions of the danger represented by different ' values ' which are opposed to the values common to our societies and to our traditions , which have been introduced and disseminated , so to speak , by illegal immigration linked to Islamic fundamentalism within our societies .
Among these values , I would like to focus on those relating to family relationships , family rights , and I would like to take this opportunity to tell you about the tragedy of two Italians - mother and daughter - who were forced to take refuge at the Italian embassy in Algiers and approached Parliament , asking us to protect their fundamental rights , violated precisely by those people who adhere to the opposing principles of Islamic law .
Furthermore , another principle : the recognition that every State has the right ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
. ( EL ) New rules for the waves of immigrants heading for the European Union , calculating the needs of the countries of entry and procedures for integrating third country nationals into society in the European Union are , without doubt , moves in the right direction .
However , the Commission communication on an ' immigration policy ' contains omissions and additional objectives need to be promoted .
To be specific , we need :
to clarify the difference between the terms ' working immigrant ' and ' economic immigrant ' and avoid the risk of creating new forms of discrimination based on the narrow interests of the job market in Europe ;
to accept family reunification in general and not as a special characteristic of certain categories of immigrants ;
to extend mobility within the ÅU for immigrants with a legal resident 's permit ;
to combat human trafficking gangs ;
a strategy to facilitate the return of specialised immigrants in order to strengthen productive capacity in their country of origin ;
to abolish discrimination between immigrants on the basis of sex , age , sexual orientation or disability ;
to create a European network for immigration as an observatory and census mechanism .
This being the case , I voted against the report .
The Pirker report on Community immigration policy has just been made worse by the adoption of Amendment No 17 which claims voting rights for foreign nationals in local elections .
In any case , despite Mr Pirker ' s laudable efforts , this report is ambiguous in the way it is worded in general , because it does not dare to say clearly that the Commission ' s approach , in its communication on immigration , is wrong .
First of all , to a large extent it hides the phenomenon of illegal immigration , and it proposes only partial or distant solutions .
In particular , the approach involving co-development with the countries of origin will no doubt be of value in the long term , but it does not mean that we do not need to strengthen our border controls now .
Moreover , the Commission is more or less opening the floodgates to legal immigration . It says that European policy should be based on the fact that migratory pressure will continue ( page 14 ) , and from this it draws the conclusion that legislation should be designed so as to facilitate , rather than hinder , the admission of economic migrants ( page 19 ) .
We , however , do not draw that conclusion at all .
On the contrary , we believe that a quota policy should be adopted , with quota levels determined by each Member State on its own behalf , and in our opinion those quotas should be filled , as a matter of priority , by nationals of countries in Eastern Europe , who will soon be members of the Union .
On the subject of the integration of immigrants , the Commission invites us to recognise that integration is a two-way process requiring adaptation by both the immigrants and the society that receives them ( page 21 ) .
This is not our opinion either .
The strangers who come knocking at our door more often than not come from countries which have completely failed to let their population live decently , or even to feed it .
It is obviously in the immigrants ' interest to adjust to our way of life and our values .
To take the opposite view would be to do them a great disservice , and it would also , in return , do a great disservice to the countries of Europe .
. ( PT ) The report comments on a Commission communication on immigration , adopted in November 2000 , which considers the issue from a mainly economic perspective , linked to job prospects , which may create the conditions for establishing immigration quotas in the European Union .
It appears that the European Union is only interested in using labour from third countries to meet the needs and shortages of European capitalism , indifferent to the obstacles this may create to those countries ' own development by depriving them of vital human resources .
It is , therefore , crucial that we find a new perspective on cooperation and development policy , particularly with third countries , in order to contribute towards greater support for their development and provide their populations with decent standards of living , something which the report , unfortunately , does not touch upon .
With regard to immigrants , it is important to guarantee and respect all their rights .
Hence the proposals we submitted on upholding the legalisation of all immigrants , our insistence on the need for recognition of civil and political rights , namely the right to vote in local and European elections and the guarantee of equal treatment in terms of economic , cultural and social rights .
- ( FR ) I voted in favour of Mr Pirker ' s report and I would like to draw attention to the quality of the work carried out by our rapporteur .
I am glad that Parliament is finally taking a decision on such an important subject .
For almost twenty years , immigration as a subject of public debate has been treated only emotionally or unrealistically .
How could it have been otherwise , when the subject has virtually become a major stake in the internal policy of every Member State of the European Community ?
It also has to be admitted that , in the eyes of the public , the policies being followed are , on the one hand , inefficient when it comes to combating illegal immigration and , on the other , unjust in the case of proper immigration which is legal and useful to the development of our society .
It has now become vital to make a clear distinction , both in law and in practice , between proper immigration and improper immigration , and finally to define criteria and then stick to them .
While several international and European organisations all emphasise the risk of shortages of qualified workers in Europe , we must learn to adapt , like certain Anglo-Saxon countries , and open up European society to the immigrants that it so badly needs in several sectors , including informatics and new technologies .
To conclude , real courage consists in campaigning for deep-seated change in the world economic order .
Justice and ethics would then count for much more than they do in the moralising extremism of those who would like to demand total freedom to live and work in Europe , like those who would like to turn our European Community into a mere sanctuary .
- ( FR ) In the light of the recent dramatic events of 11 September 2001 in the United States of America , the fight against illegal immigration into Europe should , more than ever , be our chief concern .
It is time to stop letting all these illegal immigrants in and put an end to the free movement of traffickers and terrorists within the Union .
We must show some instinct for survival .
Terrorist cells have recently been identified in various Member States of the Union , in particular in France and Belgium , among illegal immigrants .
Since the opening up of borders and the Schengen Agreements , some immigrant communities have systematically organised themselves into networks of religious and ethnic infiltration , and as a result they are a fertile breeding ground for terrorism , and also for delinquency , trafficking and violent crimes of all kinds .
Yet what , in the face of all this , is Brussels ' policy ?
It closes its eyes and ignores the evil .
At the very best it feebly condemns the constant increase in international crime .
So what are its solutions ?
Encourage immigration , legalise illegal immigrants , give identity papers to all those who have entered our territory illegally , create and allow the creation of no-go areas where the law does not apply , such as the Sangatte Centre in France .
Broadly speaking , that is what is being preached by the report that we are voting on .
It tells us that we must populate Europe because Europe has a population deficit .
Europe needs manpower , so in order to meet that need we must have a global and voluntary immigration policy .
The National Front Députés have for years been constantly denouncing this irresponsible and suicidal policy coming from Brussels .
The fight against illegal immigration must clearly be based on the principle of zero tolerance .
Illegal immigrants must be sent back to their country of origin .
Our borders must be re-established , because proof has finally been given to all signatory parties to the Schengen Agreements that those borders are an essential element in the security of our countries .
Therefore , before committing ourselves to a Community immigration policy , let us start by establishing a Community security policy .
We are critical of parts of the report .
In our opinion , there is too great an emphasis placed on what should be done to limit immigration , instead of highlighting the positive and necessary aspects of increased immigration , including the immigration of labour .
In several cases , we should like to go further with regard to becoming more receptive to increased labour migration .
We are particularly critical of Paragraph 15 , which states that ' immigrants are expected to respect the community of values - as set out in the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights - and to show a willingness to integrate into society in the Member States ' .
We do not currently require the citizens of Europe to respect the community of values referred to in the report .
The question is how this paragraph will actually be interpreted .
A wave of anti-Muslim sentiment is currently sweeping across Europe .
In Sweden and in several other Member States , Muslims have been harassed .
Politicians in individual Member States have , in our opinion , made some astonishing statements .
Our concern is that the wording of Paragraph 15 is in danger of providing further scope for intolerance and xenophobia .
There is a risk that the diversity of Europe could be lost .
- ( FR ) The debates that have just taken place in the present session on the Pirker report , and indeed on the Evans report , represent a double departure from the debates previously held within the European Parliament on the same subjects .
The first of these departures is the new tone of firmness and rigour demonstrated both by the presidency and even by the Commission .
The events of 11 September have something to do with that .
The ideology of ' fewer and fewer controls ' has given way to the realisation that terrorism feeds on our laxity .
It is not by chance that the Europe of the Fifteen , the European Union , has emerged from the inquiry into the killings of 11 September as being the privileged location for the organisation , preparation and mounting of the terrorist attacks in the United States .
It is necessary now for the good intentions just expressed by the President-in-Office of the Council and the Commission to be translated into action and sustained in the long term .
It is , in fact , high time that the fight against illegal immigration and the fight against the abuse of the asylum procedure should no longer be mere formulae to be bandied about , but should become policies to be implemented with determination .
The second departure is more distressing .
This is the obvious discrepancy that has appeared between the new tone of the Council and the Commission , which is a positive signal of awareness , and the persistence of an ideological attitude among most of the Members who have spoken , which continues to confuse control with violation of freedoms , and which wants to increase the number of guarantees to the benefit of those who are abusing our reception and asylum procedures , to the detriment of the security and protection of our citizens and the interests of those who , because they really are being persecuted , ought to find asylum here .
Mr President , I should like to take this opportunity to clarify the reasons why my group voted in favour of the Pirker report .
In our view it is of the utmost importance that the Commission ' s communication be favourably received .
The Laeken Council has the political duty of revitalising the process launched by the Tampere European Council .
As evidenced by the data supplied by EUROSTAT , the citizens believe that the European Union must adopt a common immigration policy .
Amongst other provisions , our group has included the right of long-term residents to vote in local elections . We have also contrived to build in clearly defined responsibilities for the European Union .
For all these reasons , and also to express our strong support for the Commission , we have voted in favour , even though our views differ markedly from some of those expressed by the rapporteur .
We trust the communication will be favourably received at the Laeken Council .
We regret that some right-wing Members have referred to terrorism and immigration in the same breath during the debate . This gives rise to mistrust of immigrants and Muslim refugees .
Evans report ( A5-0304 / 2001 ) and Pirker report ( A5-0305 / 2001 )
- ( DA ) The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have today voted in favour of Mr Evans ' s and Mr Pirker ' s reports .
We agree that , in the longer term , the EU should develop a common asylum procedure and a uniform status for persons granted asylum .
Moreover , the EU ' s immigration policy should be adapted to developments in the world .
We are nonetheless alert to the fact that the communications relate to an area covered by Title IV of the Treaty Establishing the European Community and do not apply to Denmark , cf. the protocol on Denmark ' s position .
- ( FR ) We voted in favour of the Evans report because it contains a certain amount of progress as regards the position of refugees and because it ought to go without saying that on this subject all the countries of the Union should apply the same procedure .
However , this joint situation should be in line with the country that is most favourable to refugees , which is far from being the case .
Moreover , the wording leaves several loopholes for those Member States who like the rules to be applied more restrictively , which limits the actual scope of measures which are a step in the right direction .
On the other hand , we voted against the Pirker report on immigration , which justifies a policy of immigration quotas based solely on the interests of the bosses in the countries concerned .
This report tries to provide a legal basis for the activities of traffickers in modern slaves , allowing them to seek the workers that they need in poor countries , and giving them the right to turn people away as soon as there is no longer a demand for them .
Titley report ( A5-0309 / 2001 )
. ( EL ) The terrorist attack on the USA gives us an incentive to look at the problem of arms exports in a new light .
Having said which , the Titley report , despite containing a number of positive , albeit general , pointers , does not I think , come anywhere near to responding to the demands of the times .
It is unacceptable for the European Union to base its code of conduct in arms exports on the criterion of the ' needs of the European defence industry ' , because this negates any substantive measures which might be mentioned .
The European Union should move to get the USA , Russia , China and all the other major arms exporters to adopt binding rules of conduct and their unwillingness should not be a reason for the European Union to relax or otherwise fail to act properly .
At the same time , we need an observatory at European level , we need records and transparency on arms exports so that we can put an immediate end to the scandalous practice of selling arms to forces of crime and destabilisation which have no hesitation in using terrorism to turn their arms against the European Union and its citizens .
This is why I feel that the motion falls short and I did not vote for it .
- ( DA ) The idea of regulating politically the production and export of arms has our complete backing , but we reject Mr Titley ' s report with the following justification .
The report does not reflect the fundamental conflict between the interests of the arms industry and an ideal and peaceful world order .
To introduce a report on codes of conduct on arms exports by , in paragraph 1 d ) , proclaiming that the EU ' s policy on arms exports should ' meet the needs and challenges of the European defence industry ' is self-contradictory .
In the same way , we are opposed to the goal of making arms exports policy into a tool for developing a common defence policy , as intimated in paragraph 1 e ) .
We acknowledge that positive changes have been made and also support a number of the individual wordings .
. The Verts / ALE Group welcomes the fact that the report by Mr Titley on an EU code of conduct on arms exports is a major improvement on his previous reports on this issue .
We can fully support the vast majority of this report and we welcome many of its recommendations .
However we regret that many of our members felt they had to abstain from the final vote because the amendment to delete section 1 ( d ) " ... Reiterates its belief that European policy in arms export must : ( d ) meet the needs and challenges of the European defence industry " was not adopted .
Had this section been removed we could have supported the final report .
But to leave this objective in the report completely contradicts what we believe to be an ethical policy on arms .
We feel that an ethical code of conduct on arms exports should not be dictated by the needs of the European defence industry .
. ( NL ) The sale of instruments which facilitate the killing of people can be very lucrative .
Since the terrorist attacks of 11 September in America , the profit expectations of the arms industry have risen .
The only possible justification for producing weapons is in self-defence against external enemies who aim to take over , suppress us or wipe us out .
The production of arms as an economic activity , to make profit by means of exporting to regions where people want to buy those weapons , means that money is considered more important than human life .
Against the wishes of Parliament , last year , the Council pressed ahead with lifting the arms embargo against Indonesia , despite the violence in East Timor , the Moluccas , Aceh and West Papua .
Mr Titley ' s proposal contains only a non-legislative reference , but includes a number of improvements on the current situation , such as the legal enforcement of the Code of Conduct for arms exports , and its application to candidate countries .
He is right to request that permission from the Member States be required by European companies to transfer licences for the production of military equipment outside of European territory .
I support him in his aims of a worldwide agreement , annual reports on the application of the Code of Conduct and a refusal to allow the supply of weapons to countries that do not provide information to the UN conventional weapons register .
Langenhagen report ( A5-0288 / 2001 )
- ( FR ) The GALILEO Programme is being presented to us as enabling progress to be made in various fields ( the management of land , air and sea transport , road traffic , the organisation of life-saving at sea ) thanks to radio-navigation by satellite .
We are told that GALILEO testifies to a desire to ensure the independence of Europe from the United States which , with its Global Positioning System ( GPS ) , has launched a similar programme .
In fact , what it really does is provide an enormous market for European businesses , in other words a new source of profits for their owners and shareholders .
For it is they who will be the primary beneficiaries of GALILEO - indeed they already are - whether in the telecommunications sector , the transport sector or the space sector , since GALILEO involves the launching of a network of thirty satellites .
Public funding amounting to almost EUR 2 billion has already been budgeted for and to some extent released by the European Union and the European Space Agency .
As for private investors , they are reluctant to pay a single penny . Yet the European Union is not planning to call for their financial involvement until the final phase of the project , after it has been launched and guaranteed by public money .
According to the reporter , however , the private investors who have been promised responsibility for managing GALILEO and therefore ' possible revenue flows from GALILEO services ' , are unwilling to take any ' economic risk ' .
They are waiting for a ' positive signal from the political side ' of Europe . In other words they are waiting to be told that the political side will take on responsibility for all the costs , leaving the investors with nothing to do but collect the profits .
Though the European authorities are revelling in the supposed virtues of private initiative , the capitalists , for their part , want paying with more than words .
They want guaranteed profits , without any risk , and they know that they can count on both European and national authorities to give them what they want .
We have therefore voted against this report .
- ( FR ) I am pleased to be able to express my opinion of the GALILEO project at a time when the events of 11 September are forcing us to review our capacity to handle crises .
Remember that the GALILEO project is intended to deploy a set of satellites orbiting about 20 000 km above the Earth .
All those satellites would be linked to a network of control stations on the ground .
Cover would thus be worldwide , making it possible to improve considerably the management of air , sea and road traffic and to support search and rescue operations .
This technology already exists in the USA ( the GPS system ) and in Russia ( the GLONASS system ) .
It is currently financed and controlled by the military authorities in those two countries .
The quality and continuity of its use for civilian purposes are dependent on those authorities who may , at any time , discontinue or downgrade the signal .
In Europe , on the other hand , the GALILEO programme will be managed and controlled by civilians .
It is proposed that the system should be developed in four stages , namely a definition phase in 2000 , a development and validation phase up to 2005 , a deployment phase up to 2007 and an operational phase after that .
Ideally then , the GALILEO system should be operational from 2008 onwards , thereby responding to the wishes expressed at the European Council in Stockholm and to the European Union ' s urgent needs in this field . This , at any rate , is what emerges from the report by the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism .
On the question of financing , it seems to me to be important to clear up the question of how this will be organised before coming to a final decision .
I also deplore the fact that some Member States are reluctant to lend their support to this project .
I therefore invite the Commission to take the necessary steps to break down this reluctance .
It will then have the task of defining a general financing structure , and that will have to be done between now and 15 November 2001 if we want to be reasonably sure of meeting the 2008 deadline .
The European Parliament will have to be consulted on the Commission ' s draft .
Once this draft has been approved , it should be possible to encourage the involvement of European industry in the financing of the later stages in the medium and long term .
- ( FR ) First of all I should like to thank both our rapporteur from the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , Mrs Brigitte Langenhagen , and also the whole of that Committee , for the high-quality work that they have submitted to us and also for the fact that they have strongly emphasised both the advantages and the difficulties that could result from the implementation of the GALILEO satellite navigation programme .
Let us remember , briefly , that the GALILEO satellite navigation programme is an ambitious project which provides for the deployment of an arrangement of satellites in orbit at a distance of about 20 000 km from the Earth , linked to a network of ground control stations .
This definition shows us how important it is to vote in favour of this report , as I shall be doing .
The implementation of the GALILEO project will enable us to have world coverage which can be used not only for controlling air , sea and road traffic but also for supporting search and rescue operations .
However , although it is necessary , for the above-mentioned reasons , to vote in favour of the report , thereby allowing the EU to develop a system which the European Council in Stockholm considered was important enough to be launched ' without delay ' , we should do so while bearing in mind those areas - highlighted in the report - which may prove to be problematical in future .
It is , in fact , extremely important that we should remain vigilant regarding the possibility of such a system being used for military purposes .
It is possible that the system might be misused , and it is up to us to be aware of this and to ensure that such a thing cannot happen .
In addition , it should be noted that the immediate funding of such a project will not be without its problems .
Member States , or at least some of them , are reluctant to lend their financial support to the implementation of GALILEO , and private investors do not seem to be particularly enthusiastic about the idea of participating in such a project either .
In other words , before coming to a final decision , the budgetary authorities of the European Union need to have an accurate understanding of the financing involved , which means that the Commission will have to prepare proposals for the management structures for the GALILEO project .
( Speech shortened under Rule 137 of the Rules of Procedure )
. ( PT ) Our vote expresses the conviction that it is worthwhile having a European project that functions properly and is independent of military and defence activities , including that of third countries , which is not the case at present , given Europe ' s dependence in this context on the United States of America .
It is crucial , however , that the implementation of the project respects citizens ' rights , freedoms and guarantees , namely their privacy .
Its creation may be an advantage for the mobile telecommunications services , which can use it for localisation applications requested by users if the financial cost does not render such use prohibitive .
It is also necessary to take the cost of financing it into account , especially the share that may be demanded of countries that do not participate directly in its creation , in order not to hinder its implementation in the various Member States .
. ( NL ) GALILEO will not come into being until American competition has cornered the European market , which will be too late .
Such a navigation system by satellite might have become part of a strategy to make Europe less reliant on the US .
There are plenty of reasons for this .
America is threatening us with increased global warming , again with an anti-missile shield dating from the ' Star Wars ' period , with meat containing hormones , noisy aircraft , the ECHELON tapping system , a monopoly of patents and with a dollar which , as international currency , has for decades passed on the deficits of the American balance of payments to the outside world .
At the moment , it is even threatening to drag us into a war against the third world . Restricted access of American products manufactured under poor working and environmental conditions to the European market might force America to pay more attention to labour , the environment , public health , animal torture , human rights and peace .
Only in a confrontation of that kind could we possibly have a need for GALILEO .
As long as such a confrontation is not forthcoming , the GALILEO project remains a contribution of the European taxpayer to industry in the field of electronics and space travel , and that industry is largely subject to military interests .
It would be preferable to spend the money for GALILEO on environmental care and useful collective facilities .
Rübig report ( A5-0234 / 2001 )
- ( FR ) Deploring the fact that the European Union is lagging behind the United States and Japan , the report proposes a series of measures claiming to encourage ' innovation promotion and progress in research ' .
All the proposed measures are centred on the idea that it is the task of the public authorities to finance the research , directly or indirectly , but that it is private interests who will profit from it .
This ranges from subsidies to what the report calls ' innovative enterprises ' to measures to encourage ' synergy between businesses and universities ' , which means that as far as research is concerned the latter will be subordinate to the former .
In its explanatory statement , the report not only preaches the promotion of ' entrepreneurship at the educational level ' but also says that ' obstacles to mobility arising from social security systems should be removed ' .
The title of the report is ' Innovation in a knowledge-driven economy ' .
It would be more accurate to talk about the subordination of knowledge , research and public money to the interests of the bosses in a profit-driven economy .
Since we are opposed to both the spirit and the letter of this report , we have voted against it .
- ( FR ) The reception given to this Commission Communication on ' Innovation in a knowledge-driven economy ' has been largely positive .
It sets out the European scoreboard for innovation , drawn up on the basis of statistics available at European level .
An analysis shows that despite the efforts made by Member States to promote innovation , Europe ' s performance is still trailing behind that of its main competitors .
Yet innovation was one of the strategic priorities identified by the European Council in Lisbon in March 2000 .
Consequently , the Commission makes several recommendations to Member States with a view to improving their policies on encouraging innovative enterprises and support for innovation throughout the whole of the economic and social fabric .
The Member States are invited to improve their policies on encouraging innovative enterprises , removing obstacles to initiatives and innovators , encouraging private investment in research and innovation , and improving the rules governing the use of the results obtained by publicly funded research .
Naturally I support these proposals .
I believe that the projects that are covered by this philosophy will be able to obtain funds as part of the Sixth FRDP .
The rapporteur has identified three key sectors in which Community intervention and Member States ' commitment are necessary . These are the creation of entrepreneurship at the educational level , the promotion of the training of workers , and the promotion of innovation among small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) .
He also emphasises the need to take into consideration the needs of the SMEs , since they represent 60 million undertakings and 60 % of jobs in the European Union .
Innovation cannot exist without the SMEs .
I agree with him there , of course , but I have to admit that we have been hearing the same speeches for years , all about the essential role of the SMEs in the European economy and the need to remove the many obstacles to their development .
Alas , little progress has been achieved .
I took this into account when I drafted my report on the Sixth FRDP , and as far as possible I tried to guarantee the SMEs access to European research and development funding .
. Madam President , I warmly welcome my colleague Paul Rubig 's report which promotes research and innovation and backs a Commission initiative to promote innovation .
Time and again the EU has been criticised for failing to keep abreast of technological innovation and is sorely lagging behind its American counterparts in this field .
The EU should do more to exploit its potential to innovate in this field and this was recognised , as the report outlines , in the Lisbon , so-called , dot.com Summit .
European Member States need to collude and pool their separate specialisms and create a system of ' benchmarking ' .
To supplement these measures the report rightly calls for more high quality education .
This will do much to boost the EU 's Lisbon Strategy .
Lastly , these innovations cannot progress unless there is a loosening of bureaucratic regulations .
If we decrease the amount of red tape which currently hinders European innovation , then we will go some way in becoming more able to compete with America .
This will promote more start-ups and new ventures .
Mayer report ( A5-0311 / 2001 )
- ( FR ) Yesterday evening , at the end of the debate , and quoting various studies in support of his argument , Commissioner Balkestein clearly contradicted those who claim that prices have risen since the introduction of the Community exhaustion system .
On the contrary , he maintained , prices have even fallen in some cases .
Those who claim to defend consumers are in fact protecting parallel import circuits which threaten quality , innovation and employment and encourage counterfeiting .
Hence the three amendments which I tabled , and which seem to be worrying the rapporteur .
In effect , the PPE-DE called for a roll-call vote on all our amendments so as to ensure , right to the end , the control of its members and the commitment of certain coordinators .
I am afraid that , yet again , pressure and bargaining will carry the day and that a bad decision will be taken .
In order to avoid any useless multiplication of the costs represented by these requests for roll-call votes , we withdraw our first two amendments and retain only Amendment No 3 , which we believe is enough to demonstrate the sad reality of the situation .
That the international exhaustion of rights conferred by trade marks has been an energetically discussed topic in recent months , is shown by this report , which has dragged on for months and has been thoroughly revised , as is clear from a comparison with the first draft report .
The exhaustion of trade mark rights affects all branded products .
As President of the Wine Intergroup , I would like to concentrate on the consequences for this sector .
The international exhaustion of trade mark rights will be of no advantage to the consumer in the European Union as regards food and drink , as is confirmed by the study produced by National Economic Research Associates ( NERA ) at the Commission 's request .
European consumers could indeed be put at a disadvantage in the longer term by our industries ' losing the opportunity to develop new products and to offer the consumer new services .
Should yields decrease decisively through parallel imports from third countries , there will also be a decline in motivation to invest in new markets .
In the event of the international trade mark rights becoming exhausted , complex distribution networks will come into being and it will become more difficult to put a stop to trade mark piracy .
There is no doubt that disadvantages will result for the consumer and for the manufacturer of branded goods , for example with regard to consumer health protection .
I am therefore speaking out against the international exhaustion of trade mark rights .
However , in view of events since the report was drafted , I will not be voting against it .
Joint resolution on racism ( RC B5-0605 / 2001 )
. The UK Conservatives voted against this motion for resolution since it repeats the errors of the Durban conference .
We cannot support the undue emphasis on the Middle East , and are not convinced that it might not have been better had the conference failed to reach a conclusion .
In many respects , the Durban conference belongs to an age that came to an end on 11 September .


There are three reasons underlying any racist behaviour : firstly , ignorance about the other person , which may lead to fear and thus rejection ; secondly , the bad faith and arrogance of those who want to feel superior , maybe subconsciously prompted by an inferiority complex ; and thirdly , the political , economic or religious ambition of those who want to acquire as much power as they can by dominating other people .
Therefore , while it is clear that large-scale , incisive cultural measures need to be taken to teach all people respect for others and acceptance , it is equally clear that civil society must use every tool available to it to fight those political , cultural , economic and religious systems which breed and are based on racism .
Respect for diversities must include , however , constant , enlightened action on the part of civil society so that the objective of respect for human rights and dignity is achieved throughout the world .
Therefore , the behaviour of those civilised Western - and other - cultures which are fighting against religious or ritualistic practices , for example , which physically or psychologically damage a person , cannot be considered to be racist .
In being subjected to these practices , women continue to be treated not as human beings entitled to exercise all rights but as objects subject to customs which prevent or limit their participation in society and politics .
The entire history of mankind has , I am sad to say , been marked by collective and individual racist behaviour .
In condemning the racism of the past , the political world must avoid falling into the trap of fresh racist behaviour now .
Indeed , we cannot disregard the fact that there is a form of political racism currently in existence : the racism indulged in by those who condemn the ideas of others merely because they are the expression of a different political hue .
That is why we call upon Parliament , the Commission and the Council to take much more effective action both within and outside the Community than they have done thus far , to promote a culture of mutual respect among people and governments , which , if it is to be genuine , must not tolerate attitudes , ideas or behaviour which fail to respect human dignity , whether they are based on religious , cultural , economic or political ideals .
For these reasons , I voted for the resolution .
- ( FR ) The MPF Members abstained from the vote on the resolution on the Durban Conference as a sign of their very strong disapproval of the highly ambiguous conduct observed in this House by European Union representatives .

In fact , here we have a conference convened under the aegis of the United Nations allowing itself to be overrun and exploited by a grouping of Islamist NGOs , with the active or benevolent complicity of a significant number of states , mainly in the Arab-Muslim world , some of which are usually described as ' moderates ' , a conference that goes so far as to suggest an untenable equation of Zionism with racism , while our representatives go on sitting there as though nothing had happened .

In face of the attitude of the United States and Israel , whose departure from the conference was a sign that the threshold of the unacceptable had been crossed , the European Union , by remaining , and however much it denies this today , ran the risk of appearing to support these shameful equations and intolerable excesses that the philosopher Alain Finkielkraut summarised as follows : ' In Durban , anti-racism has taken over anti-Semitism and the denial of humanity ' .
The Europeans should have left for the sake of their honour and dignity , which would have sent out a strong and salutary signal to the UN and its General Secretariat and encouraged them to take a firm stance in face of the attempt by Islamism to impose its ideological influence , and genuinely to represent the interests and values of the international community .
Any show of complaisance towards the kind of equations proposed in Durban can indeed be interpreted as a sign of weakness on our part and of encouragement towards those who have set themselves the objective of destroying our values .
. I voted against the resolution in relation to the World Conference against Racism in Durban to make it clear that this conference has done the gravest possible disservice to the promotion of good race relations .
The conference was hijacked by those whose sole objective was to attack the state of Israel and to ignore the fact that it is the one nation in the Middle East based on democracy .
Israel was singled out by countries and organisations which have an appalling record on human rights .
Even worse the language and the tone of the attacks had more in common with ' Der Stürmer ' in the Germany of Adolf Hitler .
And yet despite this no condemnation of the United Nations or the conference for allowing this to happen .
The United States made it clear that it would take no part in these proceedings .
The European Union should have taken a similar view .
That it failed to do so was a sad reflection on its failure to learn the lessons of history .
That concludes voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.39 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to say what a pleasure it is for the presidency to welcome the delegation from the Moroccan Parliament to this House . This delegation is led by Mr Brahim Rachidi , who is visiting us for the ninth time .
In welcoming Mr Rachidi and the members of his delegation , I would like to highlight the importance we attach to such meetings .
They provide an opportunity for both Parliaments to reaffirm their common commitment to the fundamental principles of democracy . As you are aware ladies and gentlemen , Morocco has joined with us in condemning the recent criminal attacks on the United States .
In addition , Morocco has expressed its solidarity with the United States and all freedom-loving countries in no uncertain terms . Morocco has also made its commitment to the global fight against terrorism quite clear .
Along with its southern Mediterranean neighbours , the European Union is intent on playing its part in the building of a stable , strong and democratic region within the framework of the Barcelona process . This process is essential to the future of Europe and of its nearest and dearest neighbours .
We are facing difficult times .
I should like to emphasise , Mr Vice-President of the Moroccan Parliament , that we shall maintain our commitment to these common values throughout . We shall also maintain our strong opposition to any attempt to identify terrorism with the Arab-Muslim world .
In this connection , we have committed ourselves to act resolutely and nip in the bud any consequences for nationalism , racism or xenophobia .
Mr Vice-President , it is my earnest hope that the conversations you are to have with the members of the Delegation for relations with the countries of the Maghreb and with other colleagues will serve to strengthen existing links between European Union countries and the Kingdom of Morocco . I hope too that these contacts will help us to continue making progress in our common quest for peace and prosperity for all countries bordering the Mediterranean .
( Applause )
Growth and Stability Pact - Informal ECOFIN of 22 / 23 September in Liege
The next item is statements by the Council and the Commission on the Growth and Stability Pact , and also on the informal meeting of ECOFIN ministers in Liege on 22 and 23 September .
I shall give the floor first to Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck , who will speak on behalf of the Council .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too have great pleasure in welcoming a delegation from the Moroccan Parliament to the gallery .
It so happened that my duties had taken me to Casablanca when the tragic events of 11 September took place . I was leading a Belgian economic mission to Morocco .
I was at lunch with ten members of the Moroccan government , including the Prime Minister of Morocco , and we heard the tragic news together .
Together we shared the distress caused by these horrific events , and the subsequent reactions you are aware of .
I too would therefore like to welcome the delegation which is here with us today .
( NL ) As far back as the introduction of the single currency , it was decided to bring about reinforced , economic coordination among the then eleven , and now twelve , Member States belonging to the eurozone .
This coordination materialised via the Eurogroup which Belgium is chairing throughout this year and in which finance ministers of the Member States which have adopted the euro are represented , together with the European Commissioner responsible for economic and monetary matters , as well as the President of the European Central Bank .
As you know , this reinforced coordination has an informal and structural dimension and does not prejudice the responsibilities assigned to the ECOFIN Council by the Treaties .
For the first few years when the single currency came into being - and I am talking about 1999 and 2000 - the bulk of the activities were aimed at the development of , and familiarisation with , this reinforced economic coordination among the Member States taking part in the eurozone .
Pursuant to , and with due respect to , the subsidiarity principle , this coordination faces the most important challenge of marrying the practice of economic authorities of each individual Member State involved , with the common monetary project to which these Member States have subscribed .
It is the task of the European Central Bank to adopt an independent monetary policy , the key objective of which is to maintain price stability .
The decentralisation of the economic policy and the centralisation of monetary decisions are , as it were , a basic contradiction in terms within the Economic and Monetary Union .
The Eurogroup ' s first task in this reinforced , economic coordination , is to outline the mainstays of the eurozone ' s economic policy .
In fact , the message which was formulated in Nice last year by the Heads of State and Government is very much along the same lines .
In its conclusions , the European Council is delighted at both the improved operation of the Eurogroup and the reinforced coordination of the economic policy of the Member States in the eurozone .
All efforts by the Belgian Presidency of the Eurogroup are channelled into reinforcing the role , the visibility and the credibility of the Eurogroup .
In addition , the Belgian Presidency is also drafting a reference framework and the working method for the coming years , especially in connection with the coordination of the economic policy of the different Member States .
The key instruments of a macro-economic policy , especially the monetary and budgetary policy , must be combined in an optimal policy mix , as it were , to achieve the pre-supposed objectives , such as promoting price stability and bolstering economic activity .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the interests of the Eurogroup it is important firstly to develop an effective and lasting budgetary policy for the entire area , and also specifically for each of the Member States .
This must be done in line with national constraints and special considerations .
This budgetary policy must dovetail with the monetary policy of the European Central Bank .
However , it will not be easy to finalise the details of this type of budgetary policy for several reasons . Firstly , the results of any budgetary policy depend on the time scales established .
For example , in the short term , pro-cyclical budgetary policies should not be used .
In the medium term , the objectives of the Growth and Stability Pact to establish a balance or surplus of public finances should be maintained .
In the long term , it will be essential to ensure the viability of public finances . This should take account of the different elements involved , including the difficult and important problem of the ageing of populations .
Ladies and gentlemen , what I have just said clearly demonstrates the extent of the challenges before us . Do I really have to highlight just how difficulties with planning and methods , and the inevitable economic uncertainty , make it very difficult and complicated to define and implement budgetary policies ?
We are confronted by statistical problems , the uncertainty surrounding economic forecasts , even in the short term , and the diversity of the many situations . There is also the fact that the effects of budgetary policies are only felt after a certain period of time .
All this makes it difficult to determine a budgetary policy ex ante .
The long-term analysis of budgetary policy is also an essential part of structural policies . The strategy combines a number of approaches as regards the ageing of our populations .
The strategy aims to step up the reduction of public debt . It also promotes the adoption of measures to increase employment levels .
This involves the gradual elimination of obstacles to employment , particularly by reducing the fiscal burden on employment . Lastly , the strategy provides for the in-depth reform of pensions systems , in order to ensure their viability .
The Belgian Presidency is seeking to examine public finances in greater depth on an ongoing and long-term basis . Particular attention will be paid to examining public finances in relation to the stability and convergence programme .
Member States and the other interested parties agree on the long-term objectives and the instruments to be used .
However , as regards the short and medium term , recent economic deterioration has created some confusion .
Clearly , we need to hold an in-depth debate on this matter in order to define and establish a strong common position .
We must hold such a debate during our presidency .
Ladies and gentlemen , we must keep to the terms of the Growth and Stability Pact .
Member States stated this commitment during the informal meeting of ECOFIN at Liège on 21 and 22 September .
Therefore , there can be no question of Member States being faced with deficits in excess of the convergence criteria of 3 % .
The Extraordinary European Council of 21 September also reaffirmed its commitment to the framework , regulations and full implementation of the Growth and Stability Pact .
However , budgetary balances do not necessarily have to be set in stone .
Instead of a purely nominal approach , there should be the ability to make adjustments in relation to changes in economic circumstances .
The broad guidelines of economic policy for 2001 , adopted at Gothenburg last June , are very clear on this point .
The principle is accepted without discussion in a favourable economic climate .
Hence , better than expected economic growth inevitably leads to a greater improvement in nominal budgetary figures . For this reason also , a pro-cyclical budgetary policy , together with a decrease in spending which could lead to overheating , is not permitted .
The question that now arises is to establish whether this allowance for cyclical variation can be implemented in a similar way in periods of poor growth or recession .
The Belgian Presidency is convinced that this is indeed possible . The broad guidelines of economic policy for 2001 confirm our belief .
In a less favourable economic climate , the balances already taken into consideration within the framework of the Pact , should also be adjusted in line with changed economic circumstances .
Nominal balances can therefore be affected by worsening economic conditions . However , they can only fluctuate according to those same economic conditions .
In these circumstances , a pro-cyclical policy should not be used .
Consequently , a decrease in revenue should not be then compensated for by an equivalent reduction in spending .
Cyclical adjustments must be reliable in order to assess the budgetary positions correctly .
The agenda of the Belgian Presidency therefore allows some time for us to refine effective methods to calculate the disparity between production and potential growth .
These methods should be used in future stability programmes .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , all these issues will doubtless lead to some long but interesting discussions at the next meeting of the euro area .
Mr President , I , too , would like to offer a warm welcome to the Moroccan delegation with us today . I shall also endeavour to analyse two issues confronting us , namely the Growth and Stability Pact and the informal ECOFIN Council and shall attempt to report on both during my first speech .
The Liege Council on 22 and 23 September 2001 focused on the economic impact of the terrorist attacks on the United States .
I should like to refer to three aspects of this impact discussed at ECOFIN . Firstly , the economic situation .
The opportunity was also taken to discuss the Growth and Stability Pact .
Secondly , the financing of terrorism .
Thirdly , the problems airlines are experiencing with regard to insurance .
I shall also comment on two other important matters raised at Liege , namely preparations for transition to the euro and issues related to globalisation .
Concerning the first point , I should emphasise that the attacks on the United States have strengthened our conviction that international cooperation on financial and political issues is essential . Further , coordination of economic policies within the European Union must be strengthened .
As from last year , the slowdown of economic activity in the United States and the rest of the world has been having a greater impact on the European Union than was originally anticipated .
The tragic events in the United States have increased uncertainty and the negative risks for anticipated general growth .
We cannot act as if nothing had happened , but at the same time it is very difficult to produce an accurate estimate of the potential impact of those acts .
Within the European Union , growth will be well below 2 % this year . We are however still hoping for a gradual recovery of internal demand in the coming quarters .
There are a number of reasons for this : lower inflation , recent tax reductions and more favourable monetary conditions .
The risks should therefore be manageable . We must , of course , monitor economic changes very closely so as to adjust economic policies as necessary , both in the Union and in each of the Member States .
Following the events on 11 September , political leaders showed their determination to act swiftly and appropriately to eliminate the risks of a lengthier slowdown . To this end , we must also maintain our medium-term objectives , and move through our agenda more swiftly .
I have in mind in particular the Lisbon agenda .
We need to modernise our economies quickly so we can reverse the slowdown as soon as possible and increase our capacity for growth .
As I stated earlier , the declaration following the informal ECOFIN confirmed the commitment of Member States to the framework , rules and implementation of the Growth and Stability Pact .
As the presidency has pointed out , slower growth will affect the nominal value of budgetary positions . Departure from the objectives ought , however , to be limited .
The Growth and Stability Pact is a suitable framework for budgetary policy in times when the economy is developing well and in less good times .
It makes it possible to implement the most appropriate budgetary policy for each set of circumstances .
It is possible to resort to all the possibilities provided in the pact .
The automatic stabilisers will be more effective if the slowdown is greater than anticipated .
The manner and extent to which these stabilisers operate will depend on the situation of each Member State .
Those states closer to balancing their budget will obviously have more room for manoeuvre .
Current budgetary situations result from compliance with existing budgetary rules , and have enabled the European Central Bank to adopt a flexible monetary policy . In particular , they have made it possible for the Bank to take the right decision quickly and reduce interest rates by fifty basic points on 17 September .
An increase in deficits over and above what can be justified by the operation of the stabilisers would reduce the options open to the Central Bank as regards possible future cuts in rates of interest .
The European Council requested the Commission to submit a study of the likely evolution of the economic situation together with the recommendations it envisages to the forthcoming European Council at Ghent .
The report will have to be viewed as an ongoing systematic exercise allowing for adjustment of the assessment of the evolution of risks and the possible consequences .
My second comment concerns action to combat the financing of terrorism .
The ECOFIN statement gives prominence to a number of specific actions .
Firstly , the matter of the review of the directive on money laundering . This is currently under negotiation , as you are aware .
I should like to emphasise once again , on behalf of the Commission and in line with the ECOFIN statement at Liege , that we attach great political significance to the swift conclusion of this process .
It will send out a clear signal of the Union ' s commitment to stamping out criminal activity supported by money laundering .
I should also like to highlight the Commission ' s approval of the draft regulation on specific measures to freeze the assets of individuals or entities involved in the financing of terrorist activities . We hope the Council and Parliament will deal with this as a matter of urgency so that it can be implemented immediately .
It gives a clear indication of our political determination to grant no respite to those who attack political coexistence and the freedoms of all citizens .
The ECOFIN Council also agreed general guidelines on government intervention concerning the insurance problems facing airline companies .
The ECOFIN statement invites the Commission to broaden the remit of the ad hoc group set up in the framework of the Transport Council to include insurance problems .
The statement also specifies that the Commission must be notified of any measure taken by governments , including financial amounts .
This will enable the Commission to discharge its responsibility of ensuring that such measures are compatible with Community legislation and to ensure consistency between the responses by the various Member States .
The Commission is drafting a report on the impact of the attacks on 11 September on the air transport industry .
There was also an opportunity at the informal ECOFIN to pursue the discussion on preparations for the introduction of the euro . Such discussions have been held at regular intervals .
The Commission is drafting a report on the subject for the forthcoming European Council at Ghent on 19 October .
At Liege I appealed to the Member States to pay particular attention to three aspects which seem to me crucial at this juncture . Firstly , the problem of supplying small traders in advance .
They need to be informed and convinced of the commercial advantages of advance supply .
It is also important however to find ways of helping them to work with the banks . The latter should offer fair debit conditions for the amounts in euro received by small traders before 31 December 2001 .
In addition , it is essential to provide specific training for small traders and for all those working on the tills in any kind of business .
The third issue causing us concern is monitoring of the prices of goods and services over the period of the changeover to the euro .
We cannot go through the process of calculating the harmonised consumer price index every week , nor would it make sense to do so . Nonetheless , we can however provide the citizens with information on the evolution of certain key prices in a transparent manner .
As this exercise is to be undertaken by government agencies , transparency and objectivity will be guaranteed , and the sample chosen will be appropriate .
The informal ECOFIN also agreed with the Commission ' s proposal to establish a common European network to organise exchange of information during the period when notes and coins are to be introduced .
This network will start to operate at the beginning of December in close cooperation with the European Central Bank ' s Cash Changeover Committee .
The last issue I would like to deal with is the debate on globalisation .
The Commission has followed the public debate on globalisation closely , including the debate on the so-called Tobin levy or tax .
We have taken note of ECOFINs interest in receiving a report on these issues .
This debate focuses on two clearly relevant objectives on which we share the concerns expressed by many of the participants in the debate on globalisation .
Firstly , to avoid excessive fluctuation in the rates of interest which could prevent the hoped-for economic development of developing countries . Secondly , to find sources of additional finance to combat poverty .
There is no single instrument allowing us to attain both these objectives at once .
The Union and other countries , international institutions and other groups have developed a range of instruments and policies in an attempt to work towards these objectives .
More and better action could of course be taken , and the Commission is prepared to explore new possibilities .
As originally defined , Professor Tobin ' s idea of imposing a tax on foreign currency transactions was intended to put a damper on international monetary markets .
It was put forward as a second best solution to put the brakes on short-term speculative movements .
The Commission has already made its point of view clear on a number of occasions .
A tax on monetary transactions is not an effective way of dealing with the problems arising from excessive volatility of financial flows or with inequalities between countries .
A wide range of instruments should be drawn upon .
The Tobin levy or tax is not the magic wand allowing us to deal with all the challenges which have arisen .
We need to consider a wide range of instruments in our efforts to attain financial and monetary stability .
A global approach to the financial edifice is called for , both at internal European Union level and at international level . This should include regulatory frameworks , institutions and the problem of money laundering .
A wide-ranging approach to the financing of development is also required .
Different instruments can be used to deal with poverty , debt reduction , the supply of international public goods and the protection of the environment .
The Commission is prepared to make an active contribution to the debate on the instruments to ensure coherence between globalisation , sustainable development and world governance . I am sure we can also count on support from Parliament and the Council .
These issues are of course beyond the Union ' s strict sphere of competence . We should tackle them together with other countries and institutions .
The Commission is ready to respond to the Council ' s invitation to continue working on how best to respond to the key objectives I referred to . In any case , part of this work is already under way within the Commission .
We are currently preparing a report on the external dimension of sustainable development . This is due next January and is aimed at the Río + 10 conference to be held in Johannesburg next year .
Ladies and gentlemen , these are the key issues I wanted to share with you .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , why did my group demand this afternoon 's debate on the Stability and Growth Pact ? The reason given was that we were disturbed by certain utterances we have heard emanating from the ranks of socialist governments in the past weeks and months .

The statements made by Mr Eichel , Mr Jospin , Mr Fabius , and other things that were said , all went along the same lines .
For a start , they asserted that it was necessary in the present situation to soften the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact . That was the first demand .
The second was that the Heads of State and of Government must be accorded the right to prescribe annual stability objectives to the European Central Bank .
We take the view that both these proposals are extraordinarily dangerous , for the Stability and Growth Pact and the independence of the European Central Bank are the twin pillars on which rests the European Union 's monetary system .
These pillars must not be shaken .
My group will always speak up in favour of maintaining the independent European Central Bank and the Stability and Growth Pact in their present forms .
Let us turn now to the resolutions on the table before us .
Jointly with the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reform Party , we have submitted a motion for a resolution .
We negotiated with the Group of the Party of European Socialists , which stated that it was unable to agree to our resolution .
What , though , is so bad about our resolution ?
It states that the Stability and Growth Pact should , in quite simple words , be ' retained ' .
Why can they not agree to that ?
Then they said : We want to put its principles fully into practice .
Why not just agree to it then ?
We need measures against money laundering .
You spoke about that , Commissioner .
We need measures to destroy the financial background for terrorist acts .
Why not agree to that ?
We must also be consistent in reducing monopolies in order to strengthen the competitiveness of our European economy .
Why can they not agree to that ?
Now for the second question : what counter-proposal does the other side have to offer ?
They put forward essentially the same ones over and over again : that the European Central Bank should cut interest rates .
Or , on the other hand , that the Stability and Growth Pact , or the Member States ' budget policies , should be relaxed .
That is the Socialist policy mix .
That is the potion concocted by druids to cure all the ills of our economy at a stroke and without effort .
It would be nice if things worked like that , my dear Christa !
But in reality they do not .
Take a look at Japan , where this policy was applied and where it does not work .
Consider the stock exchanges in the United States today , where it can be seen that it does not work .
Look at economic history , where we see from the past that it has never yet worked .
So I would like to urge you to reject these demands and support our resolution .
Mr President , Commissioner , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in the light of the grave global situation , I have no desire to enter into a puerile argument with my fellow Member , Mr von Wogau .
Mr von Wogau has just accused the Socialist Group of having the worst of intentions .
This is certainly not the policy we are defending here .
We must bear in mind that the attacks of 11 September have not only caused great human suffering . They may also have far-reaching consequences for civil liberties and for the global economy .
Before 11 September , the United States was clearly already experiencing a slowdown and Japan was already in a bad way . However , before 11 September a slowdown was already evident in Europe .
It had proved necessary to revise some forecasts downwards . Furthermore , it is clear that the situation in Europe and worldwide will be worse during the third quarter than it was during the second quarter .
What we need to do now is prevent a recession .
As we are all aware , a recession is defined as negative growth for two consecutive six-month periods . According to Mr von Wogau , we must now wait six months to see if we are really in a recession .
However , I believe that we must respond by pursuing a pragmatic policy . I think that Europe owes it to herself to respond to this threat of a recessionary spiral with a proactive economic policy .
This should be achieved within the European Union by improving the coordination of economic policies .
The Council representative said just this to the House . The European Union should also increase political cooperation with all its economic partners , including developing countries .
We would like to establish a pragmatic policy like that of the United States , although , as far as I know , the United States does not have a Socialist government ...
We should of course take account of the Growth and Stability Pact .
We should not encourage Member States to exceed budgetary deficit limits , especially the 3 % threshold .
Nevertheless , as the Council representative has said , we must assess the long-term viability of public finances . The Growth and Stability Pact states that public finances should be balanced , or almost balanced .
We must also respond in the short term .
Economic stabilisers can have a role to play .
We are experiencing the consequences of a negative external event . The Growth and Stability Pact allows for us to respond to negative external events .
I do not wish to engage in ideological debate .
Mr von Wogau ' s interpretation of the Growth and Stability Pact is merely theological . We are not calling for state aid .
Nor are we calling for quick-fix solutions . We are calling for selective measures to support sectors badly affected by the current economic situation .
Ladies and gentlemen , lastly , I would like to stress that we are not facing a war between different civilisations .
Terrorism does not represent any civilisation . Terrorism negates everything that is human .
We need a coalition against terrorism , but we also need a coalition against poverty .
The World Bank has recently published information on the consequences of the attacks on New York for developing countries .
We must not only deplore the loss of thousands of lives in New York and Washington . We must also lament the fact that there are tens of thousands of other victims amongst the children of the poorest countries in the world .
These are the people we must respond to .
Mr President , on behalf of the Liberal Group , I wish to say that we believe the Stability and Growth Pact is an essential pillar of economic stability in the euro area and in the Union more widely , and should be respected in letter and spirit .
We do not recognise the view , apparently emanating from the Socialist Group , that the SGP currently incorporates unnecessarily restrictive fiscal rules .
For the 11 countries whose budgets are in a sustainable position - those which , in other words , can face a normal recession with a fall in tax revenue and continue to respect the 3 % limit on budget deficits - there is no need to raise taxes or cut public spending and the automatic stabilisers can and should be allowed to play .
Moreover , for many of these countries , this is the first slowdown since the first oil shock in 1973 in which the automatic stabilisers have been able to work fully .
Previously , financial market worries have been a serious constraint on governments .
So monetary union , the Stability and Growth Pact and fiscal consolidation have given back to Member States a useful policy lever which has been out of the policy box for too long .
For the four euro-area Member States whose budgets are not yet fully compatible with the Stability and Growth Pact - France , Germany , Italy and Portugal - it is wholly reasonable that they should continue the process of putting their underlying budget positions right .
This means allowing some effects of the slowdown on the deficit , but certainly not all .
In our joint motion with the PPE-DE Group we urge the proper respect of the SGP .
We point out that it would be particularly useful in a year like this one - in which many stability programmes were drafted in expectation of 3 % growth , but the out-turn is likely to be less than 2 % , as the Commission has said - if there were a commonly agreed measure between the ECB , Ecofin and the Commission of the underlying budget balance , stripping out the impact of the slowdown on taxes and cyclically determined spending and , perhaps , interest rates as well .
Such an underlying budget balance would allow better between-years monitoring of the fiscal position , underpinning the discipline of the Stability and Growth Pact and reassuring the financial markets that the fiscal stance is not being eased , even if the nominal deficits are inevitably somewhat larger .
Similarly , such an underlying budget balance would discourage finance ministers from fiscal easing in upturns , merely on account of cyclically buoyant revenue .
I urge us to respect the Stability and Growth Pact and add to its ability to check finance ministers ' discipline .
Mr President , Madam President , Commissioner , much has already been said about the issue of the Growth and Stability Pact .
I think that the main difference between the two joint motions for resolution submitted to the House is the fact that the motion for resolution signed both by my group and the Socialist Group lays greater stress on the possibility of implementing a contracyclical policy . This policy would promote growth , while keeping within the limits of the Growth and Stability Pact .
If I understand the declaration made by the presidency correctly , it seems that the presidency supports this idea that the Growth and Stability Pact should allow the European Union to implement a contracyclical policy to promote growth .
That said , we must not be under any illusions .
There is relatively little room for manoeuvre within the terms of the monetary and budgetary policies . I would now like to comment on one aspect of the debate .
This has not yet been mentioned but I , at least , am concerned about it . As you know Commissioner , Madam President , practically all Member States have engaged in a structural reduction of government revenue ( as a percentage of GDP ) through fiscal reductions .
This is being done within the context of fiscal harmony between Member States , especially through corporation tax , and within the context of weak growth . This type of policy entails the risk of downward pressure towards a structural reduction of public spending .
This could lead to insufficient spending , given the solidarity mechanism we endorse . Alternatively , it could lead to inequitable public spending .
This is why it is important to debate the development of other tax bases . It seems that the presidency has alluded to and taken heed of this possibility .
In this regard , the Tobin tax may also contribute to widening the range of tax bases . However , Madam President , Commissioner , I would like to find out from you about the progress of work within the Prima Renault group , and about the state of discussion on the issue of corporation tax .
I believe that it is urgent for the fifteen Member States to find a way out of the impasse they have got themselves into . The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs is no longer informed on how this work is progressing .
When we do hear rumours on this subject , all we hear is that no progress has been made . When growth is slowing down , I believe that , as a matter of urgency , the European Union should pull itself together and coordinate work on the development of corporation tax .
Secondly , I would like to comment on the problems of terrorism and money laundering .
The principal elements concerned are the Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering ( FATF ) and the issue of the directive on money laundering .
Experts in this field judge progress made so far on international cooperation on this area to be limited and not very effective . Signatory countries are not obliged to implement the series of recommendations the FATF has produced .
In October 1996 , European magistrates signed the Geneva Appeal , which called for certain international conventions to be ratified , and for banking secrecy to be lifted when proceedings have to be started .
One of these magistrates has recently repeated this appeal , calling for an international conference to consider these matters . The conference would define the rules on economic transparency , including lifting banking secrecy and abolishing tax havens .
It would also increase judicial cooperation between states and set up a system of sanctions to be imposed on countries that failed to comply with these provisions . I urge the President and the Commission to see that the Belgian Presidency acts upon these requests magistrates are making .
Indeed , the head of FATF has reiterated these same demands , as I have read in the press this morning . Work on these issues should proceed more quickly and FATF recommendations should be made binding .
This would be a very useful role for the European Union to play , both in its capacity as the Chair and a key member of the FATF .
I believe that we will be able to turn words into actions .
I also believe that , as regards the fiscal package , which includes binding provisions to regulate tax havens and low-tax areas ( some of which can be found within the European Union ) , we can combine the fight against financial crime and the European tax on savings programme . I believe that we must seize this political opportunity to step up work on these issues .
Unfortunately , the informal meeting of ECOFIN had to announce , yet again , that no progress had been made in this area .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the dogmatism and apathy dominating the economic policy of the European Union are causing great concern .
Unemployment is rising once again , there is a threat of recession and the conditions for lasting growth are not in place . However , so far , the Council , the Commission and the European Central Bank have come up with platitudes and have convinced themselves that everything is fine .
The euro does provide protection against currency speculation but it offers no protection whatsoever from financial crises . We are involved in financial globalisation up to our necks .
The main cause of the current apathy is the fundamentalist approach of those opposed to state intervention .
Those who subscribe to this view try desperately to promote fiscal competition , as Pierre Jonckheer reminded us . They reduce public spending but welcome turgidity on the stock exchange and its requirements to produce financial returns .
This results in a lack of public and private investment .
Another reason for this apathy is that social-democratic visions for Europe are somewhat lacking .
I think it is time we recognise this .
You advocate strengthening coordination between national policies .
I am in favour of this , but we must recognise that basically this has come to be equated with the Growth and Stability Pact .
I am sure you will confirm this . The debate must not remain polarised between the ' fundamentalists ' and those who want to make the Growth and Stability Pact more flexible .
We advocate an action plan to get us out of this rut .
Firstly , as elected representatives at a European and national level , we must come to a consensus and call for a revival of the European economies . We must send a message along these lines to a meeting of the European Council in Ghent and to the Commission .
In order to achieve economic revival , we must favour public spending and credit as opposed to tax cuts . Funds to promote investment should also be established .
Secondly , we believe that we must carry out an in-depth revision of the Growth and Stability Pact . This Pact has remained unchanged since 1992 , although the global situation is now very different and the euro has appeared .
I appreciate the idea of starting to make it more flexible , as mentioned by Mrs Neyts .
However , we want something more than this .
We want reform . Two principles should guide us in this .
Public or mixed economy choices should balance market forces .
Must I point out that President Bush used Keynesian policies to revive the American economy , after President Clinton refused to cut taxes to increase his popularity ?
Furthermore , the criteria of state intervention should allow for decision-making at national level and for solidarity .
Restricting public deficit to a maximum of 3 % in no way succeeded in preventing the exacerbation of differences .
Consequently , the new Growth and Stability Pact would be based on common criteria for effectiveness , relating both to taxation and public spending .
Taxation should combat the volatility of the financial markets and government stocks by taxing financial products and revenues .
Spending should create the necessary conditions for lasting growth , employment , security and solidarity .
We also want the Pact to include taxation and budgetary tools appropriate to the European Union . Fortunately , the Belgian Presidency has suggested this .
Thirdly , the Laeken declaration must include a commitment to establishing Community powers in relation to macro-economic policy .
Madam President , I welcome the opportunity to make a few , but important , points on the Stability and Growth Pact .
There is a role for economic policy coordination , but it must be applied in a sensible and balanced manner in all Member States .
There are , however , serious policy differences between what the Commission is now proposing and what was agreed at the Ecofin Council in Helsinki in 1999 , when it was agreed that Member States ' determine their budgetary policies in consistency with the Treaty ' , but that this commitment leaves room for domestic policy choices .
This week the Commission published a welcome White Paper on European governance , the thrust of which reflects the need for EU institutions to listen , rather than dictate .
There is a clear signal coming from EU citizens that while they continue to support the thrust of EU integration , they want it to happen in a manner which reflects the independence and the integrity of each Member State and its citizens .
There are those in this House , and indeed within the administration , who are blindly rushing towards the creation of a federalist Europe .
They are in my mind doing a disservice to the vision of Europe 's founding fathers and will , I predict , be stopped in their tracks by citizen reaction .
Events in the real world can rarely be dealt with by means of a predetermined , prescriptive set of rules .
Over-regulation stifles initiative and , therefore , progress and prosperity .
Mr President , yet again the European Union is not keeping pace with the situation in Europe , as it wishes to keep European economies within the shackles of the Growth and Stability Pact . We all know that the criteria of this Pact are now completely obsolete .
The Growth and Stability Pact is dead , Mr Von Wogau ; it did not die in New York . It was killed off by the European Central Bank .
The Bank ' s policies were always out of line with reality . Its forecasting errors are now legendary , and it has an irrational fear of inflation .
We are all aware of the results .
We have to contend with the highest interest rates in the world , a consistently weak euro and the threat of recession .
The outcome of pursuing monetary policy in the manner of a frightened old man is clear . Sooner or later , governments will be forced towards budgetary expansion .
It would be ridiculous now to blame them for doing this . Many members of the committee have made this abundantly clear in all our conversations ( if you can call them that ) with Mr Duisenberg .
Once again , the European Union is unworthy of the powers it has assumed from legitimate governments . It has proved this by failing to order ( this is a euphemism ) the European Central Bank to make available to the countries of the euro area the resources entrusted to it by Member States .
As far as we know , the ECB does not own Europe ' s currency and should not act like Scrooge .
I would also like to point out in passing that it is unacceptable for the ECB to decide whether or not to issue euro notes and coins before 1 January .
I have to say that I really cannot understand why some governments do not wish to take the initiative and bring the date of distribution forward .
Yet again the European Union cannot keep pace with its ambitions and assertions . It has failed to take up a position at the forefront of the drive to promote economic growth and employment .
This is the only battle that matters to the people of Europe .
Lastly , Commissioner , Madam President , let me add that the hypocrisy surrounding the issue of the Tobin tax added nothing to the intellectual standing of the European Union . For once , the European Union had the opportunity to show that it intended to have an effect on world affairs , to become more than what it actually is , simply one more piece of the jigsaw of liberal globalisation .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , the Italian Radicals supported the resolution of the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party because they consider it of vital importance that Parliament confirms the validity of the Stability and Growth Pact and its principles .
I feel that rigorous budgetary and monetary policies are not incompatible with growth , provided that we have the courage to act in the areas of structural reform , privatisation , liberalisation of the markets - particularly the labour market - and public spending , and provided that we have the courage to resolve the complex issue of pensions expenditure , which is an excessive burden on the budgets of many European countries and , because of the way these systems are organised , creates situations which are extremely unfair towards the young generations of workers .
I am quite aware that the European countries - I refer to my own country , Italy , in particular , but also to others such as Germany - rested on their laurels during the economic boom , putting off reforms which were necessary in order to consolidate public finances and make businesses competitive and giving way to pressure from trade unions and employers ' associations demanding more State aid .
Thus , they failed to prepare the European economies for the inevitable subsequent slowdown , which will be particularly severe in the wake of the events of 11 September .
Mr President , in my opinion , the fiscal burden in Europe is still too high : although it has fallen somewhat , it is true , the figures show that the fiscal burden in Europe is still significantly higher than it was in the early nineties , for example .
Derogating from the constraints of the Stability and Growth Pact now and resorting to deficit spending means storing up fresh tax increases for the coming years which , in my opinion , the European economy , the European workers and the European unemployed can on no account afford .
There is one danger which must be highlighted - Mr Goebbels mentioned the confusion following the events of 11 September - and that is that Europe will use the current economic crisis and the crisis in the United States as an excuse to go back to expansionist , deficit spending policies such as those experienced by Europe and its citizens in previous decades .
This is not the right response to the situation .
The argument that the United States is also reacting with an expansionist policy and that it is going to spend an additional 1 % of its GDP disregards the fact that the United States is supported by healthy , buoyant public finances and therefore has the capacity to do so reasonably effectively .
The same would not be true if we were to implement similar policies in Europe or to support State airlines which have drained public resources and hampered the liberalisation of the European markets .
I would like to stress one last point relating to the fight against terrorism and its funding .
Something which is now increasingly being emphasised by expert analysts - recently even by the winner of the Nobel Prize for Economics , Gary Becker - is the fact that the multinational terrorist organisations are financed by drug trafficking , particularly where Afghanistan and Pakistan are concerned .
We must also explore the possibility of cutting off this channel of terrorist funding at source through drugs policies not based on prohibition .
Mr President , the debate taking place today on the supposed choice between the Growth and Stability Pact and budgetary expansion seems somewhat bizarre . In fact , we do not have a choice between these two alternatives .
On the one hand , the Growth and Stability Pact is too rigid an instrument , despite offering some opportunities for derogation , because it does not make proper provision for the time-lags between the economic cycles of the various Member States .
We have consistently pointed this out .
However , the Council has just suggested that it might eventually be possible to make adjustments according to the economic climate , and using a bit of skill and the excuse of the attacks , we can therefore expect the Pact to be more flexible .
On the other hand , budgetary expansion in countries that have suffered the biggest slowdown , like France and Germany , has had three main effects .
Firstly , these countries already have significant budgetary deficits .
This limits their margin for manoeuvre and has already acted as a stimulus . As is the case with drugs , a greater stimulus is needed to achieve the maximum effect .
However , eventually the dose will have to be reduced .
The second effect of this expansion is that the excessive undervaluing of the euro has led to an increase in exports . This is due to the fact that the euro is an artificial currency .
This has been unfair on our partners but has boosted internal growth . However , I am not sure that this might not have contributed , to a very small degree , to the slowdown in the United States over recent months .
The third effect of budgetary expansion is the dispersal of cash people have been hoarding , prior to the introduction of euro notes and coins on 1 January next year . No one ever mentions this , but it is nevertheless happening .
This laundered money has been reinvested in the economy in very significant amounts . The figures for France total FRF 50 billion this year .
This is already causing revival . Further budgetary expansion would have no purpose .
It would only lead to the eventual introduction of new taxes which would make the situation even more difficult in future .
The real question we should be asking ourselves is : given the three linked elements necessary for economic revival I have mentioned , why are we not experiencing an economic boom ?
Apart from the unexpected effects of the attacks in America , which have yet to be firmly established , I think there are two reasons for this .
The first reason is that the economies of Europe are overburdened with many different taxes and rigid regulations . The policies of the Socialist French government , especially the absurdity of the 35-hour working week , made these problems particularly acute in France .
The second reason relates to the perverse effect of the euro . I have said this before , but I will mention it again .
The euro may to some extent prevent some fluctuation in internal exchange rates , as supporters of the currency take great pleasure in explaining time and again .
However , on the other hand , it imposes a single monetary policy on countries which find themselves in very different situations .
This ' one-size-fits-all ' policy , to quote one economist , is not suited to the present situation of France and Germany . It is having a recessionary effect in these countries .
It seems clear that the recessionary effect of standardisation today rather outweighs the benefits of eliminating internal exchange rates .
If we consider the situation as a whole , the euro is not protecting us from recession but rather encouraging it .
Should we put up with greater budgetary deficits to compensate for the euro ?
That would be truly paradoxical !
In any case , Mr President , given the direction Europe has taken , we will have to endure several more years of problems and tension before governments recognise this essential truth : all countries fare better if each can benefit from an economic policy suited to its individual requirements .
Mr President , Minister , Commissioner , the present political situation in the world , and the war against terrorism that has begun , have a host of features that are creating long-term uncertainty for the EU economy .
That is why economic policies to create confidence will perhaps have an unparalleled impact on the behaviour of consumers and investors , and , hence , on how long the period of slower growth will last .
There are also certain positive signs , from the point of view of restraint and the stability of currency values . The price of crude oil is falling rather than rising and the US Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank have , since 11 September , been taking prompt action and acting in accord with one another .
Now , after the Federal Reserve ' s drop in interest rates yesterday , all eyes are on the ECB .
It is no good waiting .
May the approach to the solution remain in the hands of the independent ECB , but the future of the policy on interest rates in Europe must also be made clear quickly .
Firm commitment on the part of every country to the Stability and Growth Pact will create just the sort of confidence the pact itself seeks and the economy now needs .
Budgetary discipline must not be allowed to slacken in the EU countries on any pretext , not even on account of any possible expenditure to increase internal and external security .
Equivalent savings will have to be found : we cannot rely on some hoped-for continued growth of income .
Switching to the euro will mean slightly increased costs for all points in the production chain .
There is no denying that .
However , they will be one-off increases and will only raise prices slightly .
They should not be used for scaremongering and thereby increase inflationary pressures .
The best long-term policy for stability and growth now is to adhere closely to the decisions of the Lisbon Summit and make the European Union the world ' s most competitive area , removing internal barriers to competition and giving encouragement to innovation and research and development .
The commencement of a new round of WTO talks is now vital for international cooperation in matters of the economy to steadily gain strength .
Mr President , representative of the Council , Commissioner , in my view , our economic policy is a combination of success and failure .
The success , of course , is the euro , the failure is the actual economy , where there are two , interconnected problems . The low rate of growth and the high rate of unemployment .
The reason for both is the same and lies in the low rate of investment in capital equipment during the last decade of the last century , accompanied by the collapse of public investment .
Some people maintain that this collapse is a virtual collapse because it is due to a simple change of name , in that the private sector is investing where the public sector used to invest .
But how are we to believe this when overall investments have fallen so low ?
Did public investment have to be throttled in order to support the euro ?
Did unemployment have to reach its present rate , albeit not as high as just two years ago , although it will no doubt rise again , Commissioner , in order to support the euro ?
I do not think so , but although no one admits it , this was the official policy up to the European Council in Lisbon .
That was where the line was taken to adopt the new economy which is supposed to find a modern solution to Europe 's economic problem and bring back full employment on the new basis of more advanced technology , the most advanced technology in the world .
Nice words , nice ambitions , nice vision .
Unfortunately it failed because this was when the bubble burst on the American stock exchange , especially in the new technology and telecommunications sector , which was supposed to lead us into a new era and which is now threatening to drag us into one of the biggest slumps of the twentieth century .
It seems to me that these events have drawn a line under the Lisbon vision and that we need to go back to the drawing board .
There is no way someone can have a full plan to present to you , not when all our study institutes deny the need for us to change our economic policy .
But some things seem to be self-explanatory .
The European economy needs investment , the private sector is not investing enough because we insist on preventing the public sector from supplementing its investments - is that how we are going to revive the private sector 's interest ?
By refusing to make use of the possibilities offered by the Treaty and exempt investments from the definition of deficit in the Stability Pact ?
I heard Mr Della Vedova refer in trepidation to ' deficit spending ' .
Things may have got out of hand in the era of ' deficit spending ' but , let us not forget that , in that era , the rate of growth was 5 % and unemployment never exceeded 1 to 1.5 % , while our current economic policy , based as it is on a high degree of liberalisation of the markets , is a long way from being such a success .
America came close in the last five years of the last century in a climate of excessive speculation and look where that has got us now .
Also , I should like to ask you , Commissioner , as you did me the honour of allowing me to ask you in private : what is the scientific criterion for refuting your position that will make you tell us that our position has been refuted and that we need to change economic policy ?
As I am sure you know , without refutability there can be no scientific standpoint .
We keep getting caught in a huge tautology and I am afraid that this is precisely the economic policy which you support .
Mr President , so as to appease the Commissioner and the other honourable Members , may I state for the record that I am not a fan of deficits , of increasing public debt or of inflation .
However , that is not the issue .
Are we forecasting a slump , yes or no ?
Some say , wait and see what happens .
But if it does happen , then it will be too late .
Others say , wait and the problem will resolve itself .
Some take cold comfort in the belief that our economy will rally once the economy rallies in the United States and totally ignore the fact that , with globalisation , if that happens , others will benefit from the recovery .
All the wrangling , as a number of honourable members have already said , is about avoiding the notion of public intervention in the economy .
I fail to understand why .
What is the point in being dogmatic , when you have specific problems and , more to the point , the problem of a slump in front of you ?
Some of us can imagine various scenarios which marry public intervention with economic stability , that is , increased earnings , without creating the alarming fiscal competition which some people are projecting ?
The problem is , we need public expenditure , we have the potential to generate public earnings which do not affect the productive structure or development of the economy or its competitiveness .
Surely you do not mean to tell me that you would have a problem if someone somewhere did something about annuities or the international speculators throwing hot money around on the stock exchange , or even about the excessive wealth and the frantic consumption of our inflated upper middle classes .
We have no scientific answer .
We are dogmatic .
No to the public sector and no to a Europe which , if it did all this - because only Europe can do all this - would be a federalist Europe .
Well , I have never heard such dogmatism in my life !
Mr President , the tragic events in America have sent severe economic shock waves through the world .
No country will remain immune to the economic impact of the horrendous terrorist attacks in America .
Those attacks were so severe that it will be some time before the extent of the economic fallout is fully known .
We are already seeing the first economic ramifications of 11 September , a day that will be etched on the memory of us all for evermore .
Job losses are mounting in the airline industry .
The jobs shed at many European airlines will never be filled again .
These job losses in turn affect nearly every aspect of an economy .
Consumer and investor confidence is waning , the value of global and stock markets is down too .
The one encouraging sign is that the euro currency is surviving strongly .
We can now all see the importance of the single European currency and the fact that there are 12 currencies participating within the single European currency regime is lending stability to the European economy .
There could be nothing worse than having 15 independent floating currencies operating within the European Union at the moment .
This would be a recipe for international speculators to come in and play one currency off against another .
We all recall the devaluations which took place in 1992 , when the international currency speculators played havoc with the European stock markets .
Thankfully they are not in a position to do so again now , because we have a stable currency operating in Europe and surviving the recent economic shocks .
The terrorist attacks will not affect the timetable for the introduction of euro notes and coins , which will proceed as planned .
It is also clear that the European Central Bank and the various national euro changeover boards have done an excellent job in marketing the new euro economy .
While I have no doubt that there will be some teething problems , we shall overcome them and by the end of the changeover period the citizens of Europe will be fully cognizant of the value of the new euro notes and coins .
Mr President , the resolution by the ELDR Group and the PPE-DE Group has received my backing .
I have always been in favour of strict compliance with the criteria of the Stability Pact .
In this time of uncertainty , extra alertness is called for .
Various Member States are entering the danger zone .
A major advantage of budgetary discipline is manifesting itself : room for automatic stabilisers .
I would like to note in this connection that increasing expenditure is no solution .
What will prove decisive is the quality of the Stability Pact in combination with the necessary reforms in the economy as a whole .
The resolution mentions that the distribution of authority between the Member States and the Union leads to negative action at Member State level .
The reverse is also true .
The Union ' s monetary decisions can adversely affect a Member State , for example , in the form of high inflation due to an unwelcome drop in interest rates .
I welcome the attention that this area of tension is receiving .
Thanks to the EMU ' s favourable effect , the European economy can become more stable .
Time will tell whether this is proportionate to the loss of custom-made solutions for the Member States .
Budgetary discipline will be crucial in obtaining this stability .
- ( ES ) Mr President , by this stage in the debate it seems to me that three things must already be clear to us .
Firstly , we know that the European industrial sector is currently experiencing a graver crisis than the one it went through as a result of the 1998 financial crisis .
Secondly , we know that the crisis currently afflicting the world economy is far more serious than the one it underwent in 1993 , after the Gulf War . This is because for the first time since 1929 , the three largest economies are affected , namely the economies of the United States , Europe and Japan .
Thirdly , except for Mr Abitbol we all know that nowadays the European economy is far better prepared to cope with such a crisis .
As stated earlier , we now have a single currency to protect us from exchange rate crises .
We also have a policy to protect us from exorbitant price rises . In addition , we have a Stability Pact to safeguard us against the munificence of public administrations .
We do not know for certain but we suspect that this crisis is not demand led , like the post-war crisis . Nor is it a supply driven crisis like the one following the Yom Kippur war .
Rather , it is a crisis of confidence . As such , what distinguishes our motion for a resolution from the one put forward by the left is not that they wish to grow while we do not .
Obviously , we all want to grow .
Nevertheless , some recipes will move us forward whilst others will put us into reverse .
We believe that our recipes will move us forward .
Allow me to explain the reasons why I think as I do .
If this is a crisis of confidence , it would be a fundamental error to relax monetary policy and allow price rises . That would hole consumer confidence below the water line .
Secondly , because revising the Stability Pact would amount to indicating that we wish to pass this burden on to future generations , and that is certainly not a confidence booster .
Thirdly , if we relax the budgetary policy enshrined in the Stability Pact we shall prevent interest rates from being lowered , as the Americans are doing .
A vessel is not assessed according to whether there is a storm around or not , but according to how it weathers a storm .
In my view , it is now clear that we should change the way we navigate .
The European Central Bank may be driven to reduce interest rates , but it must bear in mind that its ultimate aim is to maintain the dogma of price stability to maintain consumer confidence .
It is likely that some governments who have done their homework will be able to allow the automatic stabilisers to operate . They will not need to compensate for fiscal reduction by increasing taxes or reducing expenditure .
Unfortunately , governments who have failed to do their homework and behaved like prodigal sons will not find themselves in such a fortunate position .
Thirdly , as the Commissioner has said , though previous speakers failed to mention it , it is time for Europe to move ahead and take a determined step forward to get the Lisbon process under way . This process aims to create a modern , innovative and competitive society .
Regarding the Tobin tax , the Commissioner was far more convincing in the interview he granted the Vanguardia Digital , when he said it was a useless tool , than in his speech today . Today the Commissioner stated it was one more potential tool .
Previously the Commissioner stated it was not possible . Now it begins to appear probable .
I endorse what he said to the newspaper but not what he said in the House .
Mr President , all possible measures must be taken to ensure that Europe can provide a real answer to the consequences of the horrendous terrorist attacks in New York and Washington , and a part of that , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , has in fact already been done , namely a joint response from the EU finance ministers .
I think this symbolises Europe 's ability to close ranks when the chips are really down .
I believe that this policy should also be pursued further in relation to aid policy .
However , it should also give us the flexibility we need , so as to demonstrate that Europe does not want the economic downturn to be further exacerbated .
We do in fact have a Stability and Growth Pact that gives us many possibilities , because on the one hand we wish Europe to be a Community of stability , and on the other hand we also want to promote growth and employment .
It is no accident that when applying the convergence criteria , exceptional circumstances have sometimes been applied and approved which allow the definition of an excessive deficit to be deviated from .
I do not mean by that to speak in favour of a ' Community of instability ' .
Just the opposite in fact , I wish to call on the Belgian Presidency and the Commission to contribute to further coordination in this area , by taking advantage of the fact that stability programmes can be updated .
I would like to see updated stability programmes for the euro countries which make it clear that the data has significantly changed .
What is needed in this context , as you quite rightly said yourself , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , is for us to avoid procyclical policies in Europe , in both the expansionist and restrictive senses . However , we can only do that if we can compare cyclically neutral budget data with structural deficits in updated budget figures .
I think that it would be helpful if the excitement that this debate has generated in this House led to further progress being made both in economic policy and in stability policy .
I say that because the European Union needs both monetary stability and employment and social stability .
Firstly , I would like to thank you for giving me the floor .
Unfortunately , I cannot remain in the House for very long as I have a meeting at 4.30 p.m. with your contact group to debate the development of the Members ' Statute .
I regard this as an important subject and this is an important meeting . I requested it myself .
I will be back here in the House at 5.30 p.m. to respond to the many questions you wish to put to me .
I would therefore like to thank you very much for listening to what I have to say now .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am sure that you all appreciated the importance attached to every word of my speech , and the significance of every adjective I used when I spoke on behalf of the Presidency of the Council and the Council itself . Please excuse me if I do not now try to interpret my previous speech further .
I was speaking on behalf of the whole of the Council .
Consequently , I think I explained clearly how our thinking is developing . I also defined the limits ECOFIN and the ministers themselves have already set .
I then described the nature of the ongoing debate . Those of you , you are all here , will certainly wish to have experts available to monitor the development of this debate closely .
Of course , the conclusions of this debate are considerably more important .
I believe that we are , at last , more or less in agreement with the objectives we wish to achieve , even if there is less agreement on the best means of achieving them .
I am sure that this debate will continue .
However , I would like to make two brief observations of my own .
Mr Berthu , a longstanding colleague of mine , said that everything was so much better when each country had full control of its financial and economic instruments .
However , I must disagree with you on this point , Mr Berthu .
I have been around long enough to know that the reality was very different , and it was at that time too . Europe has experienced very serious financial and economic crises , and has found it extremely difficult to overcome them .
This is my first point .
I would now like to move on to my second point .
I shall not quickly forget the time in the 1970s when people sang the praises of the deficit spending policy . This was a time of economic slowdown in my country , and those in positions of responsibility praised the policy of deficit spending to high heaven .
It took us fifteen years to recover from the effects of this policy . I do not wish this policy to be implemented in the European Union .
However , everything I have heard here goes quite in the opposite direction . I am sure that you will make it your business to monitor this situation very closely and will be extremely vigilant .
Thank you very much for your attention .
Thank you for informing the House of the reason for your absence , Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck .
Be assured that we wish you every success with such a sensitive matter .
Mr President , we are living at a time when it is becoming clearer that the Stability Pact functions as an obstacle to development and to economic and social cohesion : by considering monetary and nominal convergence as a priority , by making restrictive budgets mandatory , it prevents those countries with major difficulties from being able to engage in a policy of investment , particularly public investment , in a period such as the present one of slowdown in economic activity and the threat of international recession .
In various countries and from different sources warnings are being issued regarding the need to amend the Stability Pact and the priority being given to the monetarist policies of neo-liberalism .
This situation is being felt both in the more developed countries and in those where situations of the greatest inequality prevail and / or where threats of social tension are emerging .
In a country like Portugal , which has the lowest salaries , pensions and reforms in the European Union and the highest rates of premature school-leaving , accidents at work and poverty , the application of rigid timetables and deadlines and major restrictions on public spending and investment is unacceptable , because this will impede the country ' s development and obstruct the way to economic and social cohesion .
The need for the immediate suspension of the Stability Pact is , therefore , very topical .
In a European Union that claims to be concerned with social problems , committed to the creation of jobs and the fight against social exclusion and poverty , maintaining monetary stability at any cost cannot continue to be considered as a priority , when we know that the consequences will be more unemployment , more salary restrictions and more poverty .
It is not a question of merely calling for some flexibility in the criteria of the Stability Pact and the implementation of the growth and stability programmes , which each country has had to present .
It is essential to engage in an in-depth revision of the objectives , criteria and foundations of the Stability Pact , starting from the premise that the budgets of the Member States must reflect the needs of each people and each country and not the interests of the financial groups that the European Central Bank is seeking to convey .
Mr President , Commissioner Solbes , we need more Europe , and the Stability Pact is a tool for building Europe .
It is a complex and anomalous tool , not found in textbooks and universities ; in fact , it replaces a true economic and budget balance policy on a federal scale .
But in order to be effective , such a tool must be credible and based on definite rules and obligations that are respected by all .
Changing the rules during the difficult process of convergence , less than one hundred days before the birth of the euro proper , would therefore be a serious mistake .
The Stability Pact must not , therefore , be relaxed or have its deadlines or targets changed ; any such approach would be merely short-sighted opportunism and disastrous for the building of Europe .
The Stability Pact should , rather , be strengthened , improved and made more efficient ; targets that only refer to budget balances are no longer enough .
Budget balances are a necessary but not sufficient objective , because there will be a growing need to aim at quality in public spending and the medium to long-term sustainability of public finances in the individual euro countries ; in this connection , it is sufficient to think of the pension deficit .
Commissioner , even a Stability Pact interpreted in the most responsible , far-sighted manner possible would do nothing for the credibility of our currency if there were not a massive acceleration in the process of completing economic union at the same time , with greater genuine convergence , greater social cohesion , greater development , greater liberalisation , and a greater market for services and energy .
Though we need therefore to comply with and value the Stability and Growth Pact , as much attention should also be devoted to the subject of the Lisbon agenda .
Unfortunately , the Stockholm European Council was a step backwards in this respect .
Commissioner , Minister , for the sake of the euro and our Europe , let us avoid similar steps backwards in future .
Mr President , Commissioner , Europe is not technically in recession , but it is clearly experiencing a situation of slower growth , and we cannot yet predict all the economic , political and social consequences that this will have .
Within this framework , many people are questioning the validity of the restrictive and fundamentalist way in which the Growth and Stability Pact has been interpreted and the consequences that this interpretation may have on the very process of development and cohesion in Europe .
The Stability Pact is a global commitment , which combines the realism of a specific macro-economic scenario with a healthy concern for the consolidation of public finances .
The Pact should be interpreted in its entirety and , obviously , if one of the terms of the equation is altered , the other term must be adjusted and made flexible .
I do not want to get into an argument with the followers of the school of single thought , who have , unfortunately , come to play a leading role on the European economic policy scene . But I cannot refrain from stating that any true defence of the Growth and Stability Pact requires , first and foremost , an understanding of it .
Now , understanding it means that it is correct to agree , in an unfavourable international situation , to accommodate the unavoidable loss of income and the consequent increase in the public deficit , provided it does not exceed 3 % , as Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck rightly stated .
This cannot and must not be confused with any laxity or inefficiency by the revenue authorities , much less with relinquishing in the medium term a policy of adjustment supported by budgetary procedures and a serious and ongoing effort to control public spending and improve administrative efficiency at every level .
Controlling and streamlining public spending are worthy objectives .
We are not , therefore , talking about a revision or cancellation of the Stability Pact .
Consolidating spending does not mean irrationally demanding a linear reduction of deficits . It does mean considering that in the medium term budgetary balances from one year should be balanced with those of the next .
Mr President , stability and growth are objectives of economic activity that everyone wants , whichever party or group in the European Parliament they belong to .
However , when it comes to defining these concepts and in particular when it comes to how we should achieve these objectives , then there are considerable differences between us .
A purely fiscal interpretation will not help us to solve the present problems , which are reflected in falling economic growth and consistently high unemployment .
The market economy as an economic concept is fine , but it is unacceptable as a social policy tool .
Or to put it another way , the market can and should regulate the economy , but not society .
We see the priority as being not a supply-oriented economic policy , but a demand-oriented one .
We do not believe that liberalisation is a panacea .
We need not only commercial competition , but also a linkage with economic and social criteria , in order to achieve the highest possible level of social security , sustainability and justice .
Balancing budgets is fine , but not at any price .
In contrast to the President-in-Office , I wish to call for an anticyclical economic policy .
In times of recession , increasing public expenditure on investment in new capacity and in education and training are essential .
We have the euro area , but we do not have a European economic , fiscal and social policy .
That cannot work .
It is not just a matter of achieving price stability alone , which is the ECB 's remit , we also need to achieve socio-economic stability .
A more flexible approach to the existing convergence criteria will not solve the problem , it will just shift the burden to those who meet the criteria .
We need a new version that takes into account additional parameters such as the employment rate , the value-added ratio and the investment ratio , because these indicators reflect economic strength and development .
Mr President , Commissioner , the dark clouds of recession are looming in the west , in part due to the piercing of the asset bubble of the US stock market , but further exacerbated by the tragic events of 11 September .
The US Federal Reserve has now dropped the federal funds rate to 2.5 % - a 39-year low .
This is the ninth rate cut this year .
The ECB may respond shortly , but almost two years since the euro 's launch , there is as yet little enthusiasm for its future role as the major international reserve currency .
This is in part the result of exchange-rate weakness and , in part , because the notes and coins are not yet in circulation , so it cannot yet be heralded as an unqualified success .
It remains to be seen if the one-size-fits-all model of interest rates will work in all the countries of the Union , in particular countries like Ireland .
These concerns and the added concerns about constitutional implications and loss of sovereignty leave my country , the UK , happy to remain outside for the time being .
Although clearly we all wish the project well , it has frankly confounded many pessimists including our former Prime Minister John Major .
Some years ago , the Commission in its McDougal report concluded that central tax-raising powers of at least 7 % of GDP would be needed to allow counter-cyclical spending and transfer payments to make a single-currency zone function properly .
This would , of course , have been anathema to Member States , so they decided instead on strict spending , borrowing and inflation limits in Dublin in 1996 as an alternative .
Recently , there have been calls to make these Stability and Growth Pact ceilings more flexible .
This is unwise in my opinion , as I believe firmly that a prudent approach to public finance and borrowing is a good thing .
Furthermore , the British economy is linked to and becoming more convergent with the euro zone , so we all have an incentive to stick to the guidelines and we must not allow the US crisis to be an excuse for new , big government tax-and-spend policies .
The Stability Pact includes mechanisms designed to operate in recession and Article 2.1 on the excessive deficit procedure could be used in exceptional circumstances to justify higher military or security spending .
But Member States should concentrate on structural reforms , particularly in their labour markets , as the way ahead .
Otherwise , we would only have high inflation and massive increases in the mountain of national debt .
Mr President , by a diabolical coincidence , it is aeroplanes that illustrate what sort of a world we are living in today .
There was the tragedy in New York and there were the events yesterday in another dimension , at another level , in the airports around Switzerland .
It may have been Swissair but it could equally easily have been Sabena or Olympic Airways or another airline .
You could say that we are dogmatic in the European Union about refusing to see what is going on around us .
That is our right .
But I think that to be dogmatic to the point where you refuse to see what even Mr Bush 's government with its ultra-conservative economic philosophy and Mr O 'Nill in the United States can see is taking things too far .
To refuse to see the 15 billion given to the airlines , to refuse to see that , for both political and economic reasons , international movements of funds need to be controlled somewhere along the line if we are to have both economic and political stability , to refuse to see that governments need to stop being petty and to take things in hand .
In this sense , I think that to abide dogmatically by a Stability Pact decided under different circumstances ten years ago is a big mistake .
Mr President , in the spring , the Council took a clear stance in favour of the Stability and Growth Pact .
Around the summer recess , a few finance ministers considered it necessary to express as their own personal opinion the fact that more scope was required in the Pact as a result of a declining economy .
This was apparently not an official government view because the requirements were not repeated on the platforms eminently placed to deal with this , including the ECOFIN Council . Quite the reverse , in fact .
On those occasions , warm words were spoken about the Pact .
Despite these fine words , President Duisenberg considered the talk of relaxing the rules very worrying .
Commissioner Solbes Mira even addressed Italy , France , Germany and Portugal in a stern manner and urged them to translate the agreements into action . And he is right .
It is not acceptable for governments repeatedly to adopt a high tone and demand reductions in the interest rate from the Central Bank when they have failed to do their own homework .
If all Member States , when economic growth allowed for this , had taken the required structural measures , the Central Bank would now be able to be more flexible in its interest policy .
After all , there is a direct link between the budgetary policy and the interest policy in the policy mix .
Various MEPs have spoken about 11 September and Mr Herzog even went so far as to claim that the euro does not protect us against financial crises .
I think he is very much mistaken .
After 11 September , the Central Bank took action in an admirable manner and has most definitely shielded us from a financial cash crisis .
Some time ago , Ireland was severely punished when it gave another stimulus to an almost overheated economy , contributing further to high inflation .
As far as I am concerned , Ireland might serve as an example , but we should also be courageous , and level criticism at large countries . We should especially target those countries that fully deserve the criticism .
And let us be aware of the fact that the financial markets are closely monitoring the way in which the Member States are currently handling their government budgets in a declining economy .
The current situation is a test of how sound the euro construction really is .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have had a very in-depth discussion of this subject today .
I have gradually been sensing that this debate has made it clearer and clearer how justified the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and the European Democrats was in taking the initiative to table this motion , and how important that was .
There are 89 days to go until the euro notes and coins come into circulation , and on top of that challenge we are living in very uncertain times .
At the same time there have been reactions in some governments around making the Stability and Growth Pact an issue . We have already heard the names of certain people in some governments who have not done their homework properly when it comes to the Stability and Growth Pact .
For that reason it is particularly important in these uncertain times and with 89 days to go before the euro comes in , to convey a sense of clarity and calm to the markets and also to consumers .
Europe 's Stability and Growth Pact will not be shaken .
That is why it is necessary to counter the idea that weakening the Stability and Growth Pact is a way of acting to prevent a recession .
It is simply not true that inflation can create jobs .
And it is not true that the Stability and Growth Pact did not allow enough leeway for hard times .
The Member States that have the greatest leeway are the ones that have done most of their homework .
So I can only urge you not to play with fire .
It is irresponsible to add to uncertainty at a time when things are already uncertain , and the Stability Pact is a requirement for the stability of the euro .
Mr President , the object of the Stability and Growth Pact is to achieve lasting stability in the financial markets , which have remained a national responsibility since the beginning of the single currency .
This means that the Stability Pact is a necessary counterpart in financial policy terms to the policy of monetary union and it is a financial policy substitute for political union , which did not come into being at the same time as monetary union .
The objective of the pact is to ensure that there is sufficient leeway in budgets when times are good and to make provision for bad times .
Some Member States , including Germany , have failed to do this recently .
However , no sooner have the first difficulties appeared than people have started talking about how the criteria are interpreted .
The usual criticism is that although the pact promotes stability , it also acts as a fiscal straitjacket and thus exacerbates weakness in monetary growth .
This criticism fails to take account of the facts .
The commitment made is to balance budgets in the medium term and to limit deficits , and it cannot therefore be thrown up in the air as soon as growth subsides .
That is why a clear signal is needed from ECOFIN , especially after the discussions that have taken place .
With just three months to go before the euro comes into circulation , as Mr Karas mentioned , we need a sign of stability .
The problem is that we have failed to achieve the Lisbon objective of becoming the region with the strongest growth in the world .
But we can only achieve that objective if the Member States do their homework .
They cannot blame this on the European Central Bank .
I would also like to take issue with Mr Tannock for suggesting that the ECB has not met its objectives during this period of crisis .
The ECB in particular has reacted very well since 11 September , and the euro has held up .
However , the fact that we were already discussing the Stability and Growth Pact before 11 September meant that we were playing with fire , as Mr Karas put it , and causing uncertainty .
If we had not done that we would be able to debate the future of the euro in a far calmer way now .
Mr President , with only a few days before the introduction of the euro , I believe we should most of all avoid the risk of confirming a contradiction between convergence and stability policies on the one hand and , on the other , policies aiming at sustaining the processes of growth and lasting development , in accordance with the objectives of the Lisbon Summit .
Bearing in mind the implementation of planned and existing automatic stabilisers , I think the objectives set in the Stability and Growth Pact should not be presented or seen as obstacles to growth or the need to respond - politically too - to the consequences of a downturn in the economic climate like the one we are now going through .
Furthermore , I believe it would be just as wrong to present compliance with the Stability Pact objectives as being a sufficient or , worse still , the only possible reaction to a context with a clear risk of recession .
I believe that in such circumstances there is once again a need especially to speed up progress towards two goals .
The first is to specify and perfect tools of analysis and control , to ensure that public finances are used consistently and concomitantly in support of selective investment programmes that are strictly targeted and as such useful in an absolute sense - and even more necessary when compensating for the economic downturn .
The second goal , confirming the positive nature of the Stability and Growth Pact , is to adapt and consolidate it so it remains in operation beyond the time when it should have reached its objectives , thus improving the conditions and strengthening the tools for an effective Community economic policy .
Mr President , rather than talk about the Stability and Growth Pact I want to comment on another subject which was raised at the informal ECOFIN and with which this debate deals , and that is the Member States ' ministers ' call for Parliament 's agreement on the Money Laundering directive .
I would like to echo that call for both colleagues across the European Parliament and governments across Europe to reach an agreement on this directive as soon as possible .
This has been made all the more crucial by the tragic events of 11 September .
Terror that day struck at the heart of the global financial system .
The terrorists were clearly prepared to use all the mechanisms and tools that the global financial system gave them in planning that attack .
Let us turn those tools against them .
Many bankers and finance workers died in that attack .
Let us enlist the help of those bankers and finance workers in responding to it and preventing a repetition thereof , because this is a concrete step that we can take in the war against terrorism .
No-one is going to ask us to go and die on an Afghan hillside , though others will be asked to pay that price .
But we too can - and should - make a contribution , because the bankers , brokers , cleaners , IT technicians , investment advisers , lawyers and caterers who spill off our trains into city centres in Frankfurt , Paris , London and Brussels are just the same as those 5000 or 6000 people who turned up for work in New York one day and will never ever come home .
The time has come to stop quibbling about lawyer confidentiality .
I call on this Parliament to agree to a directive which will help starve the terrorists of funds .
I call on it to agree to the freezing of assets of terrorist organisations , because someone , somewhere , is banking bin Laden 's money .
We can help starve him of funds , which is as important a task as the military operation which we know will soon follow .
Mr President , Commissioner Solbes , ladies and gentlemen , at a time of particular international tension , I believe I can state that the Stability and Growth Pact is like a guarantee of our will to uphold all the restructuring plans and growth programmes that underlie the building of an economically strong , cohesive and genuinely competitive Europe .
Any idea of waiving or relaxing established plans would undermine the future development of the whole of Europe .
There is now an aspect that should also be given due consideration : the massaging of budget balance data so as not to reveal any anomalies that may still persist in certain public accounts .
Unfortunately , in this respect , we in Italy have had to face a sad legacy from the centre-left .
This is not the right attitude , certainly worse than that of failing to bring the economy into line with the required parameters . While the former case involves fraudulence , the latter is , it is hoped , just a momentary , temporary difficulty .
Such massaging of data should be clamped down on with no half measures and penalties can be imposed where appropriate .
In the context of the Pact and the general awareness that it should be observed , it cannot be ignored that certain areas or even entire regions - southern Italy , southern Spain , southern and part of northern France , and eastern Germany - are certainly behind the rest .
While the Member State as a whole must observe the pacts it has signed , it is also true that special relief measures for these areas - I refer to differential taxation , the use of unused Structural Funds for tax credits , new types of aid after 2006 for countries excluded from Objective 1 - should not only not be considered censurable but should be seen as desirable by all .
Mr President , I should like to thank all those who took part in the debate for their comments and contributions .
I shall start by pointing out that our economic situation is different from that of the United States .
The European Union ' s point of departure is quite other from the United States ' : our balances are not the same either , what has taken place in the United States has not taken place in Europe and , furthermore , our institutional framework is not the same .
In my view it would be unrealistic and undesirable to try to apply the American model to Europe .
It has emerged from the debate that some of you feel our main concern is to prevent public sector involvement .
That is not at all the case .
We have never conceived of this issue in terms of a public sector versus private sector debate .
There is scope for more public investment . There can be more public involvement , always of course within the rules laid down in the system we have created for ourselves to ensure more effective operation of the balance between monetary and fiscal policy .
The ECOFIN decision on airlines and insurance cover as a result of the political risks involved is a good example of the swift effect of public action .
The debate then moved on to focus on the Growth and Stability Pact .
Some of you are of the opinion that those of us in favour of the pact are adopting a fundamentalist position , others find it dogmatic . Some of you have even mooted the possibility of doing away with the pact altogether .
I would be inclined to side with the presidency and with those of you who have referred to something I consider crucial .
The Growth and Stability Pact is intended to serve as an instrument to facilitate anticyclical action by the public finances .
That was its original aim and remains its essential nature .
Hence there is no question of dogmatism or fundamentalism .
We could discuss whether our past experience , gained from implementing the pact during periods of growth , has led us to the conclusion that it is only applicable to that end .
True , in times of growth we were not particularly dogmatic as far as exhausting the possibilities of the pact with regard to reducing the public deficit in certain Member States . We may well be regretting that just now .
Returning to the logic enshrined in the pact , the pact does allow anticyclical actions .
There is no doubt that the pact ' s flexibility is due to two fundamental elements .
The first concerns exceptional circumstances and it is not relevant to analyse these now , as exceptional circumstances are only invoked in times of deep recession or when growth has fallen below certain levels . The second element concerns the normal implementation of the pact through the operation of the automatic stabilisers .
In the specific case of the automatic stabilisers , the element of flexibility is contained in the pact itself . I can state quite clearly that in no way are we amending any position .
Rather , the nature of the pact provides accordingly .
In the code of conduct adopted by ECOFIN last July it was already stated that one of the fundamental elements of the Growth and Stability Pact is the medium-term objective for the fiscal position . It is made quite clear that assessment of the objective for the various countries should take explicit account of the cyclical position and its implications for the budget .
Clearly , as some of you have pointed out , this element will therefore have to be taken into account when adjusting Member States ' stability programmes .
On occasion , the Commission has insisted that the cyclically adjusted deficit position should be included in information on the stability programmes . You are well aware , ladies and gentlemen , that we are experiencing technical difficulties .
The latter relate not only to the concept but also to the method of calculating this structurally adjusted position .
Obviously , rather than making us more flexible , this will allow us to apply the pact to a reality different from that which prevailed when the various stability programmes were defined .
It further implies as I said in my first speech , that in the Commission ' s interpretation nominal objectives must not be considered set in stone .
The nominal objectives are linked to certain assumptions on growth .
Consequently , as I stated , there are no problems , there is flexibility and no dogmatism . Rather , we have moved on to a different stage as far as implementation of the Growth and Stability Pact is concerned .
Would an approach involving greater spending resolve the problems ?
I do not believe it would .
Our position is that given the European experience in recent years , involving a rather procyclical approach to this type of decision , and having observed the difficulty experienced in regaining balance , it is not a wise option .
As I said in my opening speech , we therefore remain of the opinion that the best choice is to opt for more Europe . Some of you have argued along the same lines .
More Europe means Lisbon .
In the context of Lisbon , more Europe means increasing our potential growth . More Europe means more efficient systems .
More Europe also means taking greater account of the impact of the crisis on the international markets . It also means taking into account factors as significant as international commercial negotiations on development aid , and all those related factors which will doubtless allow us to improve the context .
In conclusion , more Europe can also mean progress on issues linked to fiscal competence which some of you have referred to , ladies and gentlemen . There is no doubt about that .
More Europe will certainly mean progress in the fight against money laundering . All this is undoubtedly essential if we are to cope successfully with the tasks we have set ourselves .
A debate such as today ' s warranted a much longer reply . Unfortunately however , we are running out of time .
Nonetheless , I was anxious to comment quickly on these ideas to make the Commission ' s position on this final item quite clear .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
I have received seven motions for resolution , pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Television without frontiers
The next item is the report ( A5-0286 / 2001 ) by Mrs Hieronymi , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on the third report of the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament and the Economic and Social Committee , on the application of Directive 89 / 552 / CEE ' Television without frontiers ' ( COM ( 2001 ) 9 - C5-0190 / 2001 - 2001 / 2086 ( COS ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the objective of the Television without frontiers directive is to establish an EU legal framework to promote the free circulation of audio-visual broadcasting services and to guarantee certain particularly important interests , such as pluralism , cultural diversity , and the protection of consumers and minors .
We have before us today the Commission 's report on the application of the directive for the period 1997 to 2000 .
The key points to emerge from this report are as follows .
The main objectives of the directive have been achieved , but a thoroughgoing revision of the directive is needed .
The five main points of the report , very briefly , are these : firstly , the directive has been implemented in 12 Member States , with three yet to follow suit .
Secondly , the television sector experienced an overall phase of continuous growth between 1997 and 2000 .
This applies both to the number of television channels and also to the total turnover of radio and television broadcasters and to the advertising turnover of both state-owned and private broadcasters .
Nevertheless , the report indicates that when it comes to trade in television programmes , Europe has a deficit with the United States of some USD 2.9 billion , while the overall deficit of the audio-visual sector is some USD 6.6 billion .


Thirdly , the 50 % quota for European works was clearly exceeded , except in Portugal , falling in a range between 53 % and 81 % .
Fourthly , although the provisions on the protection of minors were complied with overall , there needs to be better coordination in future .
Fifthly , four countries have so far made use of the new provisions under Article 3a about broadcasting events of particular importance to the community , and four others are planning to take advantage of those provisions , particularly for sporting events .
The committee noted shortcomings in the report with regard to implementation in the candidate countries and in the analysis of trends in media concentration .
The digital era is now on the way , and the integration of television , PCs and the Internet requires a fundamental revision of the TWF directive so as to create a European legal framework for broadcasting audio-visual material with various degrees of regulation .
The cornerstones of this should be as follows : first , the rules on advertising should be reviewed and made more flexible ; second , the quota arrangements should be reviewed to see if they can continue to be a suitable instrument for promoting European works ; third , we must guarantee open and compatible standards for various systems covering rights of access ; fourth , there is a need for stronger and more effective self-regulation , particularly as regards the protection of minors ; fifth , the trends in vertical and horizontal integration of the media should be analysed , and sixth , a review of the arrangements under Article 3a and how they are to be dealt within future is required .
I can therefore give my full support to Amendments Nos 2 , 3 and 4 which have been tabled here .
The preparations for this review process should take into account the exceptional impact of television and new technology on democracy and society , particularly in the digital era .
The process of gauging public opinion therefore needs to be carried out openly , in a way that takes account of both experts in the audio-visual sector and the views of the public .
So I very much welcome the fact that the Commission has provided for a broad communication process , and we hope , Commissioner , that in view of the speed with which digital technology is developing you will bring forward your proposed review as soon as possible .
However , I would like to make an appeal to everyone : we must take advantage of the opportunities for dialogue over the next 18 months to demonstrate that the European Parliament cares about what matters to the public , especially when cultural issues are involved .
Mr President , I declare an interest as a director of a television documentary company , in which I am now not very active ; but I retain my concern for the quality of our broadcasting and television .
I welcome Mrs Hieronymi 's report and salute her for it .
It goes to the heart of the cultural diversity that we prize in Europe .
We defend public service obligations - however the service concerned may be financed - and the principles of universal access , which constantly come back in all of our debates now about technology .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy has taken heed of the imbalance in the European audio-visual market place , and I hope the Commissioner will be able speak on this .
Since 1999 the revenues of European television companies have grown by an average of 46.3 % .
In that time , public-service broadcasting hardly grew at all and creative television production in the five major producing countries of the European Union was sluggish or , in some cases , falling .
At the same time , US programme sales to Europe - programmes which , as we know , are reaping their tertiary reward , having already cleared their primary and secondary rewards in the US market directly and by satellite and cable - grew massively .
That is not a healthy situation .
The protection of the diverse market in Europe remains crucial .
The imperatives of the technology should be linked to what consumers need , as well as what the production empires want to sell .
Article 3a , referred to earlier by the rapporteur , shows what can be done to keep the widest audience for special events .
I too support Mrs Junker 's amendments and others on the same point .
It was a major change for the better and it showed that we can intervene here and in the European Union .
We need to return to the issue of media concentration and how that relates to the public good , not just in terms of diversity but also in terms of raw political power .
Finally , we ought to be able to say to the applicant countries : do as we do and not merely as we say .
That means having rules that are observed , for them as well as for us .
Mr President , this directive , which was devised in 1989 , bears the highly suggestive title ' Television without frontiers ' , but one could not really have imagined that it would also be without time limits .
This area , which was subject to innovative legislation thirteen years ago , has clearly changed radically and to an amazing extent .
The same even applies to the update we passed in 1997 : everything has been left behind by the driving force of new technologies and also fashion .
We are thus increasingly sure that the review of this directive , until now expected for 2002 , will be brought forward to the beginning of next year , without waiting for too many months to go by .
The last five years have , in fact seen a veritable revolution in the television sector ; the old TV has now become a supporting actor , a technical tool in the service of digital innovation , the webcasting invasion , the Internet and interactive relationships between user and broadcaster .
A global , up-to-date review is also needed because of all the other problems that directly or indirectly surround the world of television , such as the increase in turnover of the networks , the steady and increasingly disturbing invasion by advertising , the explosion of private broadcasters , and the growing social and moral implications of certain programming .
The scope of the directive needs to be broadened to embrace not only the subjects mentioned above but also others that are already included but are insufficiently developed , such as the problems of intellectual property , respect for children as often unsupervised users , the cultural levels of programmes - taking into account not only the interests and requirements of those who make them but especially the feelings of those at whom these products are targeted - and lastly the confrontation with American productions , a subject on which there was quite a harsh confrontation in 1997 but which remained to a great extent unresolved .
Lastly , on this subject , I also hope we can again discuss the so-called ' right to information ' , a right which , because of equal opportunities , should clearly concern not only the citizens of the European Union but also all those living outside who receive programmes produced inside the EU .
It is not enough just to guarantee the great sporting events , as we did in 1997 , since man does not live on football alone - if you will forgive the pun .
We must distribute constantly updated information , based on culture and constantly updated , not only to those who live within the European Union but especially to those less favoured by geographical location or social and economic status .
Everybody ' s ' right to a satellite dish ' is not enough : you need the money to get one .
Imagine what can come into houses through a dish in the remotest parts of the world .
The most precious aid is that reserved for the production of programmes designed to report , safeguard and make proposals , in the sense of safeguarding regional and local cultures .
Finally , let me renew an invitation to the Member States .
The rapporteur , whom I congratulate , and whose amendments and positions I support , reminded us that only twelve Member States have so far implemented the directive .
Well , Commissioner , let us take this opportunity to give the Member States this message again : believe in this directive , because it will become increasingly urgent , current and important , and if you believe us you must first of all implement it !
Mr President , we agree that revision of the Television without frontiers directive is urgently needed .
Firstly , it is needed because the context in which the televisual market operates , as it has been described , is so different from what it was when the directive was last revised that it does not seem feasible to retain the latter for a further two or three years .
As an estimate , we could say that at most , the directive only covers some 50 % of the problems currently experienced in the sector .
Secondly , revision is required because we need to come up with solutions which were not provided at the time . Television remains the main source of information and entertainment for most Europeans .
In my view , apart from the issue of the low quality of content , it is beset by three main problems . Too much advertising is broadcast , with no thought for its suitability or the ages and timings involved .
Only rarely are European films broadcast , which is an affront to European culture .
The business of digitalising programmes so they can be shown on subscription channels has taken off .
Doubtless these problems already existed in 1996 , but the situation is now critical . This suggests that although the directive has been successful as far as the free circulation of television services within the Community is concerned , it has failed in other important areas .
The Commission ' s communication does not allow us to assess the efforts Member States made to redress the situation in the three years under scrutiny .
Suffice it to say that three Member States did not even transpose the directive into their legislation .
Most probably , the results for the remaining Member States were not identical , but the Commission has not made such a comparative study available .
There is little detail on the situation in the candidate countries . This should feature prominently in the new directive .
For all these reasons , Mrs Hieronymi has refrained from launching an in-depth debate in her report . I believe she was wise to do so .
This debate should take place when the directive is revised , and she has requested such a revision .
A number of guidelines to inform the process have been laid down . I should like to refer to just a few of these , namely the urgent need to introduce new services based on new technologies , the need to stimulate and accelerate the transition to digital technology and the coordination of the new directive with the revision of the directive on electronic commerce .
The Socialist Group will therefore vote in favour of the report and endorse two amendments tabled by Mrs Junker . Regarding these amendments , I would like to highlight the need for Community legislation to ensure that events or shows of great interest to the citizens should be protected from digitalisation so that they can be made available to all social classes free of charge .
Mr President , Commissioner , while I would like , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , to thank the rapporteur for this report , I would also like to echo the previous speaker in drawing attention to the future .
The Commission ' s report states that the next report on the directive must also address issues which are important to the consumer , such as operational compatibility , conditional access and how the transition to digital broadcast technology will take place , but the world may already have moved on by the time the next report is drawn up .
I would like to remind everyone that , when debating the ' telecom package ' , Parliament approved by a large majority the fact that we should demand an open , common standard for TV transmitters and receivers , the only one so far approved in Europe and known as the MHP standard .
This standard would guarantee a situation in which all consumers knew what applied and one in which they had the confidence to acquire the necessary equipment . It would also guarantee that vertically divided markets did not arise .
A large majority of Parliament backed this view .
But what has happened since then ?
The Commission does not support this decision , and the Council has entirely ignored the issue , which I believe is of immense importance if we are to achieve what is known as Digital Update and promote digital technology in all TV markets .
I therefore hope that the Commission in its entirety can start to support the demands which have been made by Parliament and which we in the ELDR Group would like to clarify a little .
The rapporteur has already pointed out this requirement , but I would like to repeat it in order to make it clear to all the services of the Commission .
Some have said that ' Television without Frontiers ' is a loaded title for the directive .
There is also a special set of problems in this context .
In many cases we see that the directive has not functioned in the intended manner with regard to opinion-formers or individual consumers who wish to view TV from another country .
The Commission has found that the way in which copyright is handled prevents it from doing so .
I hope that this issue too will be debated in greater depth in the future .
Mr President , there are many who believe that this report does not go far enough in analysing the potential problems facing us as we embark on the revision of the Television without frontiers directive , expected in 2002 as we are all aware .
However , it raises some very important issues and it is important to start that dialogue now .
My personal concern is the role of public service broadcasters in this important agenda .
It is important to recognise that today 's public service broadcasting needs to adapt to the changes .
Today 's radio and TV sector is a competitive one and the market forces which largely govern it cannot be ignored . Public service broadcasters have a crucial role to play in the digital world .
Public service broadcasters make programmes of high quality in indigenous languages reflecting indigenous cultures .
They also have a crucial role to play in encouraging people to use and understand the new digital media .
I agree with the Commissioner 's statement in a recent communication that broadcasting and culture should remain within the WTO 's services category and that this arrangement should be respected .
Having established that , we then need to be absolutely certain that there is sufficient scope for national and EU legislation to protect public services and cultural entities .
Robust and determined early regulatory action will be needed to create the open environment we all seek , and one which is in the real interests of all citizens and economies of Europe .
Europe has to compete in the digital world where consumers and citizens can wander freely and where competition delivers diversity and choice .
With its complementary mix then of private and public service broadcasters , the European audiovisual model guarantees pluralism of information , cultural diversity and access for all to information , education , entertainment and the arts .
I will be voting in favour of the report and look forward very much to the forthcoming debates as we look to the future .
Mr President , I would first of all like to congratulate the rapporteur on the work she has done and also the Commission on such an appropriate initiative .
Nevertheless , I would like to highlight three aspects which seem to me very important .
The first is the importance of the audiovisual sector in promoting sport .
We must not forget that sport contributes to forging an identity and bringing people together , as well as uniting sportspeople and spectators by offering the latter the opportunity to identify with their nation .
Furthermore , sport is one of the fields of activity which most affects and touches on the citizens of the European Union regardless of their age or social origin , and therefore sport cannot and must not be discriminatory and all the citizens of the European Union must be able to see sporting events .
They must not be a privilege for the few , since these events are of great importance to our society .
The second issue is the need to control advertising slots , and I therefore fully support the rapporteur when she backs the Commission ' s strategy of carrying out a study on the repercussions of television advertising and TV shopping techniques on minors .
And the third issue I would like to highlight is my total support for the rapporteur ' s request that the Member States strengthen dialogue and cooperation on all issues relating to the protection of minors and young people .
We cannot aspire to a world without violence when our future adults spend the day watching increasingly violent animated cartoons , films and news items .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in 2000 there were 152 households in the European Union with television sets able to receive over 580 different channels .
That implies a growth of around 180 % in just four years .
These figures alone should be enough to illustrate that the conventional television market , which only covers a small part of the overall audio-visual sector , is a major growth sector .
The Commission report shows that the Television without frontiers directive , which was originally highly controversial in my own country in particular , has proved its worth .
It provides sensible conditions for international broadcasting .
In the period covered by the report , 50 channels were already aiming chiefly at markets outside their local area .
The TWF directive closed various regional legal gaps and created binding standards for areas including advertising and the protection of minors , thus creating a level playing field in terms of equal opportunities and competitiveness .
I welcome the way the Hieronymi report sets all this out .
However , it also makes it clear that we need to embark as quickly as possible on a new review of the TWF directive , if we are to keep pace with the fast-moving developments in the audio-visual sector in a time of increasing digitalisation .
That applies not only to the provision of all kinds of multimedia services , it also involves an appropriate approach to the trend in concentration of the media , which is also progressing at a pace that is hard to follow .
The other side of the coin is the need to ensure freedom of information , diversity of opinion and pluralism , and to establish an essential multimedia foundation to promote European cultural diversity .
Mr President , I would firstly like to congratulate Ruth Hieronymi on her excellent work on this issue .
Her achievement has been demonstrated by the wide consensus she has obtained on this important but extremely sensitive subject .
I agree with the general philosophy of her report and with the proposals it contains .
As regards the method used , I think it is regrettable that the results obtained were not evaluated in relation to the set objectives .
This would have produced a better picture of the real cultural and economic implications of this directive for each of the Member States and candidate countries .
On the other hand , I support the wish of the rapporteur and the Commission to propose a revision of the directive , and to do this in parallel with the revision of other directives , after initiating three in-depth studies .
Only an overall approach will lead in the medium term to the development of a coherent and forceful policy . Please note I am talking about an approach .
This is something that the directive does not at present provide . The audiovisual sector has undergone profound changes .
New services have necessitated new technologies and have also led to an increase in the number of broadcasters . As a result , the sector has been completely transformed .
Consequently , if we want to ensure the continuity of our audiovisual sector , we must now widen the scope of the directive . I have a number of concerns on this matter .
There continues to be an imbalance between European cinema production and imports from the United States .
European films rarely reach a European Union audience outside the country where they are produced . Six per cent of European films are shown outside their country of origin .
Of the total volume of programs , 74 % are fictional works imported from America and only 14 % are European in origin . As well as simply exporting programmes , major industry players are promoting the export of American thematic television channels to Europe .
These are sold both to digital grouping operators and cable satellite channels . In addition , Europe lags considerably behind the United States in the development of the digital sector .
These are the difficult issues confronting us .
This is why I believe that the only possible response is global and proactive action by the European Union . Over and above the economic and financial issues , which are clearly very important , is the key issue of our cultures , identities and the values we hold dear .
Mr President , in a previous life you also held the important position of Deputy Mayor of Madrid , so I am sure you and this House in general will be interested to know that we have a high-level deputation from Germany 's cities in the public gallery .
We should offer them a warm welcome .
We agree with you .
I see that you are very well informed by a Spanish compatriot of mine .
Mrs Reding has the floor on behalf of the Commission .
Thank you very much , Mrs Reding .
We are also grateful for this impetus you are giving to the revision of directives .
I am sure that the Commission and the European Parliament will work together to bring us up to date .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Questions to the Council ( B5-0333 / 2001 ) .
The Council will be represented by Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck , President-in-Office of the Council .
Question No 1 by ( H-0689 / 01 ) :
Subject : The ' Republika Srpska ' What policy is the Council Presidency pursuing towards the so-called ' Republika Srpska ' in Bosnia-Herzegovina , with particular regard to cooperation with the International War Crimes Tribunal in The Hague and to the return of expellees ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Council has repeatedly and consistently stressed the great importance the European Union attaches to compliance by the countries participating in the stabilisation and association process with the international obligations relating to the International Criminal Court for the Former Yugoslavia and to establishing a lasting settlement on the issue of refugees and displaced persons .
This forms part of the European Union conditions of the stabilisation and association process . The countries of the Former Yugoslavia subscribed to these conditions at the Zagreb Summit .
On 11 June the Council approved a report assessing the progress achieved by the countries of the region in relation to these conditions for European integration . The report also contained specific proposals detailing how the countries can continue working towards this aim .
On that occasion , the Council concluded that Bosnia-Herzegovina had not cooperated sufficiently with the International Criminal Court for the Former Yugoslavia , especially as regards Republika Srpska .
None of those indicted for war crimes had been arrested by the authorities of Republika Srpska .
The Council therefore ordered Bosnia-Herzegovina to take further measures to ensure that it complies in full with the Dayton-Paris agreement and collaborates fully with the International Court .
On that same occasion , the European Union expressed its view that the process of the return of refugees and displaced people throughout the whole of Bosnia-Herzegovina should be speeded up . It was also stated that measures to create the proper conditions to enable people to return should be strengthened .
The European Union also expressed its hope to see the governments of Bosnia-Herzegovina and Republika Srpska implement all the recommendations that have been made .
The Council will ensure these matters are monitored .
This monitoring process will also allow the European Union periodically to assess compliance with the criteria established as part of the stabilisation and association process . This will enable us to assess the level of the relations established , and to decide if the level of technical and economic assistance can still be justified .
We could certainly use this tool to apply pressure on the governments of Bosnia-Herzegovina and Republika Srpska , should it prove necessary to do so .
Madam President-in-Office of the Council , I have two short additional questions .
First , I would like to know if Council has asked the Republica Srpska how many expellees and refugees have now returned to the Republica Srpska .
Are any figures available on this ?
Secondly , I would like to ask if cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia has had any repercussions on the finances of the Republica Srpska .
As regards your first question , I am unable to answer this at present but we shall check and see if more accurate figures are available .
I believe I have already given the beginning of an answer to your second question , in that the Council has clearly indicated that , if the situation does not improve , it may consider revising the funds placed at the disposal of the authorities , both in Bosnia-Herzegovina and in the Republika Srpska .
Question No 2 by ( H-0690 / 01 ) :
Subject : European regions , subsidiarity and reform of the treaties Under the weight of so many treaties ( the first being Rome and the latest Nice ) , Europe can no longer be regarded ( as far as either individuals or the public as a whole are concerned ) as something ' international ' ; it is now something ' internal ' , not just in economic or market terms but from all points of view .
The Flemings and the Walloons cannot look upon us Basques ( nor the Catalans upon the Finns , the Scots or the Welsh ) as foreigners .
We are all citizens and peoples who belong to Europe .
Does the Council therefore support the idea put forward some time ago in Belgium by Mr Dreze concerning the setting up within Europe of Euro-entities , that is , non-state political bodies which would be granted EU legal personality so that they could establish and maintain direct relations with the Committee of the Regions , the Commission , the Court of Justice , etc . , and conclude valid agreements with other public authorities anywhere in the EU , as an extension of European law ?
Does the Council not think that this issue should be specifically pursued as an initiative relating to the future of the Union , to be considered under the procedure for debating the reform of the treaties which is to be established at the Laeken European Council ?
On behalf of the Council , I would remind you that the Union , in accordance with Article 6 ( 3 ) of the Treaty on European Union , respects the national identity of the Member States , while Article 48 of the same Treaty stipulates that the Intergovernmental Conference has the task of establishing by mutual agreement the amendments to be included in the Treaties .
During Question Time in July , I was given the opportunity to reply to a number of questions - I believe there were ten in all - about the possible added value which an active and institutionalised participation of so-called sub-state groups would give to the debates at Union level .
I then said that the Council , without denying the incontrovertible political impact of the Committee of the Regions , was at the time unable to give a detailed response to questions concerning the role of the regional units in the Union ' s structures .
The Council obviously knows the different viewpoints and is carefully following the developments around topics directly related to the balance of power within the European structures , starting with the concept of subsidiarity itself .
At this stage , on behalf of the Council , all I can do is look to the very near future , that is to say to the forthcoming meeting in Laeken , where the European Council intends to adopt a declaration which will form the basis for creating conditions to guarantee the Union ' s future .
And at that meeting , I have no doubt that the tone will be set for the way in which the preparation of the IGC 2004 will have to be structured and how participation will need to be extended .
Moreover , I would like to refer you to the very thorough explanation and reply which Minister Michel gave this morning on behalf of the Council , and in which he has already given a few quite specific indications in this connection .
Madam President-in-Office of the Council , in the Councils of Ministers , decisions are often adopted which affect the exclusive legislative competences of historic nations such as the Basque Country , Catalonia or Scotland , of regions such as Flanders or Wallonia , of federal states such as Bavaria , Baden-Baden , Rhineland , etc .
Do you not believe that , in the event of a conflict of competences resulting from decisions adopted in the Council without the presence or acquiescence of the historic nations , regions or federal states affected , the latter constitutional entities should be empowered to present their case to the European Court of Justice , since that Court has the power under the Treaty to hear and pass judgment on these conflicts ?
Do you not believe that the European Council at Laeken should include these issues in the future debate on the Union and the distribution of competences between the Union , the Member States and the other institutional bodies ?
Mr President , Mr Ortuondo Larrea , although this is an issue about which I am extremely passionate , I do not feel that it would be advisable for us to resume the debate which took place in this House last July .
I did , I believe , at that point in time answer in a comprehensive manner , partly on behalf of the Council where possible , and partly in my own name .
Allow me therefore to refer you to the Minutes of that sitting in which you will find all the replies to the questions you have just asked .
Question No 3 by ( H-0691 / 01 ) :
Subject : Working languages in the European Patent Office On Thursday , 31 May 2001 , the Council published a common position on the Community patent .
With regard to the language regime used at the European Patent Office , the text simply notes that translation costs must be limited .
It is a fundamental principle of the European Union that everybody should be able to address the institutions in any of the eleven official languages .
Does the Council agree that it must be possible for an application for a patent to be submitted to the European Patent Office in any of the eleven official languages of the EU ?
If so , how does the Council guarantee that individuals and businesses may submit applications for a patent in any of the eleven official languages ?
If not , how can the Council justify a position which is so at odds with the official line ?
Does the Council support the Greek government ' s plan to lodge a complaint against the language regime used by the Community Trade Mark Office in Alicante ?
It is correct that on 31 May 2001 , the Council adopted a common position on the Community patent with the aim of furthering future discussions on this subject .
With regard to the language regime used at the European Patent Office , the common position posits that it must be based on a number of principles which apply universally , including the principle of non-discrimination .
In order to curb the cost of translation , further consideration must be given to the various suggestions made in this connection , including technical translation aids , without ruling out other options a priori .
Having regard to these guidelines , the Council recently started discussing the provisions presented in the Commission proposal for a regulation on the Community patent , as well as the other solutions which have been provided for consideration by various Member States .
In any case , the honourable Member will understand that the Council is not prepared at this time to adopt a clearer position concerning this motion for a resolution , including the linguistic aspects involved , as long as the European Parliament , consulted in accordance with Article 308 of the Treaty , has not issued a recommendation on the matter .
The Council would remind the honourable MEP that the language regime of the Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market is established by the Regulation on the Community Trade Mark . This regulation was adopted unanimously by the Council following the agreement reached at the Conference of government representatives at the level of Heads of State and Government on 29 October 1993 .
Moreover , with regard to the steps taken by the Greek government in case T-120 / 99 , the Council is taking note of the judgment pronounced in this case by the Court of First Instance . This judgment rejects the appeal , as well as the arguments , of the requesting party against the language regime of that office .
Madam President-in-Office of the Council , as we have come to expect of you , you are being extremely polite to the European Parliament .
It is very considerate of you to refer to Article 308 .
We all know that Article 308 concerns a unanimous decision taken by the Council following a recommendation from Parliament .
So that is why you are waiting before adopting a clear stance .
I can understand that , but despite this , we must all realise that there appears to be only a few Member States , including Portugal , Spain , Greece , Finland and Italy , which are strongly opposed to the exclusive use of French , English and German .
All the other Member States , including my own country , unfortunately , agree to the very limited application of this language regime .
I would now like to ask you whether it would not be preferable to guarantee that the key elements of such a patent , namely the conclusions , which hardly take up two to three pages , are at least made available in all the languages .
That would considerably enhance the legal certainty of the citizens and business people in the European Union .
There would then be no need to translate twenty or thirty pages , rather only the conclusions .
I believe that we would thus bring Europe a little closer to the citizen .
Some time ago , I was given the opportunity to look into this matter more deeply .
The suggestion by Mr Staes is one of the suggestions which are currently being tabled .
President-in-Office , European industry is losing its competitive edge in regard to reaching the targets that you and the Council set for it at Lisbon by the extreme cost and time delays involved in obtaining patents in Europe .
I believe the Belgian presidency undertook to make a special effort to have the Community patent installed and implemented during its presidency .
I would be interested to know what progress is being made and whether you really are resolving the language issue in the European Patent Office .
Efforts are under way .
The Council Presidency has decided to consult each government individually and confidentially in what is called in French la procédure du confessional , in order to see whether it is possible to proceed , and with the firm desire to reach an agreement by the end of the year if at all possible .
Of course this matter does not rest with us alone .
There has to be agreement across the board , and we are working on this .
I should just like to underline Mr Staes 's point on the importance of the language regime , while not ignoring the importance of the point my colleague , Mr Purvis , has made about the need for speed .
Nevertheless , the whole business of taking research on to the development stage is important .
If we are to have good research in all the universities and all the areas of the Community , it is really important for people to be able to work in their own language , even though , of course , most scientists work in English much of the time .
We take note of your statement , which is not a question .
Mr MacCormick , did you want to add anything ?
My question was implicit : does the Minister agree ?
Yes !
We say in Castilian ' lo bueno , si breve , dos veces bueno ' [ the good , if brief , is twice as good ] .
That is clearly the case here .
As the author is not present , Question No 4 lapses .
Question No 5 by , which has been taken over by Mr Bautista Ojeda ( H-0696 / 01 ) :
Subject : European Maritime Safety Agency Has the Spanish government submitted a proposal for the siting of the European Maritime Safety Agency ?
Has the government suggested that the Agency be sited in Galicia , in view of Galicia 's strategic location as far as Atlantic traffic is concerned and its importance as a maritime centre ?
The Commission ' s proposal concerning the establishment of a European Maritime Safety Agency , presented at the end of last year within the context of the ' Erika II ' package , is still under consideration by the Council authorities , and the question of where this future agency is to be based remains unanswered .
To date , the Council has not received an official proposal from the Spanish government concerning the agency ' s headquarters .
Madam President-in-Office of the Council , you have not commented because clearly , as you said , the Spanish State has still not made any formal proposal .
I would like to refer to an objective fact : Spain has always had a great maritime vocation and enjoys a privileged situation in terms of both Atlantic and Mediterranean maritime traffic , and I believe that some of those Spanish coastal territories meet all the appropriate conditions for being the location for the headquarters of this European agency .
Thank you very much , Mr Bautista Ojeda .
I would remind Members that this is Question Time and not a time to make statements or advocate certain proposals .
So in the future please try to ask questions .
At least give the impression of asking a question .
Mrs Korhola has the floor for a supplementary question .
Mr President , I would like to ask the representative of the Council what the general timetable is for deciding to establish planned agencies such as the Maritime Safety Agency and , in particular , the Food Safety Agency , and is the intention to take the decision on all of them in one go or separately for each agency ?
As I have pointed out , this question is still under discussion .
As you know , this question relates to decisions concerning several agencies .
On this extremely sensitive issue , as you can well imagine , we aim to reach agreement on all the unanswered questions by the end of the year , and I hope that we are successful in achieving this aim .
Question No 6 by ( H-0699 / 01 ) :
Subject : Illegal immigration into the European Union through Morocco What action is the Council planning to take in order to control illegal immigration into the European Union through Morocco , with a view to preventing any recurrence of the tragic events which have occurred this summer , involving the loss of human life in Community waters ?
Illegal immigration into the European Union via Morocco is permanently on the Council ' s agenda .
For that reason , the Council set up a High-Level Group in December 1998 to deal with asylum and migration issues . This group is responsible for drawing up action plans for a number of countries of origin of asylum seekers and / or illegal immigrants .
With a view to drafting these action plans , the group has pursued a cross-pillar approach which takes account of a number of aspects related to foreign policy , economic development and the management of migration flows .
One of the countries that has been earmarked for such an action plan is Morocco .
In October 1999 , the Council adopted an action plan which provides for measures that pertain , inter alia , to the fight against illegal immigration .
The European Council of Tampere subsequently approved the action plans and expressed the wish that the measures it contains be carried out in the framework of a partnership with the countries involved .
At the initial session of the Moroccan-European Union Association Committee in Rabat in February 2001 , it was agreed to set up a working party on social issues and migration .
This working party , established by decision of the Association Council of 4 April 2001 , met for the first time in July and has indeed set up an informal group for migration between the European Union and Morocco .
At that meeting , three topics were flagged as priority topics for cooperation in the field of immigration .
The first topic was socio-economic cooperation and , in particular , assistance for micro- enterprises and for small and medium-sized companies .
Secondly , there was the topic of guidance concerning legal migration to the European Union and the fight against illegal immigration networks , including transit-migration from countries south of the Sahara .
For each of those topics from the High-Level Group ' s action plan , a dossier will be drawn up concerning the projects to be carried out jointly .
Each dossier will contain a description of the project , an indicative description of the resources to be deployed , the budget line which will be required and a timeframe for the implementation of the project .
Each dossier will be communicated through diplomatic channels to the other party , which may then add its own proposals .
The Association Council which meets on 9 October will exchange ideas on migration and will add renewed momentum to the cooperation efforts in that field .
In the light of the particularly tragic events which have unfolded in recent weeks in Morocco and the EU countries , this is a weighty matter indeed .
Finally , Morocco will , in the person of its Minister for Justice , Mr Azziman , also be taking part in the Ministerial Conference on migration , which will take place on 16 and 17 October at the European Parliament in Brussels , an event which I will be attending as well .
Madam President-in-Office of the Council , I thank you for your detailed reply , but I would like to ask a couple of supplementary questions because I put this question before the tragic events of 11 September .
The Council is aware of the current security problems on our continent .
So I would firstly like to ask whether the Council is aware that we have an open border across which the European Union ' s security cannot be guaranteed ?
And in this regard , whether the Council is aware that every day hundreds , and every month thousands , of people are losing their lives as a result of maintaining this deceptively open border , because many of those who try to cross it die in the process ?
That is to say , what can the Council do to prevent this human tragedy from continuing and to guarantee the security of the citizens of the European Union ?
Mr President , I can only say to Mr Medina Ortega that we are of course aware of all the aspects , both on a human scale and in terms of security , which contribute to the gravity of the situation .
As I mentioned just now , I myself was only recently in Morocco , in Tangier , where I really saw the extent of the problem caused by illegal immigration across the strait , which in certain places really earns its name as it is barely 12 or 14 kilometres wide at its narrowest point .
Of course , we are aware of this problem and this is why all these initiatives have been implemented .
I also know from the contacts I made whilst on my trip to Morocco , which was not on behalf of the European Union but in my role as Belgian Minister , that the Moroccan authorities are also acutely aware of this problem .
They too do not watch with a light heart as members of the population embark on such perilous missions .
What does , however , occasionally upset the Moroccan authorities , and this I can understand , is that we sometimes tend to establish a little too easily a link between people from Morocco and security risks .
Madam President-in-Office of the Council , in 1998 this House adopted my proposal for a common European border police .
However , by the beginning of this year neither the old Italian government nor the German government had adopted this .
I would like to ask you if the Council has made any further progress with this issue of a common European border police or if anything is planned in this area under the Belgian Presidency .
What I can tell Mr Posselt is that the question of border security concerns us intensely and that this is actually one of the priority areas on which our presidency is to take action , certainly in view of the fact that enlargement of the European Union will mean a corresponding extension of these borders .
This is therefore an extremely significant goal to which we attach a great deal of importance and progress towards which we are monitoring extremely closely .
The same sort of illegal immigration is taking place on a huge scale via Turkey to the Aegean and the Greek islands .
First , do these plans for Morocco include Turkey ?
Secondly , has the Council taken any action vis-à-vis Turkey , which has been granted candidate status and therefore has an additional obligation towards the European Union to guard its borders properly ?
Hordes of illegal immigrants can hardly pass by unnoticed .
What has the Council done about this ?
I can only repeat what I have just said .
This is an issue of very great concern to us , the more so because my country is one of the preferred countries of destination for illegal migration .
We are fully aware of the problem in all its aspects and we are working very hard on it and addressing all third parties on the subject .
Question No 7 by ( H-0705 / 01 ) :
Subject : Illegal conferral of Greek citizenship and a large number of violations of Community law established by a formal administrative inquiry A formal administrative inquiry held in the Greek Embassy in Moscow has uncovered not only a number of breaches of discipline , but also evidence that offences were committed with the purpose of illegally granting Greek citizenship .
In view of both the large number of ' repatriations ' ( some 150 000 processed by the Moscow Embassy ) and the fact that significant information was concealed by officials of this Embassy , a further judicial inquiry is now being sought to shed light on this matter .
It should be pointed out that all these violations have taken place despite Greece 's full participation in the Schengen acquis .
Given that in the elections in the Year 2000 votes were cast by persons who were not entitled to do so , which creates a serious political problem , will the Council say :
What is its position on the illegal naturalisations in question and the large number of illegal ' repatriations ' on the basis of the Schengen acquis ?
Will it bear these findings in mind , given that , according to the answer to my Written Question E-1438 / 01 , the Greek government has not so far provided any information about the number of illegal naturalisations and ' repatriations ' for 1999 and 2000 ? What measures does it intend to take to prevail upon the Greek government to provide these figures and to put an end to the practices in question , to ensure transparency and to annul all the illegal naturalisations ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the questions raised by Mr Trakatellis concern the naturalisation of citizens in a Member State of the European Union and the repatriation of these citizens .
Mention is made of suspicions surrounding practices which are currently the subject of an inquiry that the public prosecutor has been asked to carry out .
Lastly , the question conjures up a presumed link between these practices and the Schengen Agreements .
I must point out that the Council is not qualified to comment on the circumstances in which Member States may or may not grant citizenship .
In fact , naturalisation policy falls within the competence of the Member States .
Therefore , in the case in question , the application of these provisions falls within the competence of the Greek government , which Mr Trakatellis should address directly for the answers to the questions he has raised .
Finally , the Council feels that , for details of immigration and statistics concerning the number of naturalisations , Mr Trakatellis could usefully refer to the reply given to him in July by the Commission in response to question E-1438 / 01 concerning the years prior to that mentioned here and ask the Commission to provide him with the figures for 1999 and 2000 as soon as these are available .
Thank you for your reply .
I shall take your advice as regards the figures for 1999 and 2000 which , I should point out , the Commission was unable to give me even yesterday because it did not yet have them , even though it is 2001 and the Member States naturally have a duty under the Schengen Agreement .
I should like to ask you specifically : if and insofar as a Member State naturalises a person or persons , can that person , once they have obtained a passport or an identity card from the Member State , live anywhere in the European Union ?
If it later emerges that they should not have been naturalised , is the Member State which naturalised them obliged to pass this information on to the other Member States so that the person who has no right to live in the European Union can be located ?
And if it has this duty towards Europol and the other Member States , my question is this : has the Greek government provided this information ?
We have proof that there are people who have obtained Greek nationality but were not entitled to do so .
I can only repeat what I have just said .
The granting of nationality is an exclusive competence of the Member States .
That does not answer my question .
I do not dispute the fact that nationality is granted by the Member States , my question is : what happens when it should not have been granted and the person is living in another Member State ?
How will that person later be located ?
What practical method do we have for locating him or her ?
Again , as the granting of nationality falls within the competence of the Member States , it is up to the judiciary of the Member State concerned to decide whether the obtaining of nationality by illegal means , if proven , warrants any given action .
That is a matter for the Member State .
It is not for the Council or the European Union to decide what should happen .
If one holds a passport , one can use it .
Question No 8 by ( H-0715 / 01 ) :
Subject : The EU 's most federalist country According to press reports , the Belgian Prime Minister , Guy Verhofstadt , has called Finland Europe ' s most federalist country .
Does the representative of the country holding the presidency stand by this definition , and on what measure of familiarity with Finnish affairs can it possibly be based ?
Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck , I invite you to answer the question by Mr Esko Olavi Seppänen .
I believe that it refers to Finland .
I am sorry I missed that one .
I understand quite a lot of Spanish but not everything .
Sometimes I think I am fortunate not to understand everything .
I thank the honourable Member for his question , but as the quoted statements were not made by Prime Minister Verhofstadt in his capacity as President-in-Office of the Council , it is difficult for me to comment on them on behalf of the Council , which I represent here today .
Mr President , Minister , when Sweden held the presidency , the custom was that if the Minister did not answer the question asked him or her in this session the possibility of providing a written reply also existed .
I remember Sweden ' s European Minister very often replying in writing to questions on which he or she , as President-in-Office of the Council , did not want to take a stand .
I would therefore ask Belgium ' s representative if she could continue the policy adopted by Sweden in this matter and reply to me in writing , in her capacity as Belgian Minister , stating the answer to this question , and also which country Belgium considers to be the most federalist state in Europe ; the totally unfounded claim has been put forward that this country would be Finland .
This claim was made by the Belgian Prime Minister , at a press conference during the Belgian presidential term , to be exact .
I can only repeat what I said .
The statement was made by Mr Verhofstadt in his capacity as Prime Minister of Belgium , not as President-in-Office of the Council .
Therefore I cannot , on behalf of the Council , comment on those statements .
Question No 9 by ( H-0717 / 01 ) :
Subject : Cooperation agreement with Iran and legislative reforms in respect of women With reference to the political dialogue between the European Union and Iran and to the most recent meeting ( in September ) of the Troika in Tehran , will such cooperation and dialogue lead to any improvement in the legal situation of Iranian women ?
What progress is expected to be made ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the main aim of the European Union 's policy towards Iran is to encourage internal reforms in that country .
The issue of human rights is an important point in the political dialogue with Iran .
Any future trade and cooperation agreement with this country must also include human rights clauses .
During the recent round of political dialogue which took place in Tehran on 3 September , the European Union raised the topic of human rights along with the issues of judicial reforms and democratic rights , including freedom of expression and the press , the death penalty and recent cases involving the stoning of women .
As regards the situation of Iranian women , improvement not only of their legal status but also of the concrete reality of their situation is a specific aim of the dialogue .
The European Union noted with interest the efforts of the Iranian government and Parliament to introduce new legislation geared towards women and girls .
I am referring , for example , to the draft law designed to raise the legal age of marriage for girls to 15 and to the draft law giving women the right to unconditional divorce .
Unfortunately , the Council can , to date , only regret that these efforts have still not come to anything due to opposition from other Iranian bodies , most notably the Council of Guardians .
At the last session of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in Geneva , the European Union took the initiative of tabling a resolution on the human rights situation in the Islamic Republic of Iran .
The Swedish Presidency submitted a draft resolution on behalf of the European Union at this session .
This resolution was adopted on 20 April this year .
The Commission on Human Rights , according to the terms of this resolution , welcomes the improvement seen in the area of women ' s education and health and their participation in democratic life in the Islamic Republic of Iran , as well as the efforts made to improve the situation of women and girls , particularly by means of laws designed to raise the legal age of marriage and lift the ban barring unmarried women from studying abroad . However , the Commission is also gravely concerned by the fact that these drafts have yet to be enacted in law .
Enactment would be a way of putting an end to the systematic discrimination against women and girls in legislation and in practice and a way of removing the obstacles preventing women and girls from exercising their fundamental rights fully and equally .
Madam President-in-Office of the Council , thank you very much for your reply , which I believe offers hope in an area in which there are serious difficulties .
I would like to ask the Council whether it would be in favour of carrying out monitoring , even of agreeing a timetable on the progress made in relation to the situation of women in terms of laws , because the Council is aware , like us , that if these improvements are not introduced into laws , they will not be consolidated .
I therefore believe that the Council is working very seriously and in agreement with the European Parliament in this area , but does the Council not believe that at some point it would be good to agree a timetable for introducing this progress and these improvements into laws since that is the only way to consolidate them ?
Mrs Izquierdo Rojo , I would like to reply by saying that you have of course made an interesting suggestion .
I believe that the main thing as regards the development of the situation is that the political dialogue now seems to be well under way and , moreover , in a serious fashion , and I believe that we must all , each at our own level , endeavour to keep this dialogue going , to broaden it and , above all , to continue and maintain it in order to encourage those among the authorities who are working for progress to continue to make headway in this direction .
Question No 10 by ( H-0719 / 01 ) :
Subject : Repatriating Mobotu funds While welcoming the Belgian law allowing individuals to seek the arrest of suspected war criminals visiting Belgium , would the President-in-Office of the Council indicate who had been tried for the crimes committed in the former Congo and will he indicate what measures have been taken to repatriate funds lodged in Belgian and other banks in the name of the former ' President ' Mobotu of Zaire and the steps that have been taken in order to confiscate former family assets in Brussels ?
The response is as follows : the question that was put by the honourable MEP falls outside of the Council ' s competence .
The Belgian Presidency has probably been the best presidency I have witnessed in the 18 years I have been a Member of this House .
It is making an impact with the citizens .
My question does not just refer to the Mobotu funds that are spread throughout Europe and lying dormant in banks or are perhaps being used by undesirable types .
It also deals with the law in Belgium which apparently allows the arrest of people suspected of war crimes .
There was the recent case of the Israeli Prime Minister being threatened with legal action .
My question also relates to the historical responsibility of the European Union , including the presidency , for colonialism and for the atrocities committed in various states .
For instance , would the President-in-Office tell me who so far has been charged with complicity in the murder of President Lumumba and the installation of the psychopath Mobotu , which resulted in great pain for the former colony of the Congo ?
I would like to tell the honourable Member that , when I told him his questions concerned matters not within the competence of the Council , I was referring to his questions as a whole .
Questions concerning the Belgian government should be addressed to the latter .
I am here to represent the Presidency of the Council of the entire European Union , as you very well know .
( Protests from Mr Andrews )
The reply of the President-in-Office is clear .
Madam President-in-Office of the Council , you have the floor if you wish .
That is rather a personal point .
I am not afraid to answer but this morning Minister Michel was here .
He spoke at length about the way the Durban Conference went .
If you had questions about your and my and other people 's colonial past , then that was the moment to ask them , to make your remarks and to formulate your criticisms .
Question No 12 by ( H-0724 / 01 ) :
Subject : Registration in the SIS Large-scale demonstrations and major clashes between certain groups of demonstrators and the police occurred in connection with the European Council meeting in Gothenburg and the G8 meeting in Genoa .
In both Gothenburg and Genoa , the police used excessive force and abusive tactics , including assaults on and the arbitrary arrest and improper treatment of non-violent demonstrators .
Most of those arrested during the two demonstrations have since not been charged with any offence .
Can the Council guarantee that demonstrators who were arrested and identified , but are not suspected of any criminal offence , will not be registered in the SIS ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the questions raised by Messrs Papayannakis and Sjöstedt concern , on the one hand , the conditions surrounding the reinstatement of internal border controls in a Member State which applies the Schengen acquis and , on the other hand , the conditions for the entry of an alert in the ' Schengen Information System ' in relation to the events at the G8 meeting in Genoa .
As regards the first point , this situation does not in fact correspond to what the two Members have referred to in their question as , and I quote , " an abolition of the validity of the Schengen Convention " .
The reinstatement of border controls is a measure which is explicitly laid down in Article 2 item 2 of the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement .
And this article , along with the method of applying this article adopted in 1995 by the governments of those Member States applying the Schengen acquis , is part of the Schengen acquis , incorporated into European Union law .
The Italian authorities felt that public order or national security required that national border checks appropriate to the situation be carried out at internal borders for the duration of the G8 Summit in Genoa , more specifically from 14 to 21 July 2001 .
This was admittedly an exceptional measure , but a measure that other Member States have used in the past during political or sporting events or during events which could have involved a threat to public order .
Turning now to the second point , I refer the two Members to the answer that we gave on the same subject at the June 2001 part-session , namely that the Council is not qualified to answer the question as to whether an alert was issued in the ' Schengen Information System ' for certain individuals involved in these events .
Entry of an alert in the SIS actually falls within the competence of the Member States .
Let me point out that , according to Article 94 of the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement , and I quote : ' The Schengen Information System shall contain only the categories of data which are supplied by each of the Contracting Parties , as required for the purposes laid down in Articles 95 to 100 .
The Contracting Party issuing an alert shall determine whether the case is important enough to warrant entry of the alert in the Schengen Information System .
Furthermore , Article 104 stipulates that , and I quote : ' Alerts shall be governed by the national law of the Contracting Party issuing the alert unless more stringent conditions are laid down in this Convention ' .
Finally , may I remind Mr Sjöstedt that the Schengen acquis was published in Official Gazette L 239 on 22 September 2000 .
Mr President , I would like to speak in French , if I may , so that I can make myself understood more easily .
Thank you for your answer , Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck , and for the information that you gave .
I knew the details regarding the Schengen Agreement but it is useful to have confirmation of them .
My first point , Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck , is that I am not talking about abolition .
Your translation services have made a mistake - I am talking about suspension .
This is a different concept altogether and this is the correct word .
I sincerely apologise for writing in Greek .
My second point , Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck , is that you spoke of the reinstatement of checks .
In the case that I mention in my question , however , involving the 150 young people from Greece who were banned before they even left their ship in the port of Ancona , they did not undergo any checks at all .
That is why I put to you the following question - when the Schengen Agreement is suspended , which legal status is applicable ?
I would guess that it is the status laid down generally by the treaty , in other words , free movement with passport control .
The passports of the Greek citizens were not checked , Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck .
This , forgive me for saying so , is totally illegal , it is deplorable and what is more , this is a matter for the European courts .
And , in my view , it is a matter for you , the Council or the Commission .
Once again , Mr Papayannakis , I can only repeat what I said .
I apologise if there has been a mistake in translation .
You have rectified the situation .
As for your other points , I have taken note of the comments that you made and I shall pass these on .
I think it is incredibly serious that the Council of Ministers is unable to answer the question of whether people who are neither suspected of a crime nor have committed a crime are registered in the EU data system , SIS .
The issue is that of whether the SIS can fulfil the most fundamental requirements of the rule of law .
I nonetheless interpret the Council ' s reply as indicating that it is possible for a Member State , unsupervised , to choose to place a person on the SIS register without the person in question being suspected of , or convicted of , a crime , but with him or her having simply taken part in a demonstration and been identified by the police .
This is entirely unacceptable in such cases and in breach of normal legal practice .
Perhaps you can confirm that if a state registers someone who has not committed a crime , then that person will remain on the SIS register , and it will be possible to obtain information about the fact when the person concerned passes external border controls and when an internal Schengen check is carried out .
The only thing I can confirm is that it is the responsibility of the Member States to enter personal data into the Schengen Information System .
Under the Convention they are obliged to see to it that the importance of the situation justifies any such input into the system .
This is , then , the responsibility of the Member States .
This is a genuine point of order , Mr President .
In her answer , Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck stated that she has taken my question into account and that she will pass it on .
Does that mean that I will , at a later date , at some point receive a reply ?
What I said was that we shall look into your questions in greater detail beforehand , and if it appears that they refer to matters that fall within the Council ' s remit , we will be able to give you an answer .
If it appears , however , that one or more Member States are solely responsible for the issue as a whole , I shall be unable to give you an answer on behalf of the Council .
Thank you very much , Madam President-in-Office of the Council .
The President-in-Office has replied and , depending on what happens , Mr Papayannakis will have the appropriate mechanisms to address the Council .
As they deal with the same subject , Questions No 13 and 14 will be taken together .
Question No 13 by ( H-0721 / 01 ) :
Subject : Priorities for the UN General Assembly Special Session on Children On 5 July 2001 , the European Parliament adopted a resolution on the European Union 's positions in the UNGA Special Session on Children , which is being held at the end of September .
In its resolution , Parliament called on the Council to report to it on EU efforts and priorities for the Special Session and on EU actions during the Special Session .
Where is that report ?
In what way has the Council taken account of Parliament 's call for support for the view that the family is the fundamental unit of society and that the theme of the Session ' A World Fit for Children ' has to be at the same time ' A World Fit for Families ' ?
Question No 14 by ( H-0722 / 01 ) :
Subject : EU position on the UN World Summit for Children As it was voted on 5 July 2001 , the resolution on the EU position for the UNGASS for Children states that ' the Family is the fundamental unit of society and holds the primary responsibility for the protection , upbringing and development of children ' .
Can the Council inform us why the EU delegation at the UN promotes the term , ' the Family in its various forms ' as the fundamental unit of society , and who agreed this re-interpretation since the July vote ?
Also , in the light of the fact that the term ' reproductive health services ' has been publicly defined at the UN as including abortion , can the Council explain why the EU delegation at the UN supports ' universally accessible health care and services , including sexual and reproductive health ' and how this can be reconciled with the Council 's answer of 14 March 2001 in which it states that ' on the specific issue of abortion , the Council recalls that national abortion legislation does not fall under Community competence ' .
First of all , I would remind you that the European Union as such has no official status with , nor is it accredited to the United Nations .
Article 19 of the Treaty on European Union stipulates that Member States shall coordinate their action in international organisations and at international conferences and that they shall uphold the EU ' s common positions .
The EU ' s common positions , also on matters which concern the questions put by the honourable Members , are coordinated and agreed upon in the framework of the common foreign and security policy and require unanimity from all EU Member States .
As soon as an EU position has been adopted by the Member States , it is included in the negotiating process with other members of the United Nations community .
Since it is the international community ' s wish to reach consensus on the draft documents for the United Nations Special Assembly on children , the respective positions and wordings pertaining to the draft documents are the subject of constant negotiation and adaptation with a view to reaching agreement on the draft action plan which might receive full UN backing .
In addition , reference is once again made to Article 152 ( 5 ) of the Treaty which stipulates that " Community action in the field of public health shall fully respect the responsibilities of the Member States for the organisation and delivery of health services and medical care . "
With regard to the concepts ' family ' and ' reproductive health care ' , the Member States have drawn on the language that was agreed upon during several previous UN world conferences , namely those of Cairo , Beijing and Copenhagen .
The Special Session on Children has , as a result of the terrorist attacks in the United States , been put on the back-burner .
The presidency will report to the European Parliament on the European Union ' s efforts and priorities within the context of regular information on the development of the common foreign and security policy , as enshrined in Article 21 of the Treaty .
However , I can inform you now that the European Union , during preparations of this special session , has expressed the resolve to do everything in its power to bring about a world which really pays attention to children .
Our actions in this field must be based on the International Convention on the Rights of the Child .
It remains the reference instrument par excellence .
The countries that have ratified the Convention - and I am referring to the International Convention on the Rights of the Child - must implement it in full , and those countries that have not yet ratified it , should do so as a matter of urgency .
The document that will be approved by the special General Assembly must be geared towards action and must pursue the following objectives .
First of all , we must invest in our children .
Forgive me for using an economic term .
A great deal of attention and care must be devoted to sound upbringing , one that is worthy of children , to their health , their well-being and their development , and resources must be set aside for that purpose .
In addition , children must be protected .
They must be protected from the effects of conflicts , abuse , violence and all forms of discrimination , exploitation , conscription into the armed forces , as well as from anti-personnel mines , epidemics and HIV / AIDS , in particular .
These are all scourges which affect them particularly cruelly .
Finally , children must also be heard , and they must be able to take part in the decisions that affect them .
Children must indeed be considered key figures in the mapping out of the course of their own development .
I would like to express my thanks for the reply , but I should nonetheless like to say that , in all the important comments made towards the end of your reply , you did not actually mention the family among those initiatives you emphasised as being in the best interests of the child .
Was this pure coincidence ?
In Paragraph 1 of the European Parliament resolution of 5 July 2001 on the EU positions at the UN General Assembly Special Session on Children , we state the following : ' family is the fundamental unit of society and holds the primary responsibility for the protection , upbringing and development of children ' .
In other words , it says ' family ' , not ' family in its various forms ' .
How do you interpret the position of the European Parliament , and how do you value a mother and a father supporting their children in their development ?
Why has the EU acted in a way which means that the concept of family has in fact been changed ?
That is a very philosophical question , Mr Sacrédeus .
I am not going to interpret what you have said , but that is the impression I have as President .
We must ask specific questions , but I accept your question and the President-in-Office will answer it .
If you wish to add anything , you have the floor .
That is your own assessment , Mr President .
You are Vice-President for me and all the other Members too .
I asked specific questions about the concept of family .
The last time I asked a question too , you also chose to believe that I was presenting philosophical questions and comments .
I asked the Belgian Presidency specific questions .
I request that you , as a competent Vice-President , show respect for all Members , including Swedish Christian Democrats .
I am assuming that this will be the last time you offend a Member in this way .
Philosophy and ethics are important issues even for you .
Mr Sacrédeus , I have enormous respect for all Members .
I have accepted your question .
But as legal administrator for this Question Time , sometimes I can and must express the opinion that they are very general .
Your question is in order and I have not criticised it at all .
I have said that it seems very general , but the President-in-Office will reply to it .
There is no problem .
Please be assured that the Christian Democrats warrant my absolute respect .
Mr President , if I may , I shall answer all three at the same time .
Two other Members also wanted to speak .
I can answer all three together , or do I have to answer each question individually ?
We usually reply question by question .
Furthermore , for Mr Sacrédeus ' s benefit , it is better that you reply to him directly .
Unless the interpreters have omitted some of what I said , which would surprise me , I think that I have given a general answer .
My personal views on the family are of no relevance at all to the debate that we are having .
I have the greatest respect for the family , but that has no relevance to the debate underway here .
The question is what is the position of Member States , since it is the Member States who must unanimously adopt and define their position regarding the work of the United Nations General Assembly on Children .
I have given you some information on this issue .
I stated that Member States are using the same terminology as that used at the United Nations global conferences , in other words at the conferences in Cairo , Peking and Copenhagen .
This is a political indication of the way in which Member States are working to define a unanimous position concerning the United Nations conference on Children .
I thank the President-in-Office for her answer .
It took a great deal of time to establish how Parliament 's position would be presented at the UN Special Session .
A general meeting was held where candidate countries and , indeed , the Commissioner were present .
He made the very concrete statement that the child cannot be dealt with in isolation but in the context of the family and community .
We took a general vote and there was an overwhelming desire to make a special reference to the child in the context of the family .
We then debated a proposed position for Parliament , which was voted on in this Chamber .
It is our responsibility therefore to ensure that the wishes , not just of Parliament but also of the candidate countries who had travelled here and of the Member State representatives who came , concerning the position on the family are accurately presented , otherwise our time has been wasted .
As the UN definition of reproductive health services is so much in conflict with our position as stated in the Treaties - in particular with the protocol of my country - does the Council intend to challenge this publicly stated definition or to change the definition of reproductive health services within the institutions of the EU ?
Whatever our personal feelings on this or other subjects , we need to work within the existing legal frameworks .
I started my answer by reminding you that the European Union as such is not a member of the United Nations and enjoys no special status in its relations with the United Nations .
I reminded you further that the Member States have undertaken to coordinate their positions in the international organisations of which they are members or the international fora in which they act or participate .
This is the legal framework in which such conferences are prepared .
Thus the European Parliament resolution is certainly of interest to the different Member States , but cannot possibly - with all due respect - be considered binding on them .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , you gave the issue of public health a special mention .
I would be interested to know how you see the division of responsibilities between the United Nations and the World Health Organisation .
What are your priorities here ?
I apologise for not being able to speak German well enough to be able to give you an answer in German , especially using specialised vocabulary , but I do understand it .
The questions regarding the structure of the various international - even world-wide - institutions are all very interesting , but will lead us nowhere .
Moreover , the Council , as it stands , has no position on this subject that I could communicate to you on its behalf .
I can express my personal views , which may be of interest to you , but they will not make the slightest difference because they do not convey the position of the Council .
My personal view is that it is high time for all the international institutions , wherever they are based , to cooperate more closely and to coordinate their respective policies more effectively than they have done so far .
I am not going to make any judgment . I am simply going to ask you , when you have time , to reread Annex II ( point A : Guidelines ) in relation to the procedure for Question Time laid down in Rule 43 .
Simply that : we should all read it when we have time .
As the author is not present , Question No 15 lapses .
Question No 16 by ( H-0727 / 01 ) :
Subject : Further judgments of the European Court of Human Rights against Turkey in the case of Leyla Zana and three other Members of Parliament Ruling on 17 July 2001 in cases 29900 / 96 - 29903 / 96 , the European Court of Human Rights fined Turkey 110 000 dollars for continuing to detain the Sacharov prize-winner Leyla Zana and three other Members of Parliament in Turkish prisons .
In view of the fact that Turkey systematically ignores the judgments of the European Court of Human Rights , can the Council provide evidence that Turkey intends to comply with the above judgments of the Court ?
Can the Council provide a list of ECHR judgments which Turkey continues to ignore ?
What measures does it intend to take ?
The Council would like to point out to the honourable Member that the judgments quoted by him have been passed by the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg .
In other words , the Court established by the Council of Europe and not by the Court of Justice of the European Communities in Luxembourg .
At the moment , the European Union has no specific reason to believe that Turkey will not be falling in with the judgments of the European Court of Human Rights in this instance .
On a wider scale , neither does the European Union have a list of judgments of the European Court of Human Rights with which Turkey is said to have failed to conform .
The Council of the European Union would remind you that it has no authority whatsoever to implement the decisions of the European Court of Human Rights .
However , on behalf of the Council , I would like to emphasise that the Union , particularly within the framework of the strengthened dialogue with Turkey , seizes every opportunity to stress the obligation resting on that country to observe all international agreements it has entered into ; particularly in the field of human rights , obviously including the decisions by the European Court of Human Rights .
Within the framework of the partnership for the accession of Turkey , the European Union has stipulated that Turkey must respect human rights and fundamental freedoms and guarantee that it will ensure that these are also translated into practice .
The Council will follow Turkey ' s progress from close range once the Commission has submitted its report on this matter .
I can therefore only reiterate that the Council does not have a list of judgments of the European Court of Human Rights which are said to have been ignored by Turkey .
I understand how tired the representative of the Council must be , she has been here since this morning , she has intervened on numerous issues , and I can only ascribe her disdain for the European Court of Human Rights to that .
Why else would a representative of the Council of Ministers of the European Union say that we have no knowledge of the rulings by the European Court of Human Rights , especially here in Strasbourg ?
It is a disgrace , an absolute disgrace !
Besides , the European Parliament , in its recent resolutions on Turkey , has called on Turkey , among other things , to respect the rulings and to obey the rulings of the European Court .
But that is by the by .
My question concerns Leyla Zanna .
A Sacharov prizewinner , one of us .
You are a member of the Belgian Parliament .
She is a member of the Turkish national assembly .
She is a woman , she is your age and she is in prison .
Can we just ignore this issue in a candidate country , is this our response ?
Perhaps simultaneous interpretation problems are to blame here .
I did not say that we do not have the list of European Court rulings ; I said that we do not have a list of the rulings which Turkey may have failed to observe .
That is what I said , and it is different .
I was in the former Chamber when the prize was awarded to Mrs Zana and as a Member of this Parliament I associated myself with many of the positions taken by this Parliament in respect of Turkey .
You are well aware that the Council 's position on Turkey is very clear .
We have made that position clear to Turkey repeatedly and will continue to do so .
The Minister has pointed out that this is a court of the Council of Europe , not a court of the European Union .
However , we are all well aware of the relations between the European Parliament and the supreme court of the Council of Europe .
Secondly , she said , and she repeated , that she does not have a list of the Court rulings which Turkey may have failed to observe .
Apart from the rulings on Leyla Zana and the other three Members of Parliament in prison , there is the famous ruling on Titina Loizidou , the Greek Cypriot still waiting for Turkey to pay the compensation awarded to her in a ruling by the supreme court , which Turkey has provocatively said it has no intention of observing .
I repeat I am surprised because the Minister has served as a Member of the European Parliament and as a member of her national parliament and she should at least have thought about it and if she did not have a list , she had all the time in the world to ask for one rather than coming here today , if I may say so , without having done her homework .
I sometimes wonder whether the tone adopted by some of the Members has anything to do with my sex , age or something else .
I have been very clear in my answers .
There is a distinction between the Court of Human Rights and our own Court of Justice in Luxembourg , as you very well know .
We hold Turkey to its responsibility of respecting all the international obligations that country has undertaken and among them , of course , is the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights .
This is one of the permanent elements of the political dialogue we are having with Turkey .
We are doing our homework .
It might not always produce the results that you would like to see or produce them as quickly as you would like , but we are doing our homework .
Madam President-in-Office of the Council , on behalf of Parliament , I thank you for your dedication this evening and all the answers you have given us .
We like some of your answers more than others , but we are grateful for your dedication .
As the time allotted to questions to the Council has elapsed , Questions Nos 17 to 23 , 25 and 26 will be replied to in writing .

Question No 24 by Mr Van Lancker is not admissible since it refers to an item included on the agenda for the present part-session .
That concludes Questions to the Council .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.05 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )
Strengthening economic policy coordination within the euro area - Contribution of public finances to growth and employment
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A5-0307 / 2001 by Mrs Berès on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on the Commission communication on strengthening economic policy coordination within the euro area ;
A5-0306 / 2001 by Mrs Peijs on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on the Commission communication to the Council and Parliament on the contribution of public finances to growth and employment : improving quality and sustainability ( COM ( 2000 ) 846 - C5-0172 / 2001 - 2001 / 2082 ( COS ) ) .
Mr President , before I give my comments as rapporteur , I would like to make an objection and ask you to refer it to the Conference of Presidents .
In my view , it is absurd to have this debate now , when we had the debate on the Stability Pact this afternoon , and in the meantime , the Conference of Presidents thought it would be worthwhile to find time for a debate on television without frontiers .
This does not help to make our work more coherent .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the report we are about to debate has come at a crucial moment .
On 21 September 2001 , the European Council acknowledged the importance of the subjects we discuss and assisted us by requesting , for the first time , that the Commission prepare a recommendation on the economic situation of the euro area following the events of 11 September .
Some people might believe that it has been easier to organise economic policy coordination during a period of growth .
This was not intentional , even though there have been many fortunate coincidences , such as tax cuts in various Member States , which we can now welcome .
Today , however , we are faced with genuine external shocks , even though the consequences of the slowdown in the United States were already challenging us on the basis of our growth , economic policy coordination is becoming even more difficult , and even more necessary , because , at the other end of the spectrum , European policy now amounts to monetary policy and also because Mr Duisenberg , in the wake of the events of 11 September , made a commitment with his US counterpart to coordinate economic areas .
As the changeover to euro notes and coins draws near , we must make economic and monetary union manage on its own two feet .
This is what we invited the Commission to do with its communication , which we welcome .
A great deal has already been done and there is still a great deal to do .
Member States must conduct their policy in a responsible and autonomous manner .
Coordination , however , must help to make this policy as consistent as possible and mutually beneficial .
This is what the changeover to the euro represents .
The report that I am commending to Parliament echoes the Commission communication and indicates a number of options , which we believe are essential .
First of all , this coordination depends on the Eurogroup and its president , who , we must be able to believe , speaks on behalf of the whole group .
Next , the Commission must have an essential role but it cannot approach this as if it were one of its , say , conventional areas of competence .
In some ways , this role is more political , in which the Commission must display its ability to make innovative proposals , to develop medium-term prospects .
And the European Parliament must be the public forum for debate on economic policy coordination .
In order to achieve this , three courses of action are needed .
First of all , we need indicators , harmonised statistics and barometers for the euro area .
An economic policy for the euro area is impossible unless we have good instruments to navigate by .
I am also aware that some Member States are having a debate on the cost-effectiveness of the indicators .
We are clearly in favour of spending a small amount of money so that the indicators can be more effective .
In our view , the second crucial point is the exchange of information , on which Eurogroup members have made a start .
We believe it is essential to go further , to take advantage of everything that could enable peer evaluation , with the option of asking the Commission to carry out an assessment of the impact of measures proposed by a Member State as part of its budgetary , fiscal or structural policy .
Lastly , Mr President , we must improve the quality and the coherence of all aspects of the debate .
Economic policy coordination in the national parliaments must be integrated .
This means integrating the broad economic policy guidelines into the debate on national budgets .
It also means that a national debate must be based on the stability programmes .
This also means that before we discuss the broad economic policy guidelines in the European Parliament , we want to hear the views of our colleagues in the national parliaments .
I shall conclude , Mr President , by saying that this also means we hope to see the President of the Eurogroup come before the relevant parliamentary committee as often as is necessary .
Mr President , the Commission Communication on public finances is now , some time after its publication , particularly topical .
The economy is slowing down , partly of its own accord , partly through laxity on the part of major Member States , and on top of this there are the after-effects of the tragic events of 11 September .
These things have again , for the first time in a while , put pressure on the public finances of the Member States .
History has taught us that considerable public expenditure can lead to major inefficiency , to too high a claim on the capital market and to excessive taxation , and very rarely to higher employment .
All these aspects can seriously hinder the healthy development of the private sector and consequently hamper growth in employment grounded in supply and demand .
Almost ten years ago , the European Heads of State and Government acknowledged this development , and agreed in Maastricht to work on a sustainable budgetary position .
If Member States join together in a large monetary zone , albeit with coordination of economic policy , but without real political union , they must adhere to their agreements .
Thanks to instruments made available to the ECB , the latter can influence the stability of prices and , along with this , the living conditions of people in the Euro area .
Further to a discussion in the Preparatory Committee , I would once again like to underline that price stability , along with controlled inflation , contributes to a sustained purchasing power at the bottom of the wage structure and to an incentive to return to work .
Price stability prevents the purchasing power of those of pensionable age from being eroded .
It also ensures that wage increases within the labour market actually translate into more financial scope for families in Europe , and do not merely enable people to keep up with price increases , as is the case in my own country .
Some countries give tax cuts with one hand and take them back , in the form of VAT hikes and higher local taxes , with the other .
This instils in the public a sense of distrust in politics .
And the instruction to the Central Bank to monitor prices is the most effective social measure I can remember for a good few years .
In addition to the Central Bank ' s pursuit of stability , the Member States ' investment and budgetary policy is critical to the living and working conditions of Europeans and to confidence in the single currency .
According to President Duisenberg , the watering down of the budgetary objectives is of huge concern .
You yourself , Commissioner , called key countries including Germany , France , Italy and Portugal to account and reminded them of their duties . And in those same countries , the idea of extending the Stability Pact is being mooted .
Let one thing be clear , however : the financial markets are closely watching the Member States in terms of how they are dealing with their budgets in a declining economy .
The countries which did nothing when it was economically possible , are now , of course , struggling the most to observe the Stability Pact .
Needless to say , it is unrealistic to expect that they will now increase taxes or curb spending , but I consider an increase in spending to be an irresponsible burden in the face of an uncertain future .
Our generation must pay for its own bills , rather than pass them on to the next .
The current situation is a test of how sound the euro system actually is , and it is patently clear to the financial market that the public budgets are the weak link in the entire euro cycle .
Governments must not be allowed to think that the euro belongs to all of us but that their budgets are purely a national matter .
Furthermore , nobody has managed to explain to me what the use is of a Stability Pact which only applies to buoyant times .
It is precisely in an economy that is slowing down that it is important to translate agreements into practice .
The European Commission devotes an important proportion of its communication to future demographic developments .
It is a crucial component , because an ageing population will have a great impact on future budgetary positions .
And an ageing population is another reason to look after the Stability Pact .
It will also mean that we will be obliged to work much more on lifelong learning in order to sustain our own professional profile . What is more , people will probably need to work well beyond the age of fifty-seven and a half , as is now mostly the case , for example in the Netherlands .
In my report , I am asking for an individual path to be sketched for every Member State , so that the political tendency to indulge in short-term thinking will not prejudice the just pension and care expectations of people .
Mr President , in my report , it is certainly not my intention to create the impression that public investments should not be allowed , but in the Stability Pact , 60 % of the GDP has already been earmarked to meet the needs for public investments .
That offers ample scope for in-depth investment in education , R & D and healthcare .
Finally , I would like to note that I am pleased that constructive consultation with the Group of the Party of European Socialists was possible in order to come to an acceptable compromise .
Tomorrow , I will ask you whether it is possible to table an oral compromise amendment during the vote .
Mr President , given that this is a joint debate , I will point out that my mandate is restricted to the report by Mrs Peijs .
Mr President , it is customary for draftspeople of the opinion to congratulate the rapporteur of the committee responsible , to express their agreement and satisfaction , and to try to highlight their contributions and / or to at least expand on a few points .
Unfortunately , I will not be able to continue that practice today .
On behalf of the Committee on Budgets , which I have the honour of representing institutionally , I must express the profound disappointment of my committee at the treatment by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of our amendments , and please do not interpret this as in any way a personal opinion .
The Committee on Budgets adopted its opinion unanimously while I was absent through illness .
I was not even there at the final moment to defend my proposals and the opinion was therefore adopted without interference .
There was not a single vote against and there was therefore no distinction of a party political nature .
This is in no way a party political issue for us .
The majority of members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , however , has rejected our amendments en masse . Unless I am mistaken , not a single one of our amendments has warranted the approval of that majority in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
And we in the Committee on Budgets have the feeling , Mr President , that constructive and purely institutional contributions have been thoroughly spurned and scorned .
To be frank , we can find no explanation for this systematic negative vote .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is true that the Commission document which is the basis of our discussion focused , shall we say , on national budgets .
But when the Committee on Budgets added the Community dimension , the Commission , in particular the Commissioner present , thanked us for it and expressed its appreciation of this widening of the perspective of the Communication .
Well , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has refused to open its eyes to this additional dimension .
Why ?
Why does the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs deny that the European Union ' s meagre budget , 1.07 % of Community GDP , has been applied just as rigorously as that of the Member States ?
By rejecting Amendment No 7 , this is what they have done .
It is also difficult for we budgeteers in this House to understand why , two days from the first reading of the 2001 budget , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs denies , by rejecting Amendments Nos 5 and 6 , the multiplier effect of Community expenditure and the fact that it frequently acts as an example for national , regional and local authorities .
If that is the economic thinking of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , the coherent thing for it to do would be to withdraw all the amendments it has presented to the draft budget .
That would be the most logical thing for it to do .
Ladies and gentlemen , 90 days from the physical introduction of the euro , any inkling of fiscal policy in relation to the Community budget is being sidestepped .
From the point of view of the Committee on Budgets , the obvious thing to do would be to gradually strengthen the European budget and go beyond mere - necessary , but mere - coordination of the economic policies of the Member States .
Some day , just as we now have a ' Mr ' CFSP , we are convinced that we will need a ' Mrs ' Euro , perhaps Mrs Peijs herself , and a greater European budget , in exchange for a reduction of national budgets .
And in the Committee on Budgets we wonder how the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs thinks economic cycles , symmetrical and asymmetrical shocks , should be confronted , each one as it comes or all of them in a coordinated and cooperative fashion , to a certain extent using the Community budget to this end .
We in the Committee on Budgets , which I would remind you approved the opinion unanimously , have the impression that for the majority of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs ideological prejudices carried more weight than the objective assessment of the economic options available .
Please allow me to remind you , as a teacher of public economy , Milton Freedman , said , that we are all Post-Keynesians .
He forgot about that majority of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of this Parliament .
The motion for a resolution is only Post-Keynesian in a chronological sense , but the basis of its thinking is pre-Keynesian .
It takes up elements of the monetarism of the 80s and 90s without taking account of its background .
When the Maastricht Treaty was signed , perhaps all politicians , and certainly the economists , knew that we should get rid of the systematic deficit , that we needed a policy of financial rationalisation , but we also knew , since the 60s , that budgetary balance is only advisable in certain circumstances and conditions and that , in general , strict budgetary balance tends to be procyclic , that is to say that it tends to aggravate the cyclic tendency of the economy .
Kennedy ' s advisers , if I may go back that far , illustrated , by means of the so-called budget surplus of full employment , how a balanced budget , even in certain cases of deficit , can create recession .
I would therefore ask you , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of my committee , to take a more open perspective , as contained in our amendments , and to include them tomorrow in the text of the resolution .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mrs Berès , Mrs Peijs , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to say a few words about each of the reports , and also something about the previous speaker 's comments of course .
No matter what political group he or she might belong to , I would never insinuate that a fellow Member had let himself or herself be guided by anything but objective policy considerations in reaching a decision or deciding how to vote .
The majorities that prevail may vary , but since I have been following its activities , the hallmark of the work of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has been a very objective atmosphere and one very much geared to the Community 's economic and monetary policy , so that the suggestion that has been made here is one that I cannot agree with and would like to refute .
Nevertheless , I agree with you of course that within the euro area and also as regards our common foreign and security policy we need to speak with one voice , both internally and externally .
However , and this point concerns both reports , competition is becoming an increasingly global matter .
The euro will come into circulation in 89 days , and it is already the second most important currency in the world .
The euro coins and notes will make the importance of this single European currency on the world market very clear .
This is a very important aspect , and we must at all times be very disciplined about keeping Europe 's presence on the world financial stage in mind .
Global competition does of course require that in addition to the single market and economic and monetary union the necessary coordination needs to take place within the euro area and within the European Union as a whole .
What does this mean ?
On the one hand it means coordination so that a strong internal market is created in the euro area and Europe becomes more competitive .
On the other hand , you need to understand that it also involves maintaining freedom as the basis of competition within the framework agreed between the Member States .
We are , of course , not all convinced that coordination in itself is a panacea , because we also need to consider where coordination starts . What mechanisms does coordination involve , and what are the limits of coordination ?
Does coordination inhibit the functioning of the market or support it ?
This is undisputedly a debate that we need to hold , as decisions cannot simply be taken under the heading of coordination .
That is why we are in favour of more debates on European issues in national parliaments , in favour of coordination by the Statistical Office of the European Communities and enhanced links with national statistical bodies , and in favour of mutual exchange of information as a means of achieving joint tasks .
However , we naturally oppose increased bureaucracy , the setting up of new bodies and higher expenditure on bureaucracy masquerading as coordination .
We need more efficiency and professionalism in the structures that already exist in order to improve what we do jointly .
That does not mean reducing freedom of action and freedom of decision making in the Member States .
And we also oppose the information that has leaked out about tax collection or the use of tax income , because we believe that there is no legal basis for that either .
I have simply highlighted two issues that we need to debate further .
We will be voting for the report , but not all the details about what is meant and what mechanisms are necessary have been clarified .
I would like to say one more thing to Mrs Berès : it is important that you have tackled the issue of the link between public finances and reducing inflation , and thus touched on the subject of assessing the financial markets .
We need to give public finances a clean bill of health again , so that we increase the investment capital at our disposal , and I therefore call on everyone mentioned in the report to do their homework properly and not just take cosmetic measures !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Karas , I cannot resist commenting on your speech .
In all instances where we already have sensible coordination of our economic policies in the European Union , we have chalked up enormous successes .
Government budgets over the last year have for the first time in decades shown a surplus , and that still holds good , Mrs Peijs , if we exclude exceptional income from the sale of mobile telephone licences .
I do not think that we should play this down in today 's debate .
The success stories in the current year will not be so great .
That is because growth in the European Union has slowed down , but that is no reason to start harping on about inflation .
Nor is it any reason to start panicking .
No one can calm down our friends in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and the European Democrats .
No one - not in this House anyway - wants to print money . No one wants to print money as a way of solving finance policy problems .
We only want to print money to provide the public with our new currency , the euro , on time , but nobody here is talking about an inadequate budgetary policy .
However , you know that too .
That is not what is at stake here !
Essentially , it is about something quite different .
You know very well that , in the past , these budget consolidation successes that I have been talking about were not achieved by increasing income but by cutting expenditure .
Those expenditure cuts led to a positive result , but also had negative affects .
In many areas , public infrastructure is in a state of decay .
In many places social networks are under great pressure and our investment patterns both in the private sector and in the public sector have led to key strategic deficiencies in comparison with our competitors on the world scene .
We now find ourselves in a situation in which government receipts will decline for cyclical reasons .
So the vital question is this : what should we do in that situation ?
Are you really seriously envisaging further global cuts in public sector income and expenditure ?
Do you really want to freeze budgets so that we fail to make the investment necessary for our future ?
Do you want the European Union to enter a further procyclical phase which will prevent us from benefiting from long-term growth overall ?
I cannot imagine that that is what you want .
Mr von Wogau asked me at lunchtime today what the Socialists really want .
I can give him an answer : we want to stop these scare tactics !
We want to put an end to talk that recovery in Europe is always just short-term , because if the central banks or governments are running scared , we will lose long-term opportunities .
We have tabled amendments that we think are sensible .
If you can agree to compromise with us , then we can find a common path .
And if that is not possible , we will go our separate ways !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin my intervention by agreeing with Mrs Berès ' s complaint , because it really makes no sense to have held a debate , which is otherwise very interesting , on the Growth and Stability Pact and on the conclusions of the ECOFIN in Liège , to have debated ' television without frontiers ' in the middle and now to hold what I believe to be a logical continuation of the first debate , the reports by Mrs Berès and Mrs Peijs , to whom I would like to say , on behalf of the Liberal Group , that they have our support and favourable vote .
I feel compelled to relate this afternoon ' s debate to the subjects of these reports , above all by referring to the current economic situation .
It is clear that over the first few months of this year , the slow-down of the American economy has had more influence than was initially expected , and that the terrible terrorist attacks on New York and Washington have further worsened these prospects through needs for economic intervention which are truly new , urgent and no doubt justified .
The strain of the situation , however , should not lead us to justify greater public intervention or , as the President-in-Office of the Council has said very correctly , to abandon or lose sight of the need to continue with the structural reforms which the European economy still needs if it is really going to be competitive on an international level .
I trust that confidence will be recovered in the economic field as soon as possible and that the current special situation will be overcome , and we will shortly find that we have the same requirements that we had three months ago , that is , to consolidate the European economy , to make it more competitive in accordance with the Lisbon criteria , to strengthen coordination and , as we have often said to Commissioner Solbes , to have a genuine economic and monetary approach and policy , as the existence of the euro and monetary union demands .
Ladies and gentlemen , this is my basic point , although there are other detailed matters which are sufficiently well-expressed in the respective reports by Mrs Berès and Mrs Peijs .
Mr President , I want to deal particularly with the issue of public expenditure , quality and employment .
The explanatory statement of Mrs Peijs ' report is very interesting because it explains the background .
We have to beware of chasing the American economic model .
One of the things that has made many people within the European Union hostile to the euro is that they have seen its introduction as linked to cuts in public expenditure .
We have seen , with the American economic model , the prioritising of the private and the cutting of the public .
The result has been a tremendous disparity between rich and poor and high levels of child poverty - unlike in countries which invest in social expenditure and reduce the wealth gap .
We know that child poverty is linked to poorer educational attainment , poorer job prospects and so on .
We have also seen in that economy a reduction of job security and longer working hours , with the introduction of a flexible contract culture .
In the UK , contracting out at lower cost quite often means compensatory tax measures at the lower end of pay , a public subsidy to poor wages from poor employers .
The American model also represents an unsustainable pattern of consumption , which will have an economic impact in the longer term .
My group believes that Mrs Peijs ' report does not look sufficiently at the quality of the contribution of public finances .
So we cannot support the report in its current form .
Hence the amendments we have tabled .
I know that it is very difficult to measure the benefits of public expenditure in the same way we look at the balance sheet of a private health care company for example .
Public expenditure is an investment in social cohesion and we are gradually coming to recognise the costs of not investing in that .
Indeed , a priority for the European Union now is combating social exclusion .
We count as an economic success private spending to compensate for the lack of public expenditure .
Every burglar alarm bought , for example , is because we feel we are not safe .
We agree that we need to reduce the cost of employing people and to focus on lifting taxation costs for the poorer paid , many of whom are women .
But we also need to reduce working hours as part of increasing employment opportunities .
It is clear to us that a knowledge-based society which tackles social exclusion - we have to remember that Lisbon also said that - needs greater investment .
And where will that come from if there is no significant public expenditure ?
Employers increasingly want ready-trained employees as part of the flexible contract culture .
We consider that public investments can have a very positive value and can help to shift the direction of our economy , as we recognise our ecological responsibilities .
Mr President , the Peijs report states that , over 20 years , government expenditure has increased from 35 % to 50 % of the GNP .
What has caused this increase in government expenditure ?
Is it because public services have been improved , the number of hospitals has increased , additional hospital staff have been hired , public transport and national education have been developed , sufficient social housing has been built ?
No , it certainly is not !
Over the past 20 years , many governments have , on the contrary , privatised services that used to be public .
All these governments have pursued money-saving policies with regard to essential public services , have got rid of railway lines , local post offices or hospitals , which are not considered to be profitable .
The reason that government expenditure has increased is because of the extravagant sums of money given to employers on a multitude of pretexts , ranging from direct subsidies for reducing taxes and social contributions to giving all types of support - all government authorities seem to excel at making these up .
Mrs Peijs cynically proposes making this policy worse by further reducing employers ' social burdens and increasing VAT .
The poorest people are being made to pay in order to give money to the richest - if this is not brutal and direct class politics then it is hard to imagine what else it can be .
I shall of course be voting against this report .
Mr President , at the outset I would like to congratulate both rapporteurs on the presentation of their reports .
In recent months the global economic climate has been the cause of some concern .
We in Europe are certainly not immune to economic downturns in the United States .
The tragic events that took place in New York , Washington and Pennsylvania on 11 September have undoubtedly further shaken economic confidence .
In Ireland , as in all Member States , we remain committed to maintaining current budgetary levels .
The reaffirmation of this commitment at Liège will allow the EU to better address cyclical fluctuations .
I welcome also the statement by the Commissioner that governments will be able to use automatic stabilisers in the context of a slow-down in growth .
Indeed , in Ireland , we continue to run a budget surplus which affords us some room for manoeuvre .
The Irish stability programme is central to the budgetary process in Ireland .
It is discussed in Daíl Éireann and is a key component of our annual budget .
The primary objective of the Irish budget and stability programme is the continuation of sustainable economic growth , supported by moderate inflation and competitive wage developments , reflecting our national agreement with the social partners known as the Programme for Prosperity and Fairness .
As the House knows , the Ecofin Council this year , on a proposal from Commissioner Solbes , issued a recommendation to Ireland stating that she did not comply with last year 's EU broad economic guidelines on fiscal policy .
The Irish government contends that its budgetary policy seeks to achieve economic stability by securing the continuation of social partnership and also by taking action to reduce price inflation , including indirect tax reductions .
We must look to the future .
Our immediate concern is the successful launch of the euro on 1 January .
But the single currency is not an end in itself .
It is conceived to facilitate a true single market for goods and services .
The grand project requires a high level of cooperation and coordination .
National governments must retain the prerogative to formulate a budget which best addresses the particular and specific economic situation of their country at that time .
Mr President , as usual , I am in full agreement with Mrs Peijs .
That is why I shall mainly confine myself to the report by Mrs Berès .
The European Monetary Union is accompanied by a certain level of coordination in the field of budgets .
However , coordination which goes beyond what is necessary for the EMU deserves to be questioned .
Further coordination can only be justified through sound reasoning , but this is lacking in both the Commission communication and in the Berès report .
There are , however , situations which require coordination .
The Commission mentions resistance to shocks as an example .
A recent illustration is the granting of subsidies to airline companies following the attack in the United States . This is an excellent example of decisive action on the part of the Council of Ministers .
Coordination which goes beyond what is required will even prove counterproductive .
Labour participation , company policy , taxes - these are all matters which should fall within the remit of the Member States .
In substance , they give little reason for more coordination at European level .
Coordination of economic policy should not be used as a red herring .
After all , it is evident that times of economic adversity make it more difficult for the Member States to adhere to the EMU ' s underlying principle : the Stability Pact .
The much-needed structural reforms should help meet the budgetary criteria .
Member States cannot afford to postpone using this instrument in order to obtain more permanent and responsible growth .
This growth is vital in order to secure the Stability Pact .
The need for reform is therefore all the more pressing .
It is , therefore , with good reason that the report does not nominate many concrete matters for coordination .
It is always useful to exchange information on economic policy decisions .
More important , however , is the quality of the decisions per se .
The report does not comment on the motives for closer cooperation .
This does nothing to help the case for coordination .
With the EMU , the European economies should not lose their own economic policies , tailored to their specific dynamics and character .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like first to thank my friend , Karla Peijs , for her excellent report , in which she aptly describes the vital importance structural reform measures have for the prosperity of our societies .
Rarely does one see such excellent reports .
I wish to focus on two matters .
The public finances of a State in the euro area are no longer the private affairs of that State .
Any budgetary imbalances in an individual State , particularly a large one , may have an impact on the stability of the entire euro area .
For this reason , recent attempts to water down measures to reform state economies are worrying .
Many governments in recent years have relaxed their budgetary efforts , relying mainly on cyclical receipts , such as the proceeds from mobile telecommunications system auctions .
The consolidation process is still far from being complete , however .
The future objective is for a ' close to balance ' or ' in surplus ' budgetary position .
Member States must honour the commitments of the stability and convergence programmes unconditionally .
It will take perseverance and determination to balance public finances .
It will make us susceptible to populist criticisms of thinking of the economy like an accountant or balancing the economy one-sidedly .
Nevertheless , this is what we have to focus on .
Politicians have to take a few blows after all , but our economy will not be able to take a left hook .
Secondly , the rise in public expenditure in the last few decades has caused the governments of several of the Member States to increase taxation and social welfare contributions , which were already at an unendurably high level in Europe .
Simultaneously , the potential for economic growth has been weakening throughout this period .
That Last Mohican of orthodox communism , my colleague Mrs Bordes , could also stop talking about class war in this , the third millennium , and admit that the contribution of each and every European to the economy is important .
For that reason , work must be financially motivating and the benefits of different social welfare schemes at such a level that they safeguard the basic necessities of a normal , decent life , but provide an incentive for becoming active in all situations .
Only in this way can we achieve the ambitious aims of Lisbon .
Mr President , the challenges of globalisation make it clear to us just how important coordination of economic policies is for Europe , and also the integration of financial , employment and social policies , because little Europe is demonstrating to the world that it is possible to make progress in a region if regional cooperation does not just mean intergovernmental cooperation and is not just a free trade area .
I believe that the combination of the single market on the one hand and certain possibilities for giving political direction on the other is what makes the European Union what it is .
I therefore very much welcome the Commission communication and Mrs Berès 's report , as they make it very clear that we need to make further progress with the coordination process .
We all know that the challenges and demands on us are now even greater than ever .
ECOFIN has quite rightly made sure that more integrated approaches are now being adopted , especially in the field of capital movements .
It is certainly important that we should not just act in unison and improve the quality of coordination , but that we should also agree on guidelines .
Fortunately , the Lisbon process , which was taken further in Stockholm , has given us both quantitative and qualitative objectives .
Of course these still need to be extended and refined , but it enables us to demonstrate to the public that the coordination process can lead to positive outcomes .
If you could not say that , who would be interested in checking if all the Member States have actually met the requirements to which they have committed themselves ?
One aspect of the commitments that they have entered into is the consolidation of their budgets .
Mr Bullmann was quite right to point out the progress made in this area .
It is certainly true that there is still more to be done in reducing debt in some Member States , but we should not forget that the Stability and Growth Pact exists as an instrument to prevent us ever exceeding a deficit of 3 % of GNP .
That is at the heart of the convergence criteria and this deficit is intended to help us to achieve a favourable monetary policy that promotes development .
I believe that coordination can be enhanced still further , and that all those policies which can mutually or reciprocally support each other should be brought into this coordination process .
I also think that it is a particularly good thing that the European Parliament can call on the national parliaments to take part in the coordination process and I really wish to emphasise that point .
We , as a committee , have attempted to constantly highlight this cooperation with national parliaments .
Mr President , I would like to make one final comment .
We should not see the coordination of policies as an end in itself .
We , in Europe , have missed out on growth because over the last few decades coordination has been lacking .
We lost out because we did not adopt a coordinated approach to the UMTS auction .
We could have achieved a totally different outcome .
Nor did we react jointly when the OPEC countries raised oil prices .
There is no doubt that we could have achieved a more favourable starting point for economic development if we had acted in a more coordinated way .
Mr President , Commissioner , in recent decades the per capita GDP in Europe has been reduced in comparison with that of America , increasing the gap or distance between our prosperity and development and that of the United States , while our levels of employment are also worsening .
The conclusion is drawn from this that the Americans do not hinder the activities of private companies through taxation as much as Europeans do and , in accordance with low levels of public expenditure , they have not , like us , promoted action plans , introduced bureaucratic systems or tried to guide their economic operators , who have therefore been able to dedicate themselves purely to working and generating wealth .
It seems to me that this analysis does not take account of the very important fact that , over the last 30 years , levels of public investment in the European Union have been reduced to 2 % of our GDP in 2000 , while in the United States they have maintained a sustainable level and represent 3 % of their GDP .
If we add to this the fact that our per capita GDP stands at 65 % of American GDP , it turns out that their average investment per citizen each year is 2.3 times greater than ours , and this is a more than notable difference which explains the differing developments of our respective economies .
I believe that the short-term solution for Europe is not to reduce taxes , but rather , while achieving balanced budgets and no deficit , we must adjust our current public expenditure and increase public investment in viable projects , modernising our infrastructures , supporting technological research and development , involving research institutes and universities in private initiative and promoting training and knowledge in our society .
What is completely unacceptable is the policy of the Spanish central government of Mr Aznar , which covers up its real budgetary deficit by financing it with revenue , with the monthly contributions of workers integrated into the state social security system , which compromises even further the uncertain future of pensions , and the workers who are currently contributing do not know whether they will receive those pensions on retirement .
This is unacceptable and must be condemned .
Mr President , two weeks ago , I was in the Netherlands on ' Prince ' s Day ' , the opening of the new parliamentary year , when the government budget is presented .
Not only because of the events in the US did I sit that day with mixed feelings , but also with a feeling of : what is this all about ?
With the ever growing internationalisation of the economy , certainly in a country like the Netherlands , it is noticeable that at national level , there is , in fact , little room for economic manoeuvre .
It is , of course , possible to place accents , and I welcome the Dutch government ' s proposal to step up investment in the public sector .
However , the scope remaining to make a real difference is relatively limited and is determined at entirely different levels . One feels far closer to this in Brussels .
On the other hand , I felt completely at home as regards the way in which such a budget is prepared in the Netherlands .
It is based on sound analyses and prognoses issued by what we still term the Central Planning Bureau , and broad , medium-term recommendations by the Socio-Economic Council in which independent experts , social partners and the Dutch Bank work in harmony .
In this way , a government can make plans which receive broad support and which can be effective .
The paradox of the phase which we are at with European cooperation , is that , although the political control of the socio-economic policy has been moved onto a European plane , the instruments and procedures for this are still located at national level .
Neither the European political structure , nor the European actors are prepared for this .
Unfortunately , for I am convinced that Europe is in need of such sound and broad socio-economic coordination .
I am therefore pleased with Mrs Berès ' report .
She makes proposals for improved coordination within the euro countries , for greater involvement of national policy-makers and parliaments and for better harmonisation among the various actors at European level .
I would particularly like to underline the role of the macro-economic dialogue which must be afforded a far higher profile , also in the preparation of the broad economic guidelines .
A broader debate thereafter , also involving national parliaments , is important .
This concludes my comments on the Berès report .
I would once again invite Mrs Peijs to deal with the amendments which we tabled so as to reach a compromise after all .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I fully support the report by Mrs Berès on the Commission communication on the prospects for monetary union .
I think , however , that after the tragic events of 11 September the proposed measures and experiments should be implemented much sooner if we want the monetary union to fully perform the role that awaits it in fighting terrorism , maintaining economic growth and the competitiveness of Europe , and affirming a policy of peace and international cooperation that will isolate terrorism in developing countries .
I refer first of all to the need to face the slow-down in economic growth by means of coordination of our economic and social policies , countering the economic cycle . This can be achieved through enhanced cooperation measures between Eurogroup members , resulting in a real government by agreement of the monetary union , able to question decisions by the European Central Bank with an authority at least as great as that shown a few weeks ago by the United States Federal Reserve .
I also refer to the urgent need within the monetary union above all to achieve the greatest transparency and a reciprocal information system on movements of capital , overcoming the restrictions of bank secrecy so as to be able , Mr Karas , to strike at the transfer of resources linked to terrorist funding , the laundering of dirty money from organised crime , and the offence of tax evasion .
I shall close , Mr President , by also mentioning an international cooperation policy which will allow long-term contracts for supplying Europe with raw materials to be drawn up also in euro .
Mr President , I would like to thank the two rapporteurs very much .
There is no doubt that what has been said this evening is going to help us in our subsequent work .
I will begin by commenting on the Bères report and I would like to express my satisfaction with Parliament ' s motion for a resolution which supports the strengthening of economic policy coordination within the euro area .
We must not forget that economic policy coordination is an obligation laid down in the Treaty .
The Treaty makes it very clear that our model is based on a single monetary policy and on national , but coordinated , economic policies .
This is a key element of our model .
It is true that coordination is still going through a learning phase .
It is also true that we have increasingly greater interdependence - especially in the euro area but also in the Union in general - and this requires that the content , the systems and the instruments we use are constantly being reviewed .
That is why I must especially welcome the report which Parliament has produced and salute Mrs Bères and all of those members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs who have participated in her magnificent work .
I believe that this work , in many respects , goes further than the Commission ' s proposal , particularly with regard to one fundamental aspect , the increase in national participation in economic policy coordination .
I would like to highlight two essential elements of the report - and I will comment on the various interventions in relation to them .
The first is the need to strengthen coordination , the second the need to increase the democratic debate and national participation .
With regard to the content of the coordination , I think it is worth expanding on certain points .
The report supports the Commission ' s proposals on the production of periodic reports on the economy of the euro area .
Today I can tell you that our idea - we have continued to work on this issue - is that we must have detailed economic analyses but also relevant proposals on economic policy .
We must go further than specific analysis .
In her speech , Mrs Bères raised the need to improve statistics and the assessment of policies .
It is true that we have made progress with the statistical plans for the Union ' s monetary area , however , we must go further .
It is partly a problem of bringing national statistics into line with new realities , it is partly a problem of money , but , in some cases , it is neither of these problems , but rather the problem of acquiring the data necessary for a good definition of economic policy more quickly .
This perhaps means that in the future we will have to consider the need for our own statistical information which is not an aggregate of national statistics .
This would certainly be a key element if we are to be able to act within a time frame similar to that available to other economic authorities .
She makes a reference in her report which I believe to be fundamental in relation to trying to achieve a common vision of the impact of economic cycles on public finances .
We have held part of this debate today - I will comment later when I talk about the report by Mrs Peijs - but we believe it is essential for the ECOFIN Council to produce a methodology as soon as possible , allowing us to examine the concept of structural deficit by means of the same criteria .
And we are working on this , which seems to us essential , precisely to allow these automatic stabilisers to come into play depending on the extent to which the budgetary situation of each of the Member States allow it , but applying the same criteria in all cases .
A further point relating to the first element I mentioned , the content of coordination , is that of prior information .
This is a point which always gives rise to a degree of debate and discussion .
When we talk about prior information , we are talking about two different things .
We are talking firstly about the other partners of the Eurogroup knowing the broad guidelines for those essential elements of a national economic policy which may eventually have an affect on the rest .
Let us take one case : the tax reduction measures adopted last year as a result of the oil crisis .
There is no doubt that if we had acted as we have acted this year on the issue of insurance cover for airlines , we would have achieved a better result and a better approach from the point of view of the Union ' s position .
The same can be said of the UMTSs .
If we had debated , before taking the decision , how to deal with the possibilities and difficulties which one or other option with regard to licences for third-generation mobiles could pose , there is no doubt that we could have prevented some of the subsequent problems .
We are not saying that we should all do the same . We are saying that we can hold discussions together in order to try to decide on a framework , which includes the different national decisions and allows us to take a more coherent position .
I said that there is a second aspect to prior information and that is that ministers should take Community elements into consideration when defining their national policy .
And I relate this reference to the one made by Mrs Bères in relation to increasing national participation in the broad guidelines for economic policy .
Until now , it has more or less been considered that we had two processes which did not necessarily converge .
On the one hand , reaching an agreement on the broad guidelines for economic policy in Brussels , in Luxembourg ; on the other , defining our national economic and budgetary policies .
And each process took a different route .
It was also believed that compliance with the Stability Pact was sufficient to satisfy the coherence and consistency of the system which we have implemented for economic policy coordination .
It is becoming increasingly clear to us that the two instruments we have , the Stability Pact and the broad guidelines for economic policy , are key elements .
And the broad guidelines for economic policy , if they are actually approved by the ministers as a real commitment to be applied in each of the Member States , must reflect the budgetary policy which each minister wants and must present to their national Parliament .
I believe that this would help us enormously in terms of a better interrelationship between the decisions adopted at Community level and the decisions adopted by national Parliaments .
In this respect , the Commission believes that this idea of the debate is essential and we will fully support it .
However - and this is a point which I also wanted to comment on - it is true that we should not overly complicate the procedures .
Therefore , we are more cautious about certain ideas considered on the issue of macroeconomic dialogue .
It is absolutely clear that we have to improve its efficiency on the level of political dialogue , but we believe that we also have to maintain its character of frank and confidential exchange and , in this respect , it is essential to maintain this informal framework for debate and not formalise its process too much by complicating it and making the whole process of debate relating to this point less productive .
I would therefore like to end my comments on this first report by pointing out that the services of the Commission are currently looking into the implementation of some of the proposals included in the resolution , I have taken note of a series of suggestions that have been made this evening and we are naturally going to pay particular attention to them when producing our final proposal .
In relation to the report by Mrs Peijs , I would firstly also like to thank her for her suggestions and comments , but I would like to focus on just three or four points that I think are important .
Firstly , I fully agree with the idea that , in the context of the introduction of the euro , the credibility of a healthy public finance policy which is compatible with the euro is essential .
It is true that , in our view , public finances - we have said this clearly this evening - must be adequate for both crisis situations and for good economic situations .
In your report you refer to automatic stabilisers - and I do not believe that there is any great divergence between us on the analysis of this point .
We believe , like you , that they must play a fundamental role , both at times of growth and at times of slow-down of the economy .
We are grateful for your reference to tax reductions .
The Commission has been arguing that all tax reductions must respond to certain criteria , which are contained in your report , and which we believe are essential to maintaining the idea of quality of public finances .
No doubt if we were to debate tax reductions now , elements such as the promotion of consumption would be of more importance than would have been the case a few months ago , given that that is one of the issues we are concerned about .
But the idea of tax reductions can certainly be included in practice , in all cases , in the criteria contained in the document and which you support .
Finally , a comment on the sustainability of public finances in the long term .
There have been other comments on the labour market , on how we must move ahead , on coherence in relation to work , pensions , etc .
In my opinion , all these elements will be dealt with within a broader vision of the labour market , while the finance ministers must pay particular attention to public finances and , in this respect , to the difficulties which may arise in the funding of social security given the global budgetary deficits of all public administrations .
The idea we are working with at the moment - and on the basis of your report , as you know , progress has already been made on some points - is not that reference be made by means of a short paragraph on the stability programmes , but that the stability programmes annually take up the necessary data to carry out an adequate evaluation of the evolution of public finances in relation to problems of ageing .
Nevertheless , in our view , the idea of including this information in the stability programmes is not because we believe they are problems which must be resolved through annual decisions - they need more long-term decisions - but because we felt it was appropriate to introduce new processes for approaching , analysing and monitoring the evolution of public finances .
Our idea is that , every four or five years , in each country , a more in-depth analysis should be carried out - it may be a supplement to the documents from the stability programme - on long-term public finances with the obvious fundamental problem of the ageing of the population and from which , nevertheless , when updating the annual programmes we only take the most necessary basic information .
I would like to end by thanking you all once again for your cooperation and the useful ideas you have offered us , which we will take into account as far as possible .
Mr President , I owe Mrs Van den Burg an explanation with regard to the amendments .
I did not bring the amendment numbers , so I will have to quote from memory , but Mr Bullmann will undoubtedly correct me if he thinks I am quoting the incorrect numbers .
Mrs Van den Burg , in order to reach a workable compromise , we will agree on Amendment Nos 4 and 5 . Amendment No 7 will be based on the text by Mr Bullmann to which a sentence will be added .
That is the oral amendment I was referring to . We will also agree on the second part of Amendment No 9 which starts with ' calls on the Member States ' , Amendment No 10 by way of supplement and Amendment No 12 .
I believe that is the complete list .
I would now like to respond to Mr Colom i Naval .
He has probably been waiting for this all evening .
Mr Colom i Naval , I would like to make this quite clear : content was not the issue .
The reason why we were unable to talk about this before we voted on the amendments is that I was firstly in the United States with the delegation - you will have noticed my absence in the committee at the time - and then I was in Rome with my group .
It was a slightly hectic month .
It was not a matter of content .
The fact is that the European Commission took the Member States as its point of departure in its communication .
I did the same in my report .
If , in your report , you were to write about the effects of the European budgetary policy on employment , then I would gladly vote in favour of all your amendments , but they did not feature in the framework of my report .
I apologise for the fact that we did not have an opportunity to talk about this .
That was a personal statement and was helpfully reconciliatory .
I would like to thank you too , Commissioner Solbes .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Competition policy ( 2000 )
The next item is the report ( A5-0299 / 2001 ) by Mr Agag Longo on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on the Commission 's XXXth Report on competition policy 2000 ( SEC ( 2001 ) 694 - C5-0312 / 2001 - 2001 / 2130 ( COS ) ) .
Mr President , I am honoured to have been asked by my colleague , Mr Agag Longo , to present his excellent and detailed report to Parliament on the Commission 's XXXth report on competition policy .
The report draws together several important areas of competition policy .
The rapporteur restates Parliament 's strong support for Commissioner Monti in spelling out that effective competition is not only an important engine of economic growth but also works to the advantage of consumers , through greater variety , better quality and lower prices for both goods and services .
We congratulate the Commissioner on the success of European competition policy , but we recognise that such success can only be maintained by constant and rigorous monitoring .
Our rapporteur has highlighted further measures to which Parliament will be giving its attention in the coming months .
The future of car distribution is one area where we eagerly await the Commission 's proposals .
I believe that our initial evaluations suggest that consumers are missing out under the current exemption , with unjustifiable price variations between Member States .
We also await the consultation on Merger Regulation No 4064 / 89 .
We welcome Commissioner Monti 's positive approach to consultation with our committee , but we repeat our call for major constitutional change which gives Parliament real codecision power with the Commission .
Commissioner Monti has played the central role in fostering a global approach to competition policy and enforcement issues .
Our committee supports efforts to build an international competition system in the framework of the WTO , whilst recognising that Europe 's credibility in this area will depend on efficient and effective cooperation between the EU 's own national competition authorities .
We are also looking to the outcome of negotiations between the Commission and the Council on the Commission 's proposals for reform of the enforcement regime under Articles 81 and 82 which we approved last month .
Mr Agag Longo draws attention in his report to other important elements of Parliament 's position on the reform , our strong support for Article 3 and our real concern over issues of legal certainty , as well as separation of powers .
I know that Commissioner Monti is aware of this , but we have consistently argued that the Commission must guard against the danger that the reform may lead to inconsistent application or even to a renationalisation of competition policy , thereby destroying the single market .
In continuing to raise these issues we reflect the concerns of many in the business community in Europe .
Our committee has also underlined other competition concerns .
We look to further market liberalisation , but we want effective enforcement of already agreed policy areas in the gas and the electricity sectors .
The Commissioner is aware of the complaints which have been made about some acquisitions by companies which do not appear to operate in a liberalised home market and we look to the Commission to investigate whether state-aid rules have been breached in such cases .
Mr Agag Longo also urges further progress on liberalisation in areas such as energy , transport and the postal services .
We welcome the progress which the Commissioner has made on state aid control .
We also support his work in ensuring that candidate countries for membership fully understand the requirements of EU competition policy , particularly the application and relevance of such rules in terms of market distortion .
Our committee will shortly respond in fuller detail to the Commission 's ninth state aid survey , but this report also touches on this area .
We applaud progress on implementation of a public register of state aid and a scoreboard as important tools for promoting transparency and democratic control , even if I embarrass Commissioner Monti by saying that his practical demonstration of the scoreboard to our committee was frustrated by technical problems .
We view such widespread public access to information as essential .
In the same light we welcome the continuing commitment to hold competition day seminars under each Council presidency , although we are keen to see wider public knowledge of , and participation in , such events .
Finally , on an entirely personal note , I would like to express my concern that the Commission has made particularly slow progress over complaints concerning the Spanish government 's treatment of Gibraltar citizens in relation to telecoms matters .
These complaints have been outstanding with the Commission for over five years , whilst the Commission has itself recently initiated a state aids investigation of Gibraltar 's investment schemes , ordering it to cease forthwith until the Commission investigation is concluded .
I am bound to say that this hardly seems to me to be an even-handed approach and I hope Commissioner Monti will agree to look into this .
Otherwise I commend Mr Agag Longo 's excellent report to the House .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in recent times , especially since the Stockholm European Council , the European Union has reached a turning point in competition policy .
That can be seen in the increasing conservation of structures .
The Agag Longo report rightly mentions this .
Following the successful liberalisations of the 1990s , postal services , electricity and gas are now trying to escape the annoyance of competition again .
First liberalisation , then regulation again , and the heading for this scenario is self-preservation .
The agenda for the Heads of State and Government in Laeken expressly provides for a discussion of the tension between competition and the preservation of existing interests .
We are all anxious to see whether competition can win through there .
If we ask about the difference between our modern , open society and another society marked by classes and castes , the answer is clear : in our open society competition has become the order , the principle on which our culture is based .
General acceptance of the principle of competition is therefore a tremendous cultural achievement .
But the state has never submitted itself to this principle .
It has always sheltered its education system , its banks , its railway , its airlines , its postal service , its telephone networks and its housing associations from the cold wind of competition .
Many sectors of the economy , too , claim that competition cannot work for them or that exposure to competition could be detrimental to the objectives they pursue ..
There are plenty of examples .
Coal is valued because supplies are secure .
The market is said to be harmful to the health service because patients would be unable to assess the services provided .
In agriculture , the market is said to be inappropriate because farmers allegedly produce even more if prices are lower .
The postal service cannot be set free to compete - not completely , at any rate - because it has social functions to fulfil .
So we could go on .
But all these paltry excuses have one thing in common : they all recognise competition in principle , but simply claim that the principle is not applicable in their most particular case .
The situation in Europe has without a doubt become more difficult again for competition policy .
That is why it is important - and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs is calling for this - that EU competition policy should now finally be extended to energy , transport and pharmaceuticals .
Let us therefore continue together to plan , campaign and argue for freedom .
Mr President , I must say firstly that I am truly perplexed .
I am perplexed by the fact that a British Member , though talking in place of a Spanish Member , has raised an issue that in no way relates to the rules on competition , that in no way relates to the reports on competition , but which relates to the unacceptable existence of the only territory in the European Union still to be decolonised .
It seems to me that to use the speaking time of a Spanish Member to raise these issues is , to say the very least , a discourtesy .
Anyway , leaving that aside , I believe that the discussion of the annual report on competition policy is a good opportunity to consider a debate on the progress and guidelines relating to this important European policy .
If we are to be self-critical , I would like to ask you whether we are really holding this debate or whether we are simply restricting ourselves to voting on a resolution which , if we are going to be honest , is more a cause for pity than for glory .
Please do not interpret this as a criticism of the Commissioner , Mr Monti , since I am more than happy to acknowledge his work in the area of competition and he has always been prepared to hold any necessary debates with this Parliament and has always been in favour of informing us promptly of the positions of his department .
Neither do I have any intention of criticising the rapporteur , who has produced a report of high quality and has also done so with flexibility and tolerance , accepting the positions of various political groups .
I therefore believe that my comments relate more to the behaviour of this Parliament and , fundamentally , to the vestiges of an era when its was simply a consultative assembly and did not have the co-legislative role which it has now .
We therefore have a tendency to issue documents , this document on the annual report on competition , and then go back to considering other issues on which we have already contributed as legislators , although unfortunately competition rules are excluded from the codecision procedure .
Furthermore , there is not always coherence between what we say at one moment and what we say at another .
Returning to the report , I would like to congratulate Mr Agag once again on its content , most of which we agree with , and to make a comment .
Once the Commission has taken its decision , I believe that there is no need for , and we should remove , the section relating to the prohibition of public companies investing capital in companies from the liberalised sectors - think of the conflict between Electricité de France and Hidrocantábrico - which Mr Agag introduces in his desire to stick up for and assist certain positions of the Spanish government .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank the rapporteur - who is now represented by Mr Evans - for a really sound report .
I should like to express my gratitude for the cooperation I have received from Mr Longo in preparing the report .
I should also like to thank Commissioner Monti for his strong commitment to competition policy in the EU .
I should also like to take the opportunity to emphasise that the fight for free competition is a fight that must be engaged in ceaselessly .
There are at present quite a few good examples of free competition ' s being threatened as soon as the opportunity arises for disrupting it .
The first , very telling example is the proposal tabled by the Commission to introduce an interim subsidy arrangement for certain types of shipbuilding .
The background to the proposal is that we in Europe believe we are exposed to unfair competition from South Korea .
Obviously , many interested parties try to exploit the situation in order to introduce a much higher level of subsidy than is justified by the realities of the situation .
Where this matter is concerned , I therefore wish to call upon the European Parliament and my fellow MEPs here in the House to stand by the Council ' s resolution from last year to abolish all direct subsidies for shipbuilding .
The next example of an attempt to exploit the situation is provided by the aviation industry which is experiencing a lot of turbulence in these very days and weeks .
This has led many to campaign for the introduction of subsidies .
I should like to remind you that the problems experienced by a number of carriers are not primarily due to the tragic events of 11 September , but rather to the fact that the airline companies are now facing the harsh realities earlier than expected .
The whole sector has for a long time been in need of radical restructuring and , as politicians , we must ensure that the present frenzied and tumultuous situation is not used to introduce a mass of subsidies that are to be paid for by ourselves as taxpayers and that are designed to bail out a host of unprofitable companies and routes for which , as consumers , we shall have to pay the excess price over and above what we have paid in tax .
To conclude , I should like to return to a couple of specific points in the report .
I think it important that we should hold the Commission to its assurance that the new competition rules do not mean a renationalisation of competition policy .
It is also important that the Commission should continue to produce its annual report on State subsidies , even though it has now introduced the scoreboard for which I myself , for example , have for a long time been pressing and which I am very pleased about .
It is also my hope that the Commission will be attentive to the desire for a start to be made as soon as possible on looking into the rules for the repayment of unlawfully allocated State subsidies - an area which leaves a lot to be desired .
Finally , I hope that the Commission will follow up the request to look more closely into the possibility of improving the legal position of companies hit by losses and of involving third parties more extensively whenever the Commission deals with practical matters .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I should like to express my thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Agag Longo , and to Mr Evans for his speech .

I admire the quality of Mr Agag Longo ' s report and appreciate the many constructive observations that have been made .
It does not escape me that the report also contains critical notes , and I assure you that , although it is impossible in this House to take a definite stand on all the observations made in the report , I can guarantee that all of them will be very carefully examined .
I am also grateful to the other speakers in this sitting - Messrs Konrad and Berenguer Fuster and Ms Riis-Jørgensen - for their political and , I must add , their cultural support for the European Union ' s competition policy .
The thirtieth annual report summarises the developments that have occurred during 2000 .
A quick glance is enough to realise that the competition sector has continued to show intense activity , with a total of 1206 new files , 564 cases of State aid , 345 mergers and acquisitions and 297 cases of monopolies .
Work in the legislative field has focused on reform of our basic rules and regulations .
This activity has led to approval of new regulations on block exemptions in horizontal agreement issues .
New guidelines on vertical restraints have been adopted , in addition to the new 1999 block exemption regulation .
You will know that these new formulations give greater weight to economic guidance .
The fact that the number of cases of monopolies has fallen may be due to these new rules on vertical restraints , which have substantially reduced the obligation to notify this kind of agreement , and this gives the offices more room to concentrate on the more serious and difficult cases .
Considerable progress has been made towards a reform of the competition rules , to which Parliament gave decisive support a month ago , adopting Mr Evans ' s report by such a large majority .
On the issue of mergers , a communication on corrective provisions has been adopted , as has a simplified procedure for certain straightforward types of operation , so that now about 40 per cent of merger cases can be dealt with in this way .
On the issue of controlling State aid , the Commission has introduced , for the first time , three groups of exemption regulations : on the application of the de minimis rule , on aid to small and medium-sized enterprises , and on aid for training .
I accept Ms Riis-Jørgensen ' s point about recovering illegal State aid , because I too believe it to be very important for overall credibility .
As regards aid levels , the general trend that they are falling is confirmed , although this does not alter the fact that they remain very high .
Allow me , Mr President , to highlight the fact that , in relation to State aid and contrary to what paragraph 2 of your motion for a resolution would suggest , the Commission has effectively already instigated proceedings against State aid in the form of tax facilities and , on 11 July , the number of them had risen to 15 .
We are also intensifying our efforts to recover the sums wrongly paid out in the form of State aid .
Let me now point out three aspects to which we are devoting special attention , not only in the last annual report but also in our everyday operations .
The first and most important is the impact of competition policy on consumers .
I know that Parliament shares our opinion that the consumer should be the final beneficiary of competition policy .
It is certainly necessary to make consumers more aware of the benefits of competition policy and to inform citizens about our activity and the effects it has for them .
As you will have noticed , the report gives examples of certain decisions , showing the benefits resulting from them for consumers .
A good example is the decision against OPEL Nederland to defend the right of consumers to buy a car without hindrance in a Member State in which prices are lower ; other , more recent examples are an analogous decision against Volkswagen and the setting-up of an enquiry into mobile telecommunications prices charged by roaming operators .

On the subject of cars , I accept what Mr Evans said : the Commission is working hard to draw up a proposal for the period subsequent to 30 September 2002 , when the regulation for block exemption from the motor vehicle distribution agreement comes to an end .
I intend to present a new draft regulation by the end of the year , and I am sure you will be glad to express your opinion on it , given the extreme interest Parliament has so far shown in this subject .
With regard to consumer information , may I remind you of the initiative of the European Competition Days , which grew out of discussions in this Parliament .
After Lisbon , Paris and Stockholm , the next will be held under the Belgian Presidency in Antwerp on 11 October , and will focus on competition in the pharmaceutical sector .
A second priority we are working on - one which several people have mentioned this evening - concerns State aid , not only to make control stricter but also to make this subject more transparent through initiatives like the public register and the scoreboard , which is , in fact , readily available on the Internet .

The third priority area of work concerns globalisation : how competition policy , by seeking greater coordination among the various parts of the world , can make its contribution to the governance of globalisation .
In this respect - apart , of course , from the highly intense relationships within the European Union with the national competition authorities - outside the European Union we have set up close bilateral working relationships and begun most welcome and far-reaching cooperation in particular with the competition authorities of the United States , and last week we held an intense session of work in Washington , at which we planned further development of such bilateral cooperation .
I think , however , that the bilateral dimension is not enough , and we are proceeding , with all the weight of conviction that the European Union has in this area , to develop two forms of multilateral cooperation .
One is the proposal to introduce some basic , binding competition standards within the World Trade Organisation . The other is the recent initiative to launch a global competition forum to provide a venue for world-level discussions among competition authorities .
Among our short-term priorities is the work now under way of modernising the competition rules , which we have been carrying out with even greater conviction - if that is possible - ever since Parliament gave us that vote by such a decisive majority .
Within the year we intend to conclude the revision of the de minimis communication , which , by specifying which agreements between companies are not forbidden under Article 81 , Paragraph 1 , will reduce the burden on companies , especially smaller ones , of conforming to the rules .
Having already mentioned the exemption regulation on cars , I should also like to refer to the policy against cartels , which is a basic pillar of any competition authority . By the end of this year we shall have further developed and updated the policy of indulgence , based on non-prosecution or reduced fines for those who collaborate in disclosing cartels .
This is yet another area of convergence between the American and European approaches .
In the matter of controlling mergers , the Commission ' s priority for 2001 will be to continue to re-examine the mergers regulation .
In this respect , during the year I intend to draw up a formal consultation document on this subject .

As for the way new cases are dealt with , our work is focusing particularly on the recently liberalised markets , which were mentioned particularly by Messrs Konrad , Evans and others , such as energy , air transport , telecommunications and postal services , in an attempt to prevent the former monopoly holders from abusing the positions of strength that they traditionally enjoyed .
I thank you all once again for the expressions of support and encouragement you have given to the Commission in matters of competition : you know how important it is for the Commission and for me personally to have the support of Parliament in our everyday work , and how seriously we take your critical comments , which we value highly .
Thank you very much , Mr Monti .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
E-commerce and financial services
Mr President , financial services should be the big winner from e-commerce , because the sector does not have the problems of physical delivery , unlike booksellers or grocery supermarkets .
A financial service , whether a savings vehicle like a pension or a mutual fund or just a simple bank account , is by its nature ethereal and intangible .
Many transactions in banking and stockbrokerage are already taking place online .
UNICE , the EU employers ' organisation , estimates that nearly one-fifth of banking transactions in Europe are now executed through the Internet , direct dial , mobile phone , or digital television , nearly double the proportion in the US .
In the Nordic countries of the Union , the overall proportion is more than a third .
However , the vast majority of those transactions happen within an EU Member State .
Cross-border e-commerce in financial services is in its infancy and it has not chased prices down to the level of the cheapest Member State .
Indeed , the most recent survey suggests that bank charges vary more widely around the average than they did in the mid-80s at the beginning of the single market programme .
There is a lot still to do .
The e-commerce directive past last year was designed to encourage cross-border trade by enshrining the country-of-origin principle .
This is one of the essential market-opening principles of the internal market .
If harmonising rules is too difficult , at least recognise the right of any company to do business anywhere in the Union once authorised by one Member State .
The key judgment was that consumers would benefit more from increased competition than they might lose from the greater difficulty of seeking legal redress from a far-flung and delinquent supplier .
That is simply because the country-of-origin principle ensures the maximum amount of extra competition and extra competition is ultimately the consumer 's best friend .
True , the e-commerce directive allows exceptions still subject to national regulation of incoming services , notably insurance in unit trusts .
In general , most of the liberally-minded market-opening fraternity were pleased to get it on the statute book .
As its full implications have sunk in , some Member States have been quietly attempting to restrict the scope of its application and backpedal on its implications .
This is the real significance of the Commission 's White Paper on e-commerce and financial services .
It is designed to clear up the bits left out of the e-commerce directive and the report we are debating tonight is designed to support the Commission 's resolve to open up the single market ; if necessary , by insisting on the provisions of the e-commerce directive despite the reservations of some Member States .
We must maintain the liberal thrust of the e-commerce directive .
That means also setting a clear timetable to include both insurance and advertising of unit trusts in the general country-of-origin approach .
Insurance services , for example , are particularly suited to e-commerce provision .
It also means basing any guidance from the Commission to Member States about consumer protection on real documented problems , not on imagined ones .
Of course , there are real difficulties .
The Commission needs to look at these difficulties carefully and attempt to set out a clear road map to allow e-commerce and financial services to flourish .
Consumers are concerned about security , particularly with cross-border transactions .
Soft law provisions , alternative dispute procedures , should be made effective so that they can deal with the vast majority of problematic cases and we have asked for a regular report on that .
Some convergence of national rules on consumer contracts is clearly desirable , though this should not be used as an excuse to delay the single market .
Some standard features of terrestrial banking , like applying the money-laundering provisions by looking your depositor in the eye to ask where her or his money came from , require fresh thought in an e-depositing world .
It is also the case that financial services transactions are rarely entirely online without any offline elements , so we need to work as far as possible to ensure coherence .
The prize for getting this framework right is very great .
E-commerce and the euro can make a reality of cross-border financial services , not just for business but also for savers and the extra competition will , as it always does , bring long-lasting and real benefits .
So , I urge the House to stick to the line that we have set in the past in asking for opening up of this market .
, draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
Mr President , it gives me great pleasure this evening , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , to give our opinion on what is an excellent report .
We started work having the benefit of the full text of the rapporteur , Mr Huhne 's report , and so our role was very much to improve on what we felt was already an excellent text .
From the perspective of the legal Affairs Committee , which was responsible for the E-commerce directive , we feel that the rapporteur 's thrust - as he emphasised just now and in relation to the country-of-origin principle - is in line with our own opinion .
We would add our voice very strongly to that of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs in encouraging the Commission to move down this line .
I want to pick up a couple of points on our amendments .
We are very grateful to the rapporteur for accepting all of the amendments of the Legal Affairs Committee and to the committee for voting them into the final report .
We lay particular emphasis on the question of a payment and payment systems .
It is quite clear from recent studies across the European Union that one of the things that is deterring consumers from shopping in the electronic age is worry about the security of their payments .
This will be absolutely crucial if financial services are to move forward .
So we have suggested a number of methods for improving the security of electronic payments .
We have encouraged the Commission , particularly , to take a look at emerging forms of electronic payment .
While at the moment a very high level of consumer transactions are made by credit cards , we think that new formats will emerge and that the Commission needs to take that into account .
In conclusion , legislation has to enable contracts to be concluded by means of electronic signatures in financial services transactions .
We pointed that out as a specific area to be addressed .
This is a very good report .
I encourage the House to give it its full support when we vote on it tomorrow .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Huhne , I , too , would like to add my congratulations to those of the previous speaker , Mr Harbour .
This is an excellent report and it was a pleasure to work with you .
I can already say that tomorrow we shall be fully supporting the line taken by this report .
There are at present two developments running in parallel that are very important for this field .
The Internet is growing in importance .
Trade over the Internet is growing more and more .
And on the other hand we are in the process of completing the internal market for financial services in Europe .
Our target is the year 2005 .
Financial services in particular , because they are not material , are pre-eminently suitable to be offered internationally on the Internet .
I believe we will in the foreseeable future have a situation where customers buy insurance or banking services over the Internet not from a local bank but across the border in a neighbouring country and that the Internet is an excellent way of making comparisons in this field .
It is also important , however , that we win consumers over for this kind of commerce .
It is consumer protection that I am addressing here ; competition has already been discussed .
But consumers will make e-commerce in financial services a success only if they have confidence in it , if the contractual or non-contractual provisions are in place to safeguard their rights and to give them appropriate help if they have complaints in cross-border business .
I support the Commission ' s initiative here of setting up extra-judicial arbitration procedures such as FIN-NET .
Only if consumers are convinced that any problems they have in future will be sorted out will they make use of the net in future .
The third thing was mentioned by the previous speaker : technical systems .
Many people are still afraid and have misgivings about using the Internet .
I still have myself .
I am not going to put my credit card number on the Internet just like that .
There are still reservations and inhibitions about that sort of thing .
Online and offline commerce are moving closer and closer together and we therefore need to harmonise the legal provisions here , too .
I can only back what the previous speaker has said , that we must abide firmly by the country-of-origin principle , that the Commission must stand firm .
Parliament will also be making its position known tomorrow .
In smaller areas , too , however , like the abolition of national marketing and competition rules that stand in the way of the development of the Internet - fortunately , this was included in the report - we need to move forwards in order not to hinder development .
I would like to say in conclusion that e-commerce in this area will take a turn for the better , even if we may have gained a different impression from the stock markets in the last few months , but it will take off , it will continue to develop positively .
We need to make Europe fit for global competition , ensuring that in Europe , too , financial services can be offered in this way .
I therefore believe that this report shows the way and is a good step forwards , as is the Commission 's support for it .
Mr President , I too congratulate the rapporteur on the report which he will present to us tomorrow .
We know he has worked extremely hard on this report and very closely with others in this Chamber to ensure its success .
Clearly the changing industry of financial services lends itself very well to the new technologies which have emerged and continue to emerge across the world .
The ability of consumers , confusing as it can be , to pick such technologies , to choose a variety of financial services within the individual Member States , has been with us now for some little time .
But the choice of financial products across borders inside Europe is even more recent an affair .
This means that services , rather than physical products - and the rights of consumers to have confidence in the performance of those services - is as vital here as it is for manufactured products .
The marketing and advertising of services , the claims and boasts of providers , must be checked against the need to allay the fears of risk to consumers , to safeguard their purchases and exchanges by electronic means .
This is why my group has so high a regard for the element of consumer safety .
The country-of-origin principle is simply the best agreed way of approaching the process of harmonising the standards for attaining an EU-wide application of the guidance for those standards which are to be expected in those nations .
At the same time Brussels , too , is clearly more than just an element for consideration by the Commission in this process .
The amendments before the House allow for the flexibility required to pursue the exciting new medium of technology , as does the text .
In particular I would like to recognise Mr Herzog 's concerns , where he rightly points out in his amendments that we need to keep pace with technological change in order to reduce the possibility of criminality , of fraud and of money laundering .
My group believes that so long as consumer interests can be asserted and maintained as an essential element of the provisions of this report , then it is obviously going to be willing to withdraw any amendments that might suggest derogations or deletions to the country- of-origin principle .
The liberation of e-commerce is the element of any dynamic European economy of the future ; the counterbalance that has to be struck and which has to be fully realised is the effects it has on those who would use it as consumers .
I commend this report to the House .
Mr President , the country-of-origin principle should meet the challenge of offering financial services electronically .
I have one comment to make .
First of all the scope for national policy .
The country-of-origin principle respects national legislation .
In addition , it is possible for Member States to deviate from the country-of-origin principle , but only on the basis of well-defined reasons .
That is why , in the report , the rapporteur might have provided more extensive reasoning with regard to the effect the principle has on national policy .
This would probably have prevented a number of unfortunate , socialist amendments from being tabled .
Furthermore , the report is based on the assumption that more competition can only benefit the consumer .
He should know the rules with which the supplier complies . Otherwise , confidence in e-trade will not grow .
That is why the rapporteur might have been more specific in explaining consumer protection at European level .
If bottlenecks occur , it can become difficult to allow for exceptions because not all Member States will agree that there is a need for these to be made .
It is therefore useful to continue to monitor closely whether e-trade will be satisfactory to suppliers and consumers alike .
Mr President , I , too , would like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur very warmly on his report .
My colleague Mr Skinner has already indicated that our group will be able to withdraw most of our amendments if we can get clarification on one point that is very important for us and which is also concerned with consumer protection - and the rapporteur has already indicated a willingness to accommodate .
I am also willing to accept that members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , who have a responsibility for financial services in particular , naturally have a slightly different focus than so many members of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
As a lawyer specialising in European law I do still often consult the EU Treaties .
Perhaps we should no longer do that so often .
Because when I turn to Article 50 , which is about services that have not been harmonised , I read something about a market location principle , not a country-of-origin principle .
We are all aware that these provisions are creating a lot of problems today .
That is why Mr Harbour , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , has introduced the proposal to amend the Treaty .
If we are lucky , we will be able to do that by 2006 at the earliest .
But until then we shall have to come up with something to cope with this problem .
I think we have found the e-commerce directive to be very well balanced in its conception .
I was myself shadow rapporteur for my group at the time and I hold fast to the belief that by combining harmonisation , country-of-origin principle and a few exceptions , we have found a very well balanced solution that we should probably try to use in other areas , too .
I am not a believer in magic formulas or cure-alls .
We are now at last getting the Council ' s Common Position on the distance marketing of financial services .
We shall all have to put our thinking caps on to find a sensible solution for dealing with the problems that the Member States have also seen .
I think we will make it easier for ourselves if we go for pragmatic legislation rather than fight over principles and stay high and dry .
The Commission takes heart from the broad support for the Commission 's objectives in the field of e-commerce and financial services - support evidenced by the report of your Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee .
I welcome that report as being most balanced and constructive .
I draw strength from Parliament 's clear commitment to the country-of-origin approach which , if I am not mistaken , has been supported by all who spoke on this subject this evening .
In particular I welcome the report 's rejection of any attempt to roll-back the e-commerce directive in the area of financial services .
That is a position very much shared by the Commission and strongly defended during the negotiations on the distance marketing directive which , as Members may or may not know , resulted in a political agreement at last Thursday 's Internal Market Council .
We will follow that line in future proposals and negotiations .
I should like to pick up on a few key points made in the report .
They are points which were also raised by various Members in the debate .
On the need for a road map setting out what needs to be done and when , in May the Commission published a financial services policy group report to the Ecofin Council .
That contains just such a road map and hopefully brings greater clarity about the way forward .
Amongst other things that road map sets out the concrete steps that must now be taken to enable the country-of-origin approach to apply across the board to cover those financial services currently derogated and to be applied to other traditional distance training modes .
In broad terms , that would involve further convergence in national consumer protection rules , in particular by updating EU legislation which predates the e-commerce directive .
On the Commission 's guidance , where it is our aim to add transparency to situations under which Article 3 ( 4 ) might be invoked , I should like to inform Parliament that this exercise was launched in July .
We are now in the process of receiving the first replies from Member States .
I should like to assure Parliament that it is not the Commission 's intention for the guidance to represent a de facto additional derogation to the country-of-origin approach and that the guidance will be reviewed to take account of progress and further harmonisation of consumer protection rules , with the aim that it should become redundant by the 2005 Lisbon deadline for an integrated European market in financial services .
In respect of this point I would particularly like to say to Mr Radwan that earlier this year the Commission helped to put in place a network for the handling of cross-border complaints in financial services which ought to serve to raise still further the level of confidence of consumers who venture onto the Internet .
I hope that is to the liking of Mr Radwan .
May I further welcome Parliament 's call for a single payments area in which it would be easy and cheap to transfer money across borders .
I should like to recall that in July the Commission adopted a proposal for a regulation to align the costs of cross-border payments with those made at national level .
I can also inform Parliament that with a view to making payments more secure , the Commission in February adopted a communication on the prevention of fraud and counterfeiting of non-cash means of payment , which set out a three-year action plan .
This point was also raised by Mr Harbour and I should like to add that the Commission is looking into the possibility of refunds .
I will inform Mr Harbour later of the progress in this respect .
Finally , I take note of Parliament 's interesting suggestions that the Commission should seek to negotiate mutual recognition agreements with third countries , at least with those third countries that provide similar levels of prudential supervision and investor protection .
The Commission finds that a very valuable suggestion and we should like to consider it further .
In conclusion , I very much welcome the draft report as its stands .
I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Huhne , for his strong support for the country-of-origin principle .
Indeed all speakers this evening have echoed this strong support .
I nonetheless express concern about a number of the amendments which were recently tabled by some honourable Members .
Several of the amendments , unfortunately , are not acceptable to the Commission .
They would shift the balance of this report unfavourably and undermine the strong support which Parliament has shown for the Commission 's e-commerce strategy in the past .
That support was so manifest and so vital at the time of the adoption of the electronic commerce directive last year , when Members voted unanimously in favour of the directive and the underlying country-of-origin approach . That is precisely the approach which the Commission , with the support of Parliament , would like to continue .
Thank you very much , Mr Bolkestein .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Internal market strategy for services
Mr President , I would like to begin by taking the opportunity to reassure Commissioner Bolkestein .
We have already said in the two interventions on the Huhne Report that most of our amendments have already been withdrawn .
Both of us have emphasised that here .
So far as I know , there are two amendments remaining .
The Commission can easily live with that and I hope the rapporteur can , too .
A vote will be taken on the amendments tomorrow .
Now to my own report , however .
We know from experience in this House that the agenda is very often changed .
We are often glad about that to a greater or lesser extent .
This time there is a real point to it - my report was deferred so that the debate on the humanitarian situation in Afghanistan could be held yesterday .
That is certainly more important than the further refinements we want to make to the internal market .
It also allows us to hold a kind of joint debate today .
The field of financial services , services generally and also Mr Radwan ' s report , which will be debated next , go together very well .
I am sure we all agree that services generally as well as financial services and information services deserve our special attention .
They are rightly described as the key area of the European economy today .
Two thirds of Europe ' s workforce are already employed in the service sector .
Above all , the dynamism and innovation that make this sector so important will enable us to achieve the objective set in Lisbon .
If my report has given rise to some differences of opinion , they are never about the objective , only about what we consider to be the most appropriate means of achieving that objective .
I am sure we can support the Commission ' s approach of identifying all the barriers in a first phase , listing all the obstacles encountered by service providers , and then in a second phase proposing suitable remedies .
But we have no time to lose .
We now have the remedy of treaty infringement proceedings .
In many cases , better information from authorities , professional bodies and similar institutions about the law as it currently stands could perhaps help to remove some unjustified obstacles .
In all but one of the urgent legislative measures listed by the Commission - I have to admit it is the reform of public contracting - Parliament has not been responsible for any undue delay on any other points .
The call for certain legislative measures to be speeded up should therefore be addressed primarily to the Council .
I have already mentioned that we have now at last received the common position on the distance marketing of financial services .
Discussions in the Council took a very long time .
I hope we can make up some of the lost ground in Parliament and make rapid progress .
Something else that has already been before the Council for a very long time is the two directives on the situation of third country citizens when it comes to providing services - employees on the one hand and self-employed on the other , where the introduction of a service provision card could make a major contribution to achieving freedom in the provision of services .
I am also sorry that the Commission itself no longer lists these measures as priority measures in this communication today .
Essentially , our differences of opinion are over which legal instruments will be suitable .
We should not rule any instrument out .
We will need further harmonisation .
I am sure we will be able to implement the country-of-origin principle on the basis of harmonised , coordinated , largely approximated laws in our Member States .
Article 50 of the EC Treaty will probably also continue to be used in a number of remaining areas .
I do , of course have a problem when harmonisation is automatically described as over-regulation and when the country-of-origin principle is to be used as a magic bullet , the cure all to solve every problem at a stroke .
Unfortunately , things are not like that .
We have to go this laborious way of finding the appropriate instrument for every problem that arises .
I would again like to point out that even in the e-commerce directive - important as the role of the country-of-origin principle is there , and I fully support the content of that directive - the regulating principle is not the only one to apply .
The amendments that have been tabled for tomorrow follow two principles : preserving freedom of choice of legal instruments , not confining ourselves to one instrument , and not making any sector-specific changes .
That is also in line with the Commission ' s wishes , since it deliberately wanted to present a document applicable to all sectors .

Mr President , I would first like to express my thanks to the rapporteur and my colleagues Messrs Harbour and Beysen who , in the responsible committee , have done an excellent job of including and taking into account the views expressed by the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy on this matter .
I am very glad that the European Parliament is now about to take a decision on supporting the Commission ' s proposed strategy for creating an internal market for services .
The need for this is enormous - for economic growth , for the advancement of companies , for employment and for consumers .
An internal market for services has for a long time been a missing element in a European growth policy , a policy which must also be supplemented by measures to speed up the liberalisation process in sectors such as postal services , electricity and energy - something which cannot be said too often .
The Commission ' s overall course of action is good .
We cannot continue with sectoral regulation of services , something which has so far proved to hinder , rather than facilitate , the creation of an internal market .
Ninety-nine per cent of European companies are small and medium-sized .
These employ 66 per cent of workers and generate 55 per cent of turnover .
Bearing in mind the significance of these companies for the European economy , it is necessary for them to be able to benefit fully from the internal market for services - a market which quite simply cannot function well without them .
It is also important that the candidate countries should be involved as soon as possible .
What is known as the enlarged internal market for services must also be well prepared .
Finally , in order for this work to be a success , the Commission must not be left alone .
We have a major responsibility here in Parliament , but the Member States too have a great responsibility to involve themselves in the process and to work at political , legislative and administrative levels to remove obstacles to the exchange of services .
Without political will at all levels , the goal cannot be achieved .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mrs Berger very much for her clear statement of support for this proposal this evening .
Those of you who have looked at the report will know that she withdrew her original explanatory statement .
I was delighted to hear this evening that she had confirmed her full support .
This report , with the support of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy and my colleague , Mr Beysen , and with Mrs Berger 's assistance also , now strikes the right balance by giving the Commission a clear indication of the support of our committee and others for this important initiative .
I am delighted that Mrs Berger is going with the flow of that for many of us felt that her initial report really did not do full justice to what we regard as an imaginative proposal , a wide-ranging proposal , and one that is of crucial economic importance to the future of the European Union .
We must not ignore the continual structural change in the world economies , in particular in developed economies like the European Union .
We are seeing services and manufacturing business starting to converge .
We are seeing more integration of traditional service providers , with their manufacturing arms looking to focus on customers in a very different way .
Therefore , opening up the single market for services is going to be of great importance .
One thing I particularly welcome from the Commission 's analysis - something it has indicated in the report that it will now do more work on - is that it highlights the importance of a highly competitive service infrastructure in the overall competitiveness of European industry .
So many businesses depend on high-quality , effective , low-cost , efficient services to deliver their businesses .
Indeed the whole of the electronic commerce area , which we talked about in financial services earlier on , is facilitating and opening up these sorts of markets .
Therefore , this communication is extremely welcome .
We look forward , in the Legal Affairs Committee as well as in the Industry Committee , to working with the Commission and to moving forward with the necessary legal framework and the other actions that will be necessary to achieve it .
I want to reinforce what Mrs Grönfeldt Bergman said about the role of the small- and medium-sized enterprises in this sector .
Again we are seeing the combination of increasing importance of services combined with electronic commerce and the electronic means of delivering those services .
That is an area , particularly crucial in the business-to-business sector , where small- and medium-sized enterprises have a crucial role to play in the European economy .
Again , these provisions will help .
I refer back to the country-of-origin principle .
I share Mrs Berger 's view that by a happy coincidence we have a set of reports tonight with a common thread running through them .
I do not regard the country-of-origin principle as a magic bullet to achieve market integration at a single stroke .
Clearly there is a lot of work to be done .
Yet , by operating the country-of-origin principle vigorously and consistently we will actually achieve competition and higher standards for consumers more quickly than by any other means .
Consumers are going to be well-informed and intelligent enough to know where the best standards of consumer protection are .
They are going to demand them from other countries .
This is not a question of harmonising down .
It is an effective means of making the market operate in the interests of consumers , which is exactly what Commissioner Monti told us in addressing the competition report earlier on .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the attainment of a real internal market for services will afford the small and medium-sized enterprises added incentive for innovation - as was already underlined in the debate , in fact . It will also improve the competitiveness of European industry and will provide more benefits to the consumers who will be offered a whole series of high-quality competitive services .
I am therefore of the opinion that it is of crucial importance for the internal market strategy to build on the strength of the e-commerce directive and the principle of mutual recognition .
Mutual recognition forms the keystone of the European Union and the European internal market , in particular .
Mutual recognition is only possible if the consumer enjoys equivalent protection right across the Union .
This means that harmonisation is only required if this equivalent protection does not exist .
Furthermore , a business based in the Union is guaranteed completely free cross-border trade in services .
I therefore believe that the report , as it has now been approved by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , after inserting , inter alia , a number of amendments which I myself tabled , reflects and supports the Commission ' s balanced approach .
Finally , I am delighted to find out that the Commission adopted a regulation on sales stimulation yesterday .
This shows that the Commission is really serious about further developing the internal market .
In the current economic climate , we cannot afford to lose momentum in the direction of a real internal market .
Mr President , firstly the Commission would like to emphasise the economic and political importance of its communication on a new internal market strategy for services , which I hope , will henceforth enjoy the European Parliament 's full support .
A functioning internal market in services , far from being a reality , remains an objective to be achieved .
It is an objective which ought to be considered a priority if we really want the European economy to become the most competitive in the world by the end of this decade - the ambition we set ourselves in March 2000 in Lisbon .
Just to quote a single fact , services account for two-thirds of the European economy and , therefore , any progress we make on that front will greatly benefit the citizens of this continent .
Achieving that goal is rendered all the important by the growing dynamic of the information society , with all its potential for cross-border trade , and by the imminent introduction of the euro , which will increase the transparency of costs and encourage businesses and consumers to look beyond national boundaries for the provision of services .
Unfortunately , at present there are still too many legal and administrative obstacles preventing our businesses and consumers from considering the whole of the European Community as their true domestic market .
That means that we are failing to realise the enormous potential for growth and establish a framework in which millions of new jobs can be created .
At no other time in our recent history has it been more important to encourage entrepreneurship , innovation and opportunity .
Just as the 1992 campaign enabled us to focus on - and to a large extent achieve - an internal market in goods , it is now crucial for us to concentrate on dismantling the barriers to trade and services .
This new strategy seeks , above all to enable two groups - namely small and medium-sized enterprises and consumers - to reap the full benefits of the internal market .
In many instances , small and medium-sized enterprises - which Mr Harbour and Mr Beysen have mentioned also evening - will not have the means to establish themselves in all or several Member States .
If they try to do so , they will be faced with the need to expand their infrastructure and with extra financial and administrative burdens .
Therefore , they must be allowed to offer their services freely throughout the Community from their establishment .
As far as consumers are concerned , this strategy is designed above all for them .
We shall not have succeeded until European consumers have greater access to and a wider choice of , safe and reliable services at more competitive prices , and that means there must be more competition between service providers .
The strategy is the first attempt to apply , at Community level , a horizontal approach to trade and services since the General Programme for the removal of barriers to services of 1962 was introduced almost forty years ago .
It calls for the cooperation and support of national authorities , the participation of all interested parties and the active engagement of the Community institutions .
The report by Parliament 's Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market has highlighted many of the difficult issues preventing an effective internal market in services from functioning .
I am delighted that the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market shares the Commission 's philosophy and supports its ambitious approach .
I also hope to be able to count on the full support of the European Parliament in implementing both the first and second phases of the strategy .
The first phase is now being carried out .
This means that existing restrictions to the freedom to provide services and the freedom of establishment are being identified and evaluated .
In the second phase , legal and operational instruments for the elimination of barriers will be put in place and our approach will be based on harmonisation , assuring a high level of consumer protection combined with the principles of country of origin and mutual recognition enshrined in the Treaty .
Accordingly , the Commission would not welcome the newly tabled amendments .
Those amendments appear to run counter to the principles of mutual recognition and country of origin and , in the Commission 's view , would undermine the positive and well-balanced approach of the report , for which the Commission is duly grateful .
I should like to thank Mrs Berger on behalf of the Commission for having drafted that report .
The Commission feels that the newly tabled amendments would significantly weaken the support of the European Parliament for the proposed internal market approach .
In conclusion , I refer to the earlier discussion between Mrs Berger , Mr Harbour and Mr Beysen on the various merits and demerits of harmonisation , mutual recognition and the country of origin .
Large-scale harmonisation may waste time , prove unnecessarily bureaucratic and divert political goodwill and attention away from the key issues that Member States should agree on .
It may also contravene the subsidiarity principle in the Treaty .
On the other hand , it must be admitted that harmonisation may be necessary where there is a need to establish a high level of protection , notably for consumers .
Mutual recognition , on the other hand , can be made to work more satisfactorily if it is implemented through secondary Community legislation which clearly identifies the areas in which mutual recognition must be accepted .
Both principles have their merits and demerits , but by and large I am inclined to agree with Mr Harbour 's view that the quickest way of achieving an adequate level of protection for the consumer is to adopt the country-of-origin principle .
In conclusion , may I thank Mr Beysen for his kind remarks on the sales promotion directive adopted by the Commission this week .
Lastly may I apologise to Mrs Berger for having omitted previously to thank her on the Commission 's behalf for having withdrawn almost all of the amendments tabled on the previous matter .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Pre-contractual information on home loans
Mr President , Commissioner , we have now reached the last item on the agenda and I hope that the crush of Members will not now be too much .
What is this report about ?
It is about the question of precontractual information on home loans .
We are in the process of creating an EU internal market by 2005 , and one of the objectives is that in future cross-border home loans should be offered and taken up by customers .
An agreement in the matter has been reached at European level between consumer associations and banking associations .
We need that to be put into effect relatively quickly .
It would be gratifying if that were to happen in less than twelve months .
I would like at this point to expressly highlight the positive role played by the Commission , which managed to bring the two sides together repeatedly and in the end achieve a result in this difficult moderation process .
This may become the first positive example of self-regulation in the European Union .
But there are still things that need to be done .
First , we must look at the moderation process itself .
It took about four years and according to some participants was not always very transparent .
We call on the Commission to report to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs about the experience gained from this moderation process and the conclusions to be drawn for future self-regulation processes .
As I have already said , it may be a positive example .
But if it proves not to be a positive example of self-regulation , the Commission really will have to put forward its own proposal for a directive .
A few points are still outstanding here .
Firstly , of course , we need a commitment not only from the banking associations , but we need a Europe-wide commitment from the banks themselves .
The extent to which the banks will participate is an open question here .
Secondly , the register that is published must of course also be posted on the Internet .
We also need similar forms throughout Europe .
It is already foreseeable that some Member States that were very keen on producing a standard form , especially at the outset , will want to go their own way and may take a different route in future .
At all events , comparability must be preserved here , in the interests of the customer .
We ought to try to extend this agreement to the candidate countries .
We should also extend the mediation body you have just mentioned , Commissioner , to this field .
We should not retain the internal mediation body proposed in the agreements , but follow the Commission ' s initiative here .
We also need comparability of data .
The effective annual interest rate in particular is highly important for the consumer .
The figure at the end is not the only important thing , but the basis on which it is calculated , too .
The effective annual interest rate is still calculated in different ways in Europe .
We should work towards getting a uniform method of calculation .
I would very much welcome it if this did not have to come from the Commission , but if the banks themselves could manage to agree on a method within a very short space of time .
We should then also apply all this to services offered over the Internet .
We have , after all , just had the Huhne report , which also said we wanted to press forward with this .
We should have this information there in future , too .
And finally , as the Huhne report recommends , future legislation should be harmonised with the legal terms used in this code .
In conclusion I would like to stress that I very much welcome this voluntary code of conduct .
It now requires critical appraisal and monitoring .
We hope the Commission will before long present the Committee with a report on how successful the code has been and whether we can continue along that road or whether we must introduce legislation .
Mr President , I express my sincere appreciation of Mr Radwan ' s motion for a resolution regarding pre-contractual information for home loans .
There is no doubt that work to reorganise and tidy up this rather confused sector has now begun . Unfortunately , some debatable if not downright censurable behaviour has been seen on the part of European lenders .
The importance of the work that has been done lies essentially in the fact that for the first time a collection of indications and regulations is not the result of self-regulation , as has often happened in the past .
I refer to the inter-bank agreements on conditions , in which the banks dictated the rules more so as not to have to face fierce competition within the sector rather than to set up transparent contractual schemes to supply to the end-customers , but by means of an agreement , even though a voluntary one , between banks and consumers ' associations .
Also important is the choice of transparency and publicity laid down in Articles 21 , 22 , 23 and 24 of the Code itself , and especially Article 25 , which states that an offer made over the Internet should be made in accordance with the European scheme and in compliance with all the provisions and indications that are laid down .
In conclusion , I should like to point out that this code will require further additions and corrections .
The practical stage will be to give the necessary indications .
I am just troubled by the fact that the committee did not accept an amendment I tabled to set a limit - the total amount - on the loan to be registered .
My reason for this amendment was the fact that in some Member States the credit institutions triple the loan figure registered compared with the amount actually lent , which is doubly harmful to the consumer : first , there is a question of image , in that , to an inexperienced person the debt might appear to be three times as large as it really is ; and secondly , a matter of costs , particularly notarial costs , which are calculated on the registered amount of the loan .
I hope that in future this aspect can be reconsidered .
Mr President , I want to congratulate the rapporteur on his report and thank him for his cooperation .
Completing the internal market for financial services and affording consumers a high level of protection is a Community priority .
Signing a home loan agreement is often the most important and the biggest financial obligation a consumer takes on in his working life .
We must therefore welcome the fact that a voluntary agreement has been reached at European level between banking and consumer associations on the duty to provide precontractual information .
That the code of conduct and the register of home loan providers to be kept by the Commission will also be made available on the Internet is also a positive move .
In this connection , in order to improve the comparability of consumer information , a precise definition of a common effective annual interest rate for home loans should be included in the European Standardised Information Sheet ; it should be calculated in the same way throughout the Community and be consistent with the consumer protection directive .
The information sheet should be designed to include all the data needed to check how the loan is calculated .
This means , in particular , the manner in which advance and deferred interest is calculated .
That is one of the most important consumer policy concerns in this sector .
It is also desirable for Parliament to be included in talks about voluntary agreements in future so that absolute transparency can be guaranteed in drawing up the code of conduct .
I hope that this example of a voluntary agreement between market participants and consumer associations will prove successful so that it can be extended to other areas of financial services .
This will be a major contribution to the swift creation of the internal market in financial services .
But since the consumer side has relatively few resources available , concrete measures must be taken if the voluntary agreement is not kept .
Otherwise , the instrument of the voluntary agreement - a very good instrument in itself - might prove to be inexpedient because in the end the agreement is only kept by those who cause no problems anyway .
That alone would not be enough and would be of no benefit .
Mr President , I should like to begin by saying that the Commission is in a very comfortable position because it agrees entirely with the content of the resolution adopted almost unanimously on 28 August of this year by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
The voluntary code of conduct which underpins the Commission 's recommendation is the very first example of an agreement reached between banking and consumer associations on the standardisation of information which must be made available to consumers before a contract is concluded .
Its existence proves , as has rightly been pointed out in the resolution , that market participants are best placed to negotiate proper solutions and to ensure an appropriate balance of interests between contractual parties .
But however well placed they might be , market participants need a neutral and indefatigable broker to accompany , and sometimes remotivate them , during the long and difficult negotiations of this code .
Tribute has been paid by the rapporteur to the Commission 's role and the Commission is duly appreciative and grateful to the rapporteur for that acknowledgement .
As agreed between and called for by all parties , the broker , that is , the Commission , will now transform itself into a notary and , if need be , into a referee .
As a notary , the Commission will , in line with the resolution , keep a register of home-loan lenders who adhere to the code .
That register will be kept up-to-date and made available online .
I say this in particular to Mr Radwan who wanted this code to be on the Internet and it will be .
It will be made available online on the Commission 's website and appropriate transparency will therefore be ensured .
During the negotiation phase the lack of appropriate transparency was deplored in the report .
It is a point well taken by the Commission , but at least when the register is on the net then that transparency will be restored .
That is with the Commission as a notary .
As a referee the Commission will monitor compliance with its recommendation and assess its effectiveness .
The Commission made it clear in its recommendation that it will consider presenting binding legislation should the terms of its recommendation not be fully complied with .
Parliament will , as is rightly called for in the resolution , be closely informed - that also is a point that was raised tonight - about our monitoring and compliance-assessment work .
I am convinced that the code and our related recommendation will play a very significant role in the completion of the internal market for financial services to which Parliament regularly reiterates its support .
I am also hopeful , like the rapporteur , that this pioneer initiative , once again the first of its kind , will not be a one-off experience .
Its success will , however , depend on the commitment of all parties - and I am pleased to inform this Parliament that the number of companies having notified their adherence to the code is now already significant , although not entirely satisfactory in some Member States .
I can assure Parliament that the Commission will work hard in order to ensure adherence of the entire sector .
In conclusion , Mr Ettl has put forward certain wishes .
The Commission takes note of those wishes but would like to point out that this affair is restricted to precontractual information and therefore information on interest rates and so on is beyond the scope of this instrument .
So the Commission takes note of what Mr Ettl has just said but it does not see its way to complying with those wishes .
Thank you very much , Mr Bolkestein , for your dedication to Parliament this evening .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 11.50 p.m. )
Mr President , I would like to make a personal statement pursuant to Rule 122 , which allows the speaker three minutes .
I shall not abuse the Rule .
Yesterday , an Italian news agency reported a letter sent to President Fontaine by Mr Tajani regarding the speeches made during the debate of the Extraordinary Council of 21 September by Mr Barón Crespo and myself .
First of all , I would ask you to check and find out whether the President received this letter .
In addition , I gather from the agency - because I have not read the letter - that our President is being asked to do something improper , which is to take an initiative in defence of the Italian Parliament .
I do not know with what prerogative the President of the European Parliament could do so .
I also assume that the Presidents of the Italian Parliament should be perfectly able to defend their own institutions .
I should like to make it clear , then , that neither Mr Barón Crespo nor I made any attack on that Parliament .
We did , however , point out what seemed to be extremely inconsistent behaviour on the part of the Italian Government , for , at Brussels , it did not submit any reservation when signing the action plan against terrorism at the close of the Extraordinary Council , nor did it raise any objection of the kind in the Justice and Home Affairs Council , and yet Italy is promoting a law which makes judicial cooperation much more difficult .
The latter fact has been noted by prominent jurists , the international press and also , today , by the American judge , Mr Calabresi , head of the Court of Appeal in New York , who says that Italy is setting out in the opposite direction to that taken by the United States and the whole international community .
In any case , we freely expressed an opinion .
In the debate , Mr Tajani did the same , refuting these arguments with arguments of his own .
At this point , I frankly cannot see what our President should do other than uphold the prerogative of this Parliament , which , pursuant to Rule 2 , guarantees the independence of the parliamentary mandate , and as neither I nor Mr Barón Crespo have violated any rule of behaviour laid down in the Rules of Procedure , I think Mrs Fontaine should do nothing .
It also seems odd to me that Mr Tajani should complain about alleged interference and then ask the President to do the same .
Having said that , I should like you , Mr President , to inform Mrs Fontaine that , before the end of this part-session , we would like to know if and how she intends to respond to Mr Tajani ' s letter .

I shall , of course , inform the President of your request .
I am sure Mrs Fontaine will respond as soon as possible .
Mr President , a further personal statement .
I do not believe Mrs Fontaine needs lessons in parliamentary law to know what to do .
I refer to the letter that I sent to the President yesterday .
The agencies are not the source of the information , but rather the text of the letter that I sent to Mrs Fontaine to ask her if she thought it appropriate to intervene following certain statements made in this House by the President of the Socialist Group , Mr Barón Crespo and other members of the same Group .
I do not think I mentioned Mrs Napoletano in the letter , but I do not mind contesting some of her statements .
The problem is not one of interference of the European Parliament in the Italian Parliament ; it is that yesterday and the day before , that is since the beginning of this part-session , we have heard statements repeated in this House that interfere with the Italian Parliament .
Indeed , when someone asks repeatedly to check whether the laws that are passed are in accordance with the decisions of the Council of Ministers , and nobody questions the assessment of that Council , I repeat and continue to repeat , and I said so yesterday to Mrs Napoletano and the Socialist Group , who had spoken on an issue that concerns Italy ' s internal affairs - the Italian Parliament , thank God , is still sovereign and must not be subjected to guardianship - that , in connection with the rules on international letters rogatory , the issue in question is about a verification of a law ratifying the agreement between Italy and Switzerland , and the basic law is that which implements Article 3 of the European Convention on Legal Assistance signed in Strasbourg by all the European countries and which has been in force in Italy since 1961 .
Article 3 lays down the obligation of the country that receives a letter rogatory asking for legal assistance to send the petitioning country the originals of the documents having evidential value or , failing that , a copy with a certificate of authenticity .
This is not a matter of failing to combat terrorism : we have always been , as a political grouping and as the national government , the expression of this political movement with its Prime Minister strongly committed to fighting terrorism .
I would not like it to be said , wrongly , in this House , that the law being adopted implementing Article 3 of the European Convention on Legal Assistance , which has all too often been violated by magistrates in Italy , is actually a law favouring terrorism , because it is not .
Hence my request for Mrs Fontaine ' s intervention , if she thinks fit .
The matter is now closed .
General product safety
The next item is the report ( A5-0313 / 2001 ) by Mrs González Álvarez , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council directive on general product safety [ 3644 / 2001 - C5-0298 / 2001 - 2000 / 0073 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , I do not think I will take up the whole five minutes .
This is a third reading and it is a conciliation procedure that we have been following for a long time .
I would like to welcome the dialogue that has existed between the Council , the Commission and the European Parliament , which has been very helpful .
Naturally , the result of a conciliation is never entirely good for all parties .
It is usually fairly good , but with a few drawbacks .
I believe that of the first amendments presented by the European Parliament at first reading , the other two institutions have accepted some important amendments .
For example , taking into account in product safety not only the producers ' liability but also that of the distributors ; clear information on the possible risks in the languages of the different States of the Union ; faster exchange of information ; greater cooperation between Member States to prevent dangerous products from reaching the market ; and also , the withdrawal of products which are considered dangerous , even if they are already being marketed .
Furthermore , although not in the form that our colleagues from the United Kingdom wanted , an amendment aimed at including the special nature of several charities in the United Kingdom was accepted .
I believe that a major part of the European Parliament ' s proposals were included .
However , not all of them were included , and at second reading we presented only seven amendments which intended to include what had not been accepted by the other institutions .
These amendments referred to something very important for us : the inclusion of the services in a proposal on which the Commission is working , the results of which it is committed to producing in 2003 .
I believe this is a very important proposal for us , because safety of services should rank on the same level as the directive we are reviewing today .
We also need to take account of the precautionary principle ; this means that when there is a well-founded suspicion that a product is not safe , we should apply this principle of precaution which people talk so much about and which is seldom applied in reality .
And the possibility that there is an external certificate which supplements the official certification .
There is also an agreement on comitology which in this case is not what Parliament wanted either , but there is a proposal of continued and regular information to the European Parliament and the Council .
Some matters which caused us concern in the final proposal were also clearly accepted .
I would just like to emphasise a matter proposed by the Commission itself at the beginning , which is the ban on exports to Third World countries of products which are not considered safe in Europe .
This proposal was not accepted by Parliament by a few votes , and is naturally not included in the final document .
I have to say , as rapporteur , that this is perhaps what concerns me most .
I believe that we run a real risk that , as we are seeing daily , unscrupulous people export to Third World countries products that are not safe .
This is an issue that is of enormous concern to me .
We have the verbal undertaking of the European Commission that there will be very strict controls to ensure that this does not occur , but it would have been safer for it to be included in the proposal and for there to be no risk of exporting products which we Europeans consider dangerous to Third World countries .
Therefore , Mr President , despite the rapporteur ' s great regret that the express ban on the export of unsafe products to the Third World has not been included in the directive , I believe , as I said in the beginning , that it is not the best proposal for the Council and the Commission , perhaps it is not the best one for Parliament either , but it is the result of a conciliation procedure in which a very fruitful dialogue has indeed taken place between all the institutions and with which I am very satisfied .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the operation of the internal market is only guaranteed if , in an area without internal borders , appropriate and sensible measures are put in place and consumer safety is safeguarded .
We need uniform safety standards , not a range of different standards .
The proposal before us is intended to create these uniform standards .
In recent years , consumer confidence has been badly dented , firstly by various acts of fraud against consumers , and secondly by the very welcome research in this area .
This has repeatedly revealed that some consumer goods on the market no longer complied with current safety criteria .
It is therefore even more important and necessary that this report is before us today .
Our thanks are due to the rapporteur , whose efforts have made this possible .
It is very important that this general product safety directive should apply irrespective of the type of marketing undertaken , and that a decision is taken which reflects developments in the market place and therefore also includes distance marketing and electronic commerce .
As regards the issue of consumer safety , the task is not only to protect children and older persons as the weaker groups in our societies , which is always emphasised ; safety standards must apply to everyone .
It is therefore only right and proper that we should seek to ensure that goods which no longer meet our safety standards and have to be withdrawn from sale do not end up by circuitous routes in third countries where they could pose a risk to health .
I think that one of the most important points arising in this context is the involvement of the trade .
Ensuring compliance with these current safety criteria cannot take place solely via the public authorities ; the dealers themselves must play their part in ensuring that this relationship of trust between dealer and consumer is enhanced and improved in future .
However , this will still require appropriate controls , and the directive is only as good as its regulation .
Monitoring measures will therefore be very important .
This network of regulatory bodies in the Member States is essential , and we hope that it will come into operation as quickly as possible .
Let me add one final point , namely the speed of response by the European Parliament and the European institutions to this type of emergency and the consumer protection which had become necessary in the wake of the BSE crisis , foot and mouth disease , and other types of consumer fraud .
We have been discussing this issue for nearly a year now , and I think we should consider how we can respond to emergencies more quickly and introduce urgently-needed measures , and perhaps also how we can improve and , above all , speed up our internal processes and inter-institutional processes in this context .
Mr President , for those of us who have sat through the discussions in this conciliation , Mr Ebner 's comments have come as a welcome and positive contribution to our deliberations .
For those of us who have to explain back home how this Parliament influences legislation , the timetable and content of the general product safety directive could be something of a model .
Progress here has been relatively swift ; the Commission proposal submitted 15 months ago has now gone through every stage , with all of the three parts which make up the triangle of forces involved now having made their own distinctive contributions .
Secondly , as regards Parliament , there is the rapporteur .
Mrs González Álvarez has taken a consistent , thorough and dedicated line throughout the passage of this legislation through Parliament .
She has known when to hold firm and when to make concessions .
Those of us who have felt that occasionally we did not prevail when we should , owe it to her that the door is open for further and better changes after these initial steps .
Twenty-one of our thirty amendments have been accepted by the Council .
I am particularly grateful , in respect of the UK , for the clarified exemption for charity shops and street markets from the obligation to provide information on origin , which would have been beyond them .
This was not a Community-wide problem , but in countries like the Irish Republic and Britain it mattered very greatly , and much good has been done by the clarification provided .
We have the clear recognition now of the precautionary principle itself .
There was an uncommon delay before the other institutions were prepared even to write this into the preambles , but they have done so and it is now one of the markers which will guide us as we look at how product safety legislation develops .
We were not as successful as I would have wanted on withdrawal and recall , and we shall return to that and other matters later .
It is important that we should be required to consider the safety of services and to examine proposals to this end in reasonably quick time .
In this we were simply holding the Commission to a principle which it supported in theory , but must now deliver in practice by 2003 .
At the same time , we shall have to look hard at the failure to ban the export of unsafe products to the rest of the world , as the rapporteur has said , and the nature of the safety indications which imported products have to carry .
One has only to look at the CE mark to see the imperfections there .
This was one step forward , but an important one .
I congratulate the rapporteur .
She has certainly earned our quality mark in these debates .
Mr President , I would like to express my support and that of my Group for the report from the Conciliation Committee .
I also congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs González Álvarez , who has done an excellent job .
The report before us makes for a significant improvement on current legislation governing the safety of products .
Of the points agreed , I particularly welcome the fact that stronger action can now be taken at Community level under the rapid alert system where there is a serious risk to consumers , so that dangerous products can be taken off the market .
It is important that we have adequate and independent certification to comply with the relevant product safety criteria and clear labelling for consumers .
The fact that the Commission will be reporting regularly to Parliament is significant , as is the reference to the precautionary principle and the duty of the relevant authorities in Member States to interpret this in relation to all products .
My Group believes that all consumers , both within and outside the European Union , should be treated equally .
As the rapporteur has stressed several times during discussions on this directive , safety should be assured for all consumers .
I am also glad that agreement has been reached on antique and charity shops and car boot sales , as by their nature they cannot provide information about second-hand goods but do provide a very valuable service .
Overall , we need a good balance between ensuring that products put on the market are safe and seeing to it that the measures proposed to that end can be implemented in practice .
This report partially achieves that and the consumer organisations which have welcomed earlier drafts of this directive will welcome this one , too .
Our top priority is to ensure that consumers are protected and that they have the right to know which products are dangerous and what is being done about them .
This report makes significant improvements to existing legislation and hopefully will have the support of Parliament .
Mr President , strong competition , increasing concentration and globalisation are now key features of manufacturing industry around the world .
This creates great advantages , but also disadvantages , for the consumer .
Although there are numerous institutions in the EU Member States which are responsible for quality assurance and consumer product regulation , product recall is unfortunately becoming far more common .
The purpose of this report is to enforce the precautionary principle in respect of any product placed on the market , and identify suitable approaches .
I myself am a producer of consumer goods and so I would particularly like to thank the rapporteur for her proposed solutions , for the task is to protect producers as well as consumers .
One option is to harmonise the regulations governing the authorities responsible for product safety .
The network of information which will be required in this context will be broad .
It is therefore appropriate to expand the existing directive first of all and revise it after a thorough appraisal of the situation .
The market cannot be regulated .
This is why preventive safety and health measures are especially important .
The report contains numerous references to the fact that in the Member States , operators ' and producers ' rights take precedence over the rights of consumers .
The purpose of the report is to change this situation .
I fully support this objective .
Due to the wide range of products available and the resulting risks to consumer safety and health , a new legislative approach is required .
The report makes no secret of this fact .
It also makes it clear that an export ban must be adopted for dangerous products .
This issue has yet to be considered in detail , and in my view , the proposed period until 2003 is not too long for this process .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I appreciate the spirit in which Members have spoken in this House today , and also on previous occasions , over months and even longer , in addressing this issue . It is surely one of the issues which European and , I might say , world public opinion cares about most , as well as being one of the most important for Europe ' s identity .
There are arguments on which Europe has intervened effectively but which do not receive the general support of public opinion and the citizens .
There are other , more specific and sector-based topics , on the other hand , which have received approval .
This , however , is a general topic which has received the general support of the citizens .
On reading the documentation relating to this procedure as a whole , on how it developed and how it is concluded today , I find a vagueness in many chapters and recitals , as well as in many expressions that are or will be binding on this subject .
It is a vagueness that is quite common in acts of the European Parliament , the Commission or the Council , but which , in this case , could perhaps have been more fully corrected .
My concern is not the delay in reaching the position that is emerging today in the report , but rather that more specific detail should be given regarding interventions , the form these take , controls and the procedures by which they are enforced , and the flexibility and dignity of the controls - in other words they should not be humiliating for the producer or the consumer .
I think that , in this sense , we could have been more specific and , at the same time , more respectful of the rights of producers and distributors , but always , of course , in the consumer ' s interest .
For instance , I find that expressions such as ' dangerous ' and ' serious risk ' are insufficient ; they could certainly be used in a standard or a regulation - at national or other levels - but , as these arguments are so delicate and liable to affect the daily lives of consumers and thus of society and the community , we could , perhaps , have been more explicit .
As for the future , bearing in mind what I have said regarding controls , I think that the three-yearly report required of the Commission should be drawn up at shorter intervals , without waiting three years , so as to prevent situations from arising over the three years that need to be remedied with specific provisions .
That is why I believe that this point may warrant further consideration .
Mr President , I should like to take this opportunity to reiterate the Commission 's endorsement of the outcome of the Conciliation Committee .
This directive recasts an existing directive of 1992 , which has now been updated , reinforced and completed .
The overall aim of this directive is to impose a general obligation to market only safe products and to ensure both a consistent and a high level of protection of consumer health and safety throughout the EC and the proper functioning of the internal market .
Improvements in consumer health and safety represent one of the political priorities announced by this Commission .
The directive before you today is framed within the actions intended to achieve this objective .
Before us lies now the important task to ensure that the new provisions have full effect in practice .
Finally , let me again express my appreciation for your support and confidence in ensuring the rapid adoption of this important directive .
I hope it will be seen in coming years as a keystone of our efforts to ensure the safety of the European citizens .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
Poverty reduction ( combating the major transmissible diseases )
Mr President , a family in a mud hut in rural Africa without access to clean water , electricity , hospital or community centre is simply devastated when it discovers that a member of the family is suffering from any one of the three diseases HIV / AIDS , TB or malaria .
The patient has no access to a clinic nearby that can test , diagnose and treat him and , even if there is one , he cannot afford the treatment .
The patient 's family is in crisis , not only because of illness but also because it has to find the money for treatment that will include the cost of transport and additional nutritional requirements .
This is the reality !
Therefore , my objective was to produce a report with recommendations that would support a programme of action that is possible to fund , practical to implement , and most beneficial to those who are the poor victims of such infections .
Such a report requires wide consultation with colleagues from all political groups , the European Commission , the pharmaceutical industry , UN agencies , NGOs and civil society , so that a consensus based on facts can be achieved and appropriate action taken to target the problem , making most efficient use of limited resources .
I had that wide consultation , and I want to thank all colleagues who were so helpful , in particular Dr Fransen and her team and Commissioner Nielson 's department .
Dr Fransen has worked in Africa herself , so she was a mine of information .
I also want to thank all colleagues from all political parties , especially in the Committee on Development and Cooperation , related committees and , of course , the secretariats , who were extremely helpful .
The report promotes the following : a global fund financed by G8 , the EU , oil-rich nations and others to finance access to and supply of medication and treatment ; a global strategy to implement a programme of action to treat and prevent communicable diseases ; tiered pricing of medicines from the pharmaceutical industry to ensure wide access to treatment ; support for health infrastructure to scan , diagnose , treat and monitor patients , as supply of medicines in itself is inadequate ; use of incentives - both financial and legislative - to enhance research and development to produce new medicines and vaccines by both industry and the public sector ; the European Commission to work closely with the governments of developing countries , UN agencies , NGOs and civil society to implement the programme .
It promotes appropriate future legislation to give more flexibility in the implementation of TRIPS to encourage transfer of technology for local manufacture of essential medicines wherever this is viable .
There are four paragraphs in the report which require minor changes because of errors or difficulty in implementation .
My intention in paragraph 14 was to ensure that if we are to find the lowest prices for medicines for poor countries and for the patients in these countries , we must ensure that the developing countries do not impose import duty and taxes on imports of essential medicines .
Developed countries - the EU and the USA - do not impose export taxes when they export medicines from their countries .
So there is a mistake in paragraph 14 .
I want to make an oral amendment , which I hope colleagues will accept .
It should read : " Calls on developing countries to abolish tariffs and taxes on imports of essential drugs and equipment in order to make health care more affordable ; " .
This paragraph really refers to import taxes in developing countries .
I also want to make an oral amendment to paragraph 9 to replace " 10 % " with the word " appropriate " , because you cannot dictate to the European Commission and the Committee on Budgets what exact percentage of money should be spent - there are budget lines , which are already agreed in other committees and in other reports .
So " appropriate " is the word , rather than " 10 % " .
In paragraph 20 , I would like to propose an oral amendment , which I hope Members of this House will support , to delete the second part which begins " in which a doubling of the budget .... " .
Again , the same problem applies : you cannot in a report like this put a fixed percentage when other committees have agreed budget lines and the Commission has budget appropriations fixed by the Council of Ministers for doing the job it is doing .
These are minor changes .
Finally , I wish to clarify the issue of the patent life of medicines , as some colleagues have expressed concern .
A new drug costs about USD 500 m to research , test and bring to market .
Unless this sum is recoverable , nobody will invest in research and the development of drugs for diseases of the poor .
No government can finance such investment so we must encourage the pharmaceutical industry to continue to finance research .
Their patent is in any case irrelevant after seven or ten years as new drugs are developed and doctors will change a treatment regime , thereby precipitating the fall in price of that medicine still under patent .
The real trick - and this is what I have been trying to do in this report - is to secure tiered pricing for all medication - new and old - so that the poor patients benefit whilst the industry continues to pay for research and development .
My Amendment No 1 addresses this problem and I have inserted the word " review " to replace the word " reduce " , in order to cooperate with colleagues concerned about this issue .
So I am not throwing it out of the window , I am asking us to review it in WTO .
If there is justification for amending it , so be it .
I hope that this House will give me full support for this report , which I did not try to make political .
It concerns something that we must do for the poor so that we can tell the world , especially the poor , that the European Union is concerned about their problems and will take the lead in fighting disease and poverty throughout the world .
Mr President , five million people die each year of AIDS , malaria and tuberculosis in developing countries .
One of the reasons for this is that medicines are for the most part too expensive for the people of those countries . And medicines are often unavailable altogether .
Of the more than 1 450 new medicines which have come onto the market in the last twenty years , only thirteen are intended for tropical diseases .
There is a severe lack of effective medicines in developing countries .
They are either non-existent or too expensive .
It would appear that investment in treatment of tropical diseases is not profitable enough for pharmaceutical companies .
A more tragic example of the failure of the market is hard to imagine .
These sad facts give the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy cause to propose drastic measures .
Firstly , we propose a system of differentiated pricing .
Medications should be made available free of charge or at affordable prices .
For this , it will be necessary to prevent re-importation , and the industry ' s cooperation will be essential in this .
Secondly , there is the matter of patents .
Rapporteur Khanbhai mentioned the great importance of these .
Nevertheless , the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy proposes to shorten the period of patent protection for essential medicines in developing countries .
This is important , since in 2005 and 2006 , the TRIPS Agreement is to be implemented in developing countries .
By then , there will be major problems in combating AIDS and also tuberculosis .
If the system of differentiated pricing works , this measure will not be necessary . But should it not succeed completely , it would be an important weapon in the battle against disease in developing countries .
A third point which is also of extreme importance to the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy is an extensive European research programme .
This is necessary to tailor pharmaceutical research more to existing needs .
Therefore more research into , and investment in , treatment of tropical diseases , but also investment in remedies which can be used in developing countries .
Remedies which , for example , do not require refrigerated storage .
Cooperation with the developing countries is essential , and a substantial increase in the budget to go along with this .
I thank the rapporteur for his cooperation and for his willingness to listen to other committees .
Mr President , the Commission ' s initiative from last year to play a leading role in efforts to halt the spread of HIV , malaria and TB came not a day too soon - on the contrary .
The international community should long before have taken the HIV epidemic more seriously and generally gone to much more effort , through research and preventive measures , to reduce the spread of malaria in particular .
Lack of funds , especially in the area of research , has long been acute .
Of course , we welcome initiatives of the type which Bill Gates carried out , but this type of preventive work cannot , and must not , depend on the efforts of single individuals .
It must primarily be a task for public bodies .
The resolution under discussion today constitutes Parliament ' s rather late response to the Commission ' s initiative of last year .
The resolution should be seen in the context of the work we are currently carrying out with regard to the budget for next year , in which we propose , at least on a preliminary basis , considerable increases compared with the proposals of the Commission and the Council .
We believe there is a need for more capacity within the Commission in order for it to be able to play a leading role in this area .
There is also a need for more money for operational initiatives .
The situation with regard to the diseases we are discussing here today is critical .
More resources are needed , but there is also a need for new and innovative forms of partnership - especially between the public and private sectors .
We must ensure that incentives are created for increased research .
Partnership between the public and private sectors is vital , as too of course is partnership with non-governmental organisations .
I hope the Commission , and especially Mr Nielson , will see this resolution , as well as our efforts in other contexts to increase budget resources , as a strong incentive and support for the Commission with a view to the latter ' s playing the leading role in the fight against HIV , malaria and TB , a fight which I believe we all feel is so important .
Ladies and gentlemen , we should indeed welcome the Khanbhai report , which is the result of some excellent work in reaching a compromise between the various political groups and the rapporteur , and I would like to thank him for his effort .
This report reflects a twofold realisation , both of the extent of the scourge and that of the financial and human resources necessary to combat it .
It enables us to take several steps forward in a debate that is essential for the very survival of part of the world .
It also clarifies Parliament ' s position on many crucial points such as the need to significantly increase resources assigned to improving health systems and to fighting communicable diseases in developing countries , the will to overcome the opposition between prevention and treatment , which are two essential and complementary aspects of the fight against disease , and the emergence of a new concept of public health as a global public asset .
In addition , it clarifies and provides an interpretation of the safeguard clauses in the TRIPS agreement on intellectual property . It also confirms the fact that the issue of the price of drugs is at the heart of the debates on access to treatment and the importance of research and development and , above all , it stresses the need to focus efforts on diseases that particularly affect the South , as well as forgotten illnesses .
The European Parliament ' s position is therefore now clear and coherent , but , above all , it is just and fair .
There is the feeling that we are finally beginning to ask the right questions and , from now on , we need to provide the right answers .
It is now time , ladies and gentlemen , to make the move from good intentions to positive action .
In the immediate future , there are two main areas of action in which we need to intervene .
The first involves interpreting agreements on intellectual property in a way that is more favourable to the health of the developing world .
Public opinion is ready for such progress to take place and the withdrawal of actions brought against South Africa and Brazil has created a very distinct psychological climate .
Many ambiguities still remain , however .
The fourth WTO ministerial conference in Doha should enable us to go further in officially and formally proposing guarantees on recourse to all the components of the safeguard clauses established in the TRIPS agreement , confirming in particular that in the case of compulsory licences , drugs can be produced in third countries .
The second front on which we should expect short-term progress is the global AIDS and health fund that was launched in New York and Genoa .
An interim working group has been implemented . It will make proposals in the next few days .
The principle is therefore now established .
We must insist , however , that this fund should start to operate in the coming weeks so that treatment gets to patients as soon as possible , and we must ensure that its statute and procedures are fair .
What does this mean in specific terms ?
It means that the fund should be operational before 15 December , the deadline , so that the Commission can make its contribution to the 2001 budget , and so that the definitive structure of these funds and the composition of its statutory bodies respect the rule of equality between representatives from Northern and Southern States and also between the NGOs from these two areas .
It also involves , and I will end here , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , clarifications on the contribution of the European Union .
The Union committed itself in Genoa , as stated by Mr Prodi , to allocating a budget of EUR 120 million to the global health fund .
This amount is not currently entered under any budget item .
The Commission must confirm to us today that this amount will not come from and will not be deducted from other funds earmarked for development and that it is indeed an annual contribution that will be entered in the budget on the specific line from 2002 .
I thank you in advance for including these particular details .
Mr President , what happened on 11 September does not reduce the need for development aid . On the contrary .
There is reason for calling upon all the EU countries to live up to their pledges in Gothenburg to increase their aid to the promised 0.7 % .
The EU is most certainly the world ' s largest donor region , but that does not say as much about our own efforts as about the deficiencies of others .
Even if we are not at present supposed to be criticising the United States but instead continuing to support them , it has to be said that the United States ' role in this context has not been particularly distinguished , to put it mildly .
There is both their deficient contribution to the UN and the insufficient development aid they have provided .
The issue of their contribution to the UN has now been sorted out , so we can hope that the issue of development aid will also be sorted out .
Prevention is , of course , better than cure , and development aid is an effort at prevention .
It is sad that it is so easy to get expenditure on military systems authorised and that it is so difficult to get expenditure on the preventative work of development aid authorised .
We must be clear that , in our contemporary world with its TV channels , the very poorest people also know that there are very large inequalities in the world .
In reality , it is amazing that they do not react more strongly than they in fact do .
There is no doubt that the refugee ship we heard about this summer is only the first small portent of what is to come .
Following this introduction , I wish to turn to the rapporteur ' s report and thank him for all the work he has put into this matter .
Crisis conditions , to put it mildly , prevail in a long list of developing countries .
A huge effort is therefore necessary when it comes to HIV / AIDS , tuberculosis and malaria .
Anyone who has been in any doubt as to whether this can simply be left to private companies can no longer , after the debate that has been conducted in recent years , be in any doubt that an effort is required , partly from the donor countries .
We cannot leave this to the free market .
It has actually been rather humiliating to discuss this matter , but that is why it is all the more gratifying that the EU has now done something in this area and , for example , totally untied the funds , which means that developing countries can buy wherever it is best and cheapest to do so .
We must not only concentrate on medicine . We must , of course , also concentrate on restructuring .
It is incredibly important that we should ensure that people are helped to help themselves and that we should see to it that systems are devised for which developing countries themselves can take responsibility and which they can , above all , manage , including when we are not there to support them .
Both medicines and infrastructure are required in this matter , and I would urge us to continue to make a major effort to help developing countries to help themselves .
Mr President , given the millions of deaths in developing countries , the European Commission ' s proposal for an action programme against communicable diseases in developing countries is a strong initiative that contributes to affirming the right to health on the international stage .
If the European Union wishes to play a distinguished role in this fight and to make its action have a real impact , public health must become a priority for its cooperation in developing countries , and therefore be actually reflected in its budget .
This is why we are opposed on this point to the rapporteur ' s oral amendments .
This is a shame , because we have done a great deal of preparatory work with Mr Khanbhai , in order to strengthen his initial resolution , and the votes of the Committee on Development and Cooperation enabled us to achieve a broad consensus .
At the same time , the media coverage of the actions brought by the pharmaceutical industry and the United States against South Africa and Brazil , which produce or import generic anti-AIDS drugs , lifted the veil on the economic stakes and pushed the European Union to specifically commit itself to the side of those poor populations needing access to treatment .
Although it makes sense to tackle the fight against tuberculosis , malaria and AIDS in a single programme , we do , however , need to distinguish between the specific problems posed by these three diseases .
In the case of tuberculosis , although there is a vaccine for the prevention of this disease , its effectiveness is highly disputed and there is an ever-increasing amount of resistance to treatment .
There is no vaccine for malaria and although drugs to treat the disease are inexpensive , they are decreasingly effective due to increased incidences of resistance .
There is no vaccine for AIDS nor any treatment that is accessible to the people from the South , as the pharmaceutical laboratories that own the patents keep the prices at an exorbitant level .
Moreover , we regret that diseases such as filariasis , trypanosomiasis , sleeping sickness , the Ebola virus or various forms of diarrhoea are not the subject of the Commission ' s communication as they are causing an ever-increasing number of deaths .
Effective and coherent action against these diseases should therefore offer different solutions depending on the case , but also combine measures on several levels .
First of all , prevention involves education and information campaigns , particularly aimed at at-risk groups , such as women and young people , conducted on the ground by influential local figures .
For the prevention of AIDS , therefore , promoting the use of condoms is a public health duty .
The best form of prevention remains the guarantee of good housing and working conditions , nutrition and health .
Development policy as a whole and all Community policies should therefore contribute to the key objective of improving public health .
In the same way , we need a more general discussion about the environment .
For example , by increasing the amount of stagnant water surfaces , damming policy has caused the number of parasite diseases to rocket .
Secondly , it is essential that we improve or even create health structures and train the staff required for the detection , diagnosis , treatment and monitoring of these diseases .
The European Community development aid programme , specifically within the framework of the EDF , should be focused on health services , which have been neglected for too long due to budgetary restrictions imposed by structural adjustment .
The local health NGOs should be able to receive funds in order to carry out their day-to-day work of prevention and of supporting patients .
They should be involved in drawing up aid programmes in this field and be incorporated into public health action .
Thirdly , everyone should have access to treatment . This means that medication should be sold at cost price to people in developing countries .
Another solution would be for these countries to have licences that authorise them to produce generic drugs .
In fact , the only way to free the people of the South from the grip of the multinational firms on price fixing for drugs in the long term is to establish a regional or local pharmaceutical industry .
The TRIP agreements should be interpreted in the same fashion , and should reaffirm the right of developing countries to use compulsory licences in the event of a health emergency .
Pharmaceutical firms need to be made to respect human rights .
In fact , following the media pressure over recent months , some of them are taking a greater interest and have promised to reduce their prices .
These measures are isolated , however , limited to a few products for a few countries and will take time .
Moreover , they are still rejecting the principle of compulsory licences .
This rejection of compulsory licences forces us to question the duration of the protection of patents .
We could also ask ourselves whether a reduction in the duration of patents is not , after all , an excellent stimulant for research .
Fourthly , we need to give new impetus to research , and this is a fundamental point .
We need to find new preventive and curative treatments that are more effective , and more importantly better adapted to local populations .
For this purpose , an international research centre on Southern diseases , financed by public and private funds , would enable us to completely free research from the purely mercenary interests of certain manufacturers .
Finally , and this is what I believe to be the most important point in this debate , is the fact that we know that the very people in the South who are dying from these diseases are urgently waiting for our help , and have been for a long time .
I think that we should broadly develop all of these structures .
All these concerns have been largely incorporated into Mr Khanbhai ' s report .
This is why we call on you to vote in favour of the report , and we hope that all of these speeches will for once not go unheeded , because the people of the South need us .
Mr President , as Mr Khanbhai ' s report indicates very clearly , five million people die each year basically from these three contagious diseases and ten thousand people die each day in Africa .
This seems to me to be a silent genocide that is hardly mentioned in the international press .
It seems to me that some of the proposals in the report are very good , in the sense that these deaths will not be eradicated unless basic health services are available in each one of those countries and unless , as other Members have said , there is access to the treatments , to the medicines which can put an end to these illnesses .
At present , they are not available .
Therefore , the proposal for a Commission plan and also the proposal that we contribute to an international fund to fight against these diseases seems right to us .
However , I believe that we have to look into the deeper causes .
The rapporteur rightly indicates in paragraph 13 of the resolution the fact that demanding structural changes of these countries sometimes prevents them from using sufficient public funds for the health services .
It is an infernal vicious circle , because unless there are sufficient resources for these basic health services , for improving the people ' s quality of life , for them to have access to housing , food and work , it will be difficult to eradicate these diseases .
It is a vicious circle that causes a very large part of the population of the Third World countries to be in this situation .
I believe , Mr President , that prevention , better quality of life for these people , access to medicines and access to a basic health service , as the report proposes , are essential elements for a solution .
The rapporteur also points out very clearly that it is necessary to increase development aid .
It is already more than twenty years since the United Nations proposed that 0.7 % of the GDP should be allocated to development .
Today , only a few Nordic countries in Europe attain that 0.7 % .
The majority of European countries do not reach 0.7 % .
Some , like mine , do not give 0.25 % .
It is deplorable , because this development aid is vital precisely for these populations to be able to access basic health services .
I would like to end , Mr President , by recalling the multiplier effect that the participation of women may have in each of these programmes .
As a member of the delegation for relations with the countries of Central America and Mexico , I was involved in projects financed by the European Union and I could see how the participation of native women in that zone had a multiplier effect , because women can help their daughters and their fellow women to learn .
Therefore , the participation of women in these plans to eradicate these diseases is fundamental .
Mr President , it is now already a year since I took part in the round-table conference on 29 September , in which everyone agreed that no time was to be wasted in obtaining practical results in the fight against transmissible diseases . Since then , however , nothing much has happened .
The Commission has acknowledged the right of poor countries to issue compulsory licences , but what does the Commission intend to do to bring about the necessary transfer of technology so that poor countries themselves can produce medicine ?
Why have we not yet seen initiatives to enable African technicians in African factories to produce medicines to combat tuberculosis , malaria and HIV ?
Economically speaking , this is possible .
We are not talking in terms of huge investments to start up local production .
The necessary transfer of technology might , in addition , be envisaged in terms of allowing those employed in the medical sector in the EU to spend a couple of years in developing countries , working on such technology transfer programmes .
It is crucial to improve the skills of doctors , scientists , nurses and technicians in the poorest countries .
They must be involved in research and development , not by inviting them to European conferences - where they are likely to receive subsistence allowances - but by providing the institutions in which they work with equipment , training and communication facilities so that well-educated people living and working under incredibly difficult conditions are motivated to remain in their own countries .
Five malaria vaccines have now been developed - an extremely important step , given the fact that malaria is the disease that kills most people .
And what is the EU doing ?
True , we have plans to set up a European platform to test the vaccine , even if there is already a fully developed African platform .
Does it not make sense for the vaccine to be tested by Africans in Africa , or are Africans only good enough to act as subjects of experiments by European scientists ?
Let us forget all about setting up this European Clinical Trials Platform and instead support the pan-African network , AMVTN , which is just about to be converted into a fund .
It would save a huge amount of time and thus save millions of human lives , and it would save money .
It would also show that we recognise other people ' s right to take charge of their own destinies , and it would provide them with the necessary transfer of technology .
It would be a fantastic first step on the way to taking action .
We have heard enough fine , but empty , words .
I should like , then , to thank Mr Khanbhai .
Mr President , despite global growth over recent decades , progress remains inadequate and unequally distributed .
Poverty , injustice and appalling conditions , from both a social and a health point of view , are still the bitter reality for many developing countries .
Thirty per cent of the world ' s population live in conditions of extreme poverty , a situation exacerbated by continuous population growth and the inadequacy - or , rather , the decline - of policies for development aid , assistance and cooperation .
Europe is a relative exception , but not to the extent of correcting a worldwide downward trend .
New challenges in the developing world , such as urbanisation , environmental degradation and pollution , local warfare and the scourge of AIDS , together with the previously unthinkable resurgence of malaria and TB , threaten to drive us back .
In general , I am suspicious of statistics , which all differ , anyway , between the various Directorates-General of the Commission , as we have seen , and not uncommonly seem subservient to ideological prejudices .
There is no doubt , however , that the explosive growth of the richest countries has left the poorest countries even farther behind .

Among the indicators of poverty , that of women ' s poverty stands out : the majority of poor people , the poorest of the poor , are women , just as most illiterate people are women and women continue to work more and to earn and count for less .
It would be difficult to deny or underestimate the importance of the link that still persists between poverty , disease , illiteracy and population growth , a link which has its most obvious proof in the scale of women ' s poverty , the suffering of women and gender inequalities .
On the other hand , the reports of both the Commission and Parliament seem to me to be evasive , not to say reticent , on the subject of population .
The reports concentrate on the fight against AIDS , malaria and tuberculosis , going at length into sophisticated technical analyses and proposals for reforms , which may serve to improve our measures for combating poverty - especially on the question of drugs and health services - but do not propose any measures to improve the effectiveness of policies on population control , healthy and sustainable fertility , or free and informed maternity , as if this subject had disappeared from our view .
Yet this is still the crucial issue .
Let us consider the facts : in purely numerical terms , never have so many people been torn by poverty as this year .
Yet , because of the continuing population growth , today there are more poor people in the world than all those that have ever lived throughout history .
Since the end of the last century , the world population has grown fourfold , from one and a half billion to six billion .
The greatest growth has been in Asia : India , China , Indochina and , in particular , Indonesia .
The population trend in the rich countries is , conversely , now stationary , but the balance achieved depends on a longer life expectancy , which makes up for the slump in the birth rate .
Africa , in turn , has seen a population explosion , mainly due to the fall in infant mortality .
This trend seems today to be more contained , not because population policies have been successful but because of epidemics , especially , as has been said , of AIDS , TB and malaria .
Africa challenges us and moves us , but Africa is not the whole world and is itself diverse in its various parts .
It certainly has more need than any other region of a population policy more concerned with the condition of women .

Throughout the rest of the world , not only in the rich countries , population growth has slowed down somewhat over recent decades , but if you look more closely you will see both that the birth rate has fallen and that life expectancy has increased , and that means a population that is continuing to grow and which , in most situations , is ageing , as well as cases of overpopulation in certain regional and local areas .
In conclusion , if we want to be more effective in fighting poverty , we cannot avoid or ignore the matter of population control . It is true that it is linked to economic and cultural growth , but we are not without suitable tools and appropriate experience in the field of prevention and contraception .
History teaches us that there has never been so much growth and so much poverty .
Experience shows that it is no use trying to dry out a flooded room without turning off the taps .
Mr President , Mr Khanbhai has produced a balanced report , whose proposals we gladly lend our support to .
The report draws specific attention to the triangle of poverty , health and education , no part of which can be ignored without action in the other two areas coming to nothing .
Poverty has sometimes been compared to war : it takes prisoners and it kills .
The only difference is that death from poverty is slow and the victim him / herself is branded as the culprit .
I therefore also want to remind our Member States of the 0.7 % target , to give some credibility to our calls for altruism in the pharmaceutical industry .
I would particularly support the establishment of a global infectious disease fund and the introduction of compulsory licences to improve the availability of medicines .
Both will take great initiative on the part of the EU and their successful implementation will require the goodwill of key global movers and shakers as well as institutions .
In any action taken , however , it has to be borne in mind that , without viable basic health care , no other developments are possible .
Good basic health in itself also prevents more dangerous infections , and it makes it easier to identify infections early on and stop them if basic health care has been provided for .
We must not forget the importance of people ' s attitudes : if there is not even any functional basic health care in place , apathy grows and then people cannot in all fairness be asked to take seriously infection risks that might develop into fatal illnesses in the years to come .
No matter how fearful the prospects of communicable disease are , making us feel a spontaneous need to take specific action as a consequence , it should never be done at the expense of basic health care .
It can , therefore , be said with some justification that EU aid with regard to basic health care has been totally inadequate for a long time now .
For that reason , doubling the EU ' s financial aid resources for basic health care can be considered to be the most essential matter from the point of view of all the other objectives .
We should bear in mind the Copenhagen Social Summit pledge to attain universal and equitable access to primary health care .
Mr President , I should like to begin by commending both the Commission communication and Mr Khanbhai 's report .
Access to medicines will be a key issue at Doha in a few weeks ' time simply because developing countries feel hugely disadvantaged by rules which are applied universally , even though countries are of unequal strength , both economically and institutionally .
They will be calling clearly for the TRIPS Agreement to be applied fairly .
The global spotlight , therefore , will be firmly on the role played by pharmaceutical companies in the HIV / AIDS catastrophe .
Only 0.1 % of the 25 million people living with HIV / AIDS in sub-Saharan Africa have access to lifesaving drugs or indeed for the drugs for the opportunistic infections such as meningitis , drug-resistant diarrhoea , oral thrush and those other infections .
There are now alternatives - cheap copies of life-saving medicines .
In Brazil , Thailand and India their laws allow them to ignore drug patents .
In India for instance , companies are marketing a drug for the treatment of that drug-resistant diarrhoea , at 1.8 % of the price charged in Pakistan where only the patented version can be bought .
Four years ago Brazil waived the patent rights on HIV drugs and allowed local companies to produce cheap versions .
Prices in Brazil have fallen by 80 % and they have halved the number of deaths from HIV / AIDS .
I come to the point made by Mr Khanbhai on research and development .
If so much commitment is made by the pharmaceutical companies to R & D , how come they actually spend twice as much on marketing as they do on research and development ?
According to the UNDP 's recent figures less than 10 % of global spending on health research addresses 90 % of the global disease burden .
Of the 1223 new drugs marketed between 1975 and 1996 , only 13 of those drugs were developed to treat tropical diseases and only 4 of those 13 were the result of the pharmaceutical industry 's research .
And why is it that they charge more for the same drugs in Africa , than they charge in the northern hemisphere ?
I would argue that these facts very clearly speak for themselves .
They have - and this is a very important point to make and it will be made in Doha - a virtual monopoly which means that they can control prices .
They are virtually saying " no " to cheap , affordable generics for very sick people in poor countries .
Globalisation is meant to be about freer markets and about increased competition .
The big four pharmaceutical companies act like a cartel : they bully developing countries and they deny them their rights to those drugs .
During the Uruguay Round they secured agreement on patent rights for 20 years .
The TRIPS Agreement was a clear example of the powerful vested interests of the developed world at this time .
All this threatens the whole credibility of the World Trade Organisation and any chance we have of believing in the developments at Doha , or if we ever have a new round of fair , multilateral trading systems .
There is now a clear need for a clear and new interpretation of TRIPS allowing for the flexibility which clearly exists in that agreement .
We need to ensure that it is the interests of poor countries that are put first .
This is an issue of fundamental social justice .
Mr President , it is unacceptable that millions of people continue to die unnecessarily from AIDS , malaria and TB .
We have here a global problem of the highest order .
Our own citizens who are HIV positive are able to access long-term treatment with effective medication .
For patients in developing countries , the medicines are too expensive and the medical infrastructure to provide care for them is lacking .
Also , if a patient is not disciplined in taking his medicines regularly and in the correct dosage , they lose their effect .
The pharmaceutical industry only lowered its prices under the heavy pressure of global public opinion , and those prices are still far too high .
A further lowering of prices must be realised through industrial and government cooperation .
Only a very broadly established , very expensive and dogged international campaign can effectively tackle this large-scale problem .
Mr Khanbhai ' s excellent report provides a clear overview of all the important aspects of the transmittable disease .
We join him in welcoming the European Union ' s campaign programme .
It is well thought out and deserves to be carried out with the greatest urgency .
May I ask the Commissioner whether he has sufficient personnel resources available for this ?
I advocate a very substantial provision in the budget over the coming years for the AIDS fund , without detriment to present provision for poverty relief .
Does the Commissioner consider this feasible and can he also tell us the situation regarding the setting up of the fund ?
It is also a requirement that the twenty-year patent protection term specified in the TRIPS Agreement be considerably reduced for essential medicines .
The pharmaceutical industry must , of course , be able to continue investing in research into vaccines and cheap medicines , but must gain its profits in the rich countries and not in the epidemic-ridden Third World .
Results will not be achieved without large-scale information campaigns .
Sexual behaviour and attitudes towards women , in particular , will have to change dramatically .
Women ' s right of self-determination is fundamentally at issue here .
A great responsibility also rests with the developing countries themselves , not only with the governments and the NGOs , but especially with the religious leaders who can wield moral authority .
If they refuse to cooperate , they will be partly responsible for the misery .
Only a collective effort can end the situation whereby millions of our fellow humans die , countless children are orphaned and economies are ruined needlessly .
Members of the Lutte Ouvrière party will vote in favour of this report , despite its shortcomings , due to the realistic account it gives of the catastrophic situation in poor countries and the few limited , yet positive , measures that it proposes .
It is appalling when we take account of the fact that three communicable diseases are killing five million people per year in poor countries and ten thousand people per day in Africa alone and that , moreover , the number of victims is increasing .
This is very true in the case of AIDS , where there is no known cure , whereas there are cures available for tuberculosis and malaria .
Despite this , malaria , which a few years ago appeared to be on course for total eradication has , as the report highlights , become the main cause of death in sub-Saharan Africa , whilst tuberculosis , for which there are simple and effective treatments , continues to be the disease most widespread throughout the world .
The cause of this situation is simple .
Drug manufacturing is monopolised by large pharmaceutical corporations , whose prime concern is not public health , but profit .
The recent ignominious action brought by certain pharmaceutical corporations against South Africa is characteristic of this intolerable situation , even though public opinion did , to a certain extent , cause these corporations to back off .
The report ' s proposal that aims for the European Union to recognise on the international level the right of developing countries to produce and sell generic drugs within their countries , without costs resulting from intellectual property rights , is the least we can do .
Another example of this would be to impose specifications on the pharmaceutical corporations obliging them to produce drugs for these diseases , which the report says are neglected by the industry because they are not profitable enough .
The report limits itself to mentioning a reduction in prices .
Millions of people in poor countries will only be able to have access to minimum treatment if certain drugs , particularly malaria drugs , are free of charge .
The report tries to reconcile the protection of patents with access to healthcare in developing countries ; we reaffirm that industrial patents , and more specifically those patents involving the pharmaceutical industry , should be completely abolished .
They do nothing to protect the intellectual property of the inventor , they only serve to guarantee the corporations a monopoly position and therefore the enormous profits that they earn to the detriment of public health and life itself .
The heading of the report says that the fight against infectious diseases contributes to poverty reduction .
In fact , most of these diseases are diseases related to poverty , even to malnutrition .
Only an improvement in people ' s standard of living would be effective in eradicating most of them .
Having said this , however , for the benefit of the advocates of the market economy and capitalism , the simple fact that it is organically incapable of providing the most basic treatment and daily food for a considerable proportion of humanity in the twenty-first century , even though it has scientific and material possibilities like never before , irreparably condemns it .
President , in many European countries , at any rate in the Netherlands , there have been drastic changes in healthcare in recent years .
More differentiation , more individual care , increased personal choice and especially improved efficiency have been the most important aims .
Often these changes give rise to criticism , especially where the general availability of healthcare is concerned .
To many of us , it is unacceptable on principle that a higher place on the waiting list should be for sale .
This would mean that a person ' s health would be governed by his income . And we do not want that .
It is all the more remarkable that the above situation is simply the harsh reality throughout the world .
Indeed , the Commission proposals under discussion today demonstrate that the availability of adequate medicines to the poorest , despite repeated promises , still leaves much to be desired .
There is much less indignation in the West concerning this . In a world of increasing globalisation , however , we cannot shirk our international responsibility .
Our own healthcare problems are dwarfed by those of the majority of the world ' s population .
I therefore support the measures proposed .
We will have to operate on two levels to combat these diseases .
In the first place , by participating on a micro level in healthcare improvement projects .
As far as I am concerned , these projects could be funded and executed via bilateral channels .
The European Union could play an important role with larger infra-structural projects which involve NGOs from several Member States .
In the second place , by creating on a macro level the necessary conditions to facilitate those projects on a micro level .
Policy direction is an important instrument here .
I particularly welcome , therefore , the paragraphs on the TRIPS and the WTO in the European Parliament ' s resolution .
Especially since they provide the European Union with an important task .
I only need to see a concrete reference to the forthcoming meetings in Qatar .
I hope that the Commissioner responsible will nevertheless carry out our recommendations at that conference .
Mr President , in the North people think it is all over where AIDS is concerned .
It is not , of course , but changing lifestyles and the arrival of effective drug regimes have , at least , helped us turn a corner on the long road that we walk .
The forecasts when I was health minister fighting these issues were not the same as the forecasts now .
But in the South the picture is very different .
Ninety-five per cent of the five million new cases every year are in low-income countries in the South .
There are 25 million people living with AIDS in Africa and 6 million in the new-growth area in Asia - South and Southeast Asia in particular .
Where AIDS is concerned we face a vicious cycle of infection , incapacity and poverty alongside the 16 million deaths we have already seen : two million deaths a year in Africa , a quarter of all Africa 's deaths .
Ten per cent of people between fifteen and fifty years of age are living with AIDS , and there are 10 million orphans .
The people who expected to be looked after in their old age are now unable to have that care and support because their children are dead .
That is the scene confronting us .
When The Economist went to Zambia and looked at a particular hospital , it saw two-thirds of the patients there dying of AIDS .
People 's limbs , they reported , looked like broken broomsticks .
When they were asked what they were desperate for , they did not say retroviral drugs , they said food , because they were too poor to be able to afford either .
Poverty hastens death , and deaths accelerate the survivors ' descent into poverty .
In Zambia the department of health then estimated that half the population would die of AIDS .
That is a human disaster .
We are facing human disasters in America now .
The world is looking at the headlines , the world is taking action , governments are coming together , people are demanding and subscribing to solutions .
But they are not doing that where AIDS , TB and malaria are concerned .
It is not terrorism , but it is a health terror and horror that is preventable .
That is why the honourable Member 's report is so important and fundamental .
I congratulate him and the Commission on the work that has been done on this matter and everyone who has participated .
Poverty reduction goes hand in hand with the war against disease , disability and death .
We desperately need more resources for drugs and vaccines , but must also ensure their adequate distribution to people , so that drugs do not sit in storage deteriorating .
We must have adequate education , monitoring and research .
It has rightly been said that research should be conducted in Africa , by Africans , for Africans and , where appropriate , with the support , cooperation and partnership of the Western world , along the lines of the IAVI initiative between Oxford and Nairobi .
TB too , of course , is a killer .
It accounts for two million deaths a year , 95 % of them in developing countries ; it is the leading cause of HIV deaths ; one infected person can pass it on to ten others .
Malaria is the third killer ; 90 % of deaths from Malaria occur in Africa - one death every 30 seconds .
In the past four minutes , eight people have died from malaria .
I want us and the Commissioner to keep those people who are dying of these diseases in mind and see what we can do .
The honourable Member has provided the words in this report ; now it is time for the Commission to act .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think that the common feature of all the statements made in this debate so far is the belief that investment in healthcare is extremely worthwhile and is an important way of achieving sustainable development and combating poverty , which are two objectives of European development policy .
It is a proven fact that countries with a high standard of health and generous investment in this area achieve higher levels of development , including economic development .
Some of us have already observed that we must persuade the governments in these countries to spend more on this area of healthcare and education , and I naturally underline this political demand as well .
Yet it would be cynical in the extreme if we failed to point out that the structural adjustment programmes which must be undertaken by these countries to secure loans and funding from the international financial institutions now require them to spend less on prevention , public health and education .
One point which is very important , in my view , is the involvement of women in devising birth control programmes and other reproductive health campaigns .
Women - and I am not saying anything new - are extremely vulnerable to poverty .
Furthermore , as the HIV / AIDS infection rates in southern Africa show , women are also affected by this disease to a far greater extent than men .
Finally , I should like to say a few words about one of the most pressing issues addressed in the Khanbhai report , namely the Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights ( TRIPS ) .
I believe that in future , too , the European Union must assist the developing countries to benefit from the opportunities already afforded by the TRIPS agreement .
Naturally , this is set forth in the provisions of the TRIPS agreement , but has not always been accepted by the pharmaceutical industry , as the case of South Africa shows .
In my view , the proposal outlined in paragraph 41 of the Khanbhai report on reducing the period of patent protection is essential .
I believe that when we talk about poverty , we must also identify tangible measures for the reform of the WTO .
Otherwise , we will also lose credibility .
As many of the previous speakers have pointed out , it is high time we took practical steps in this direction .
Mr President , in 1979 , Willy Brandt presented his famous " North-South Report , a programme for survival " , in which he warned of the risk that in the year 2000 a large part of the population would continue to live in poverty .
Shortly after that pronouncement some frightening statistics were published ; every 24 hours , 35 000 human beings died of hunger in the world .
In two years , hunger caused more deaths than the two world wars put together .
The year 2000 arrived and the situation has only got worse .
According to the World Health Organisation , extreme poverty - misery - is the chief cause of suffering in the world and is also the one which each year claims the greatest number of human lives and yet we are still talking about poverty and how we are going to remedy it .
A few months ago , before the summer , at our Brussels headquarters , the United Nations together with the EU organised the Third Conference on the Least-developed Countries dedicated in particular to analysing the causes , consequences and solutions of poverty .
We also set an ambitious target : to reduce poverty by half by the year 2005 .
Some studies lead to the conclusion , Mr President , that by what we are doing , with the plans and projects we intend to carry out and above all , with the resources we allocate and those which are intended to be allocated , that objective cannot be met .
Our concern now is to combat the international terrorism fostered by some notorious fanatics .
True , that is the problem of the moment but , ladies and gentlemen , this is not the root of the problem .
The problem is poverty throughout a large part of the world .
Until we solve the problem of poverty , especially the extreme poverty - misery - in which hundreds of millions , around 1 500 million human beings , and I am using cautious figures , live , we will continue to be exposed to situations such as those we are experiencing now .
Between 13 and 19 September some of us were visiting some of the poorest regions of the planet , in the south of the African continent .
Mozambique today has 19 million inhabitants but within 9 years only 13 million will still be alive ; the remaining 6 will have died of Aids .
Today Mr Khanbhai in his report proposes a series of measures to combat Aids , malaria and tuberculosis in the context of reducing poverty .
During a visit to a field hospital way out in the middle of the African savannah , my colleagues and I witnessed how victims of a cholera epidemic are dying - believe me , right now - in a Dante-esque spectacle such as occurred in Europe in the Middle Ages .
This is also happening at other hospitals which are not in the middle of nowhere .
In Mocuba , there is a provincial hospital where women give birth next to patients with Aids , tuberculosis , leprosy , meningitis , and infectious diarrhoeas of all kinds .
For all these diseases which today can be cured and eradicated , there are drugs .
It is a problem of resources , and above all , it is a problem of political will .
Mr Khanbhai , I congratulate you and thank you for the important contribution you have made in your report .
But , Mr Bashir , you know your native Africa better than I do .
Let us make no mistake , the problems of poverty in the world are today of such magnitude that these measures , with the present resources , are like a drop in the ocean .
Some day we will realise this .
Either we fight against poverty with all our energy and all our resources until we conquer it , or poverty with its many faces - now taking the form of terrorism - will conquer us .
Mr President , others have established the need for action .
I should just like to add one fact : in the UK and Europe drugs cocktails have decreased AIDS deaths by 75 % , in sub-Saharan Africa , where two-thirds of all people infected with HIV live , only one person in a thousand receives drug treatment .
Education is crucial to prevent people being infected with HIV in the first place , but access to drugs really does make a difference .
The drug companies are our partners .
But it is crucial that they act with integrity .
I will never forget the representative for SmithKline Beecham sitting in our EU / ACP Joint Assembly in Brussels , banging the table and saying that they had lowered the prices of essential medicines .
And then later in the year Mr Nielson was told they were going to lower them all over again .
Which is the lowest price - the one they told us in the spring , or the one they told us in the autumn ?
I went to Gabon and South Africa and met doctors who are desperate to use those drugs , who have read the Internet press releases saying that the prices have been brought down ; yet when they ring up they cannot actually acquire the drugs to treat those patients .
I have asked SmithKline Beecham what is the genuine , long-term cost of production of these drugs .
They will not say .
I have asked them how long they will commit themselves to these lower prices .
They will not commit themselves .
I have asked them why , if they are seeking a partnership with developing country governments , they face legal action , not just in South Africa but in India , Brazil and elsewhere .
They just will not answer .
We send a clear message to the drugs companies in this resolution : prices are too high and legislative action , including compulsory licensing in cases of national emergency , is needed to deal with it .
Finally , to Mr Khanbhai , it is no good claiming that you are seeking consensus , including NGOs for example , and then putting forward your Amendment No 1 , opposing a reduction in patent protection .
Name one NGO which supports that position .
I will always remember that SmithKline Beecham 's key anti-retroviral drug was not brought onto the market because of privately-funded research .
It was publicly-funded research .
They used a dormant patent to acquire that protection for their own commercial gain .
Let us have some clear speaking in this debate .
( Applause from the left )
Mr President , 7000 people died in the wake of terrorist atrocities in New York and Washington and the global response was one of shock and horror , followed by a flurry of diplomatic activity and detailed planning for an adequate response .
In Africa , 10 000 people die every day from AIDS , malaria or tuberculosis .
Why is there not a similar response ?
Regrettably , the harsh truth is that the developed world does not place the same value on human life in Africa .
It is a terrible indictment on all of us who live in the world 's richest countries that this scale of human tragedy continues to occur into the 21st century .
Several years ago malaria seemed close to being eliminated , today it is the most common cause of death in sub-Saharan Africa .
Tuberculosis is the most prevalent disease in the world , and 35 million people are infected with AIDS , with half of all new HIV infections occurring in the 15-24 year-old age group .
I acknowledge that the EU Commission contributed EUR 4.2 billion for health assistance during the 1990s .
However , as the rapporteur pointed out , although EUR 700 million were allocated for health in 1998 , the amount for 1996-1998 was only 4 % of the total EU development budget .
This indicates how low down it has been on the list of our political priorities .
I hope this will now change with the publication of the new policy framework by the Commission and its proposed programme of action for the years 2001-2006 .
Its three-prong strategy of better deployment of existing resources , increasing the affordability to people in poorer countries of key drugs , and support for more research is indeed welcome .
However , the proposals need to be developed further and underpinned by a greater financial commitment , indicative of a greater political priority .
The best means of achieving this is by taking on board the excellent proposals put forward by the rapporteur , Mr Khanbhai .
His call for the EU to devote 10 % of our development aid to tackling this problem , his emphasis on preventative action with the 15-24 year-old age group in relation to AIDS , and his proposal for a global fund for infectious diseases and the establishment of an EU research agency should be the cornerstone of any new EU policy in this area .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , HIV and AIDS are not only a health policy problem , but a general social problem . This has been made quite clear during today 's debate .
A holistic strategy is therefore required to combat them .
Tackling poverty is one approach , but I would like to focus on other priorities which I believe are equally important : information and education , prevention , and of course treatment .
These are the three areas which must be considered if we want to make progress , particularly in Africa , where the problem is most acute .
This means providing information and sex education for children and young people , for without a change in sexual behaviour , the problem cannot be mastered .
A proportion of the available resources must therefore be allocated for this purpose too .
The sexually active population must have the opportunity to practise prevention .
I should particularly like to mention Senegal as a positive example , where religious and political leaders have worked together to halt the spread of AIDS through prevention .
A similar approach has also been adopted in Uganda .
If politicians and a country 's spiritual leaders work together on this issue , a great deal can be achieved .
The Côte d 'Ivoire , for example , has therefore appointed a Minister for AIDS and HIV .
I believe that these are models which deserve our support .
There is another important problem , which is how to prevent the sick from being ostracized .
This is a major problem .
We must dismantle social taboos and not only ensure that those who are living with infection receive the medication they need , but also encourage their positive integration into society .
This is the only way to create a climate which ultimately halts the spread of disease in a holistic way .
Mr President , allow me first of all to express my appreciation for the work of the rapporteur , Mr Khanbhai .
In the eight months since the Commission adopted an ambitious programme for action targeting the major communicable diseases , a number of events have reconfirmed the need for action , for the global mobilisation of efforts and financing , and for the political will to achieve our aims .
Health is fully on our agenda now , and the same is true of our own Member States .
Health in developing countries is , together with education , one of the six priorities for the Commission for 2002 .
Investing in health is a key strategy for economic development and poverty reduction , and hence a crucial component of a sound development strategy .
I wish to highlight and express my strong agreement with the remarks made by Mrs Korhola and Mr Bowis on the need to organise basic health care in a manner that actually works .
In this regard we should bear in mind that annual per capita spending on public health services in sub-Saharan Africa is between USD 2 and USD 6 .
This is the economic framework before us .
Reconciling the low capacity of health systems with , in particular , care and work on administering anti-retroviral drugs to AIDS and HIV-positive patients is an extremely difficult task .
I should like to mention one case that illustrates this .
In Botswana USD 100 million has been mobilised jointly by Merck , one of the big pharmaceutical companies , and the Bill Gates Foundation .
They are doing everything they can to organise their work on the ground and use these advanced types of medicine in ongoing treatment .
Their experience is that very little has been possible .
The absence of infrastructure in this area , of educated nurses and of the conditions required for these types of advanced medicine , which are very difficult to administer , to work , shows that even concentrated , well-funded efforts spanning one-and-a-half years in a place that is better organised than most others in Africa has not done the trick .
This is also why the pharmaceutical companies are warning against highlighting too uncritically the use of anti-retroviral drugs as the solution .
That warning has to be taken seriously .
Our programme for action has been moving forward .
We are speeding up the actual disbursement rate in the field of health .
I would not go as far as to express satisfaction at this , but the situation is improving .
We are disbanding dormant projects and improving projects that need to be improved .
All this work is taking place .
Now a few remarks on financial allocations .
Firstly , I appreciate the remarks made today by Mr Khanbhai concerning the mechanics of how we allocate this money .
We would like to get away from input-related targets .
They are advantageous in being easier to communicate regularly ; however , we are seeking to focus on output and processes rather than on input .
An important aspect of this debate is the fact that the budget does not reveal directly how much we are actually doing in areas such as health and education .
It must be borne in mind that macroeconomic support , our budget support , is in fact linked to health and education .
That link provides the answer as to how much - or how little - we are doing .
At present it is extremely difficult to quantify this specifically but we are working on this .
Mr Khanbhai also referred to a change relating to the import of drugs and the need to abolish tariffs in this regard .
This is definitely something that must be done .
It should be borne in mind that liberalisation on a regional basis , which we are urging our partners to move forward on , is also an answer to this problem .
Furthermore it can solve the problem of creating a better basis for starting up medicine production in developing countries .
If you cannot access a neighbouring market from a given African country investing there in order to do something in this area is not a good idea .
The question of access to medicines , an issue brought up by many , is currently being discussed at the TRIPS Council in Geneva .
The discussions have sought to strike a balance between the need to pursue access to affordable medicines and the implementation of the TRIPS Agreement .
A declaration for the ministerial meeting in Doha is now being prepared .
May I state most clearly that the EC has no intention of applying pressure on or criticising developing countries that invoke their rights under the TRIPS Agreement .
It is in the interest of all WTO members that the TRIPS provisions be clear , so as to provide for lawful and correct implementation of the agreement .
As to paragraph 41 on Mr Khanbhai 's report , the current review process within the TRIPS Council of certain provisions does not include the patent periods , nor the so-called " ever-greening " of patents mentioned in the report .
It is not the opinion of the Commission that the patent period needs to be amended .
On the second issue , " ever-greening " , there are no provisions in the TRIPS Agreement that could be applied here .
The substance and level of invention for the granting of a patent is evaluated by national patent authorities .
Allow me to make a few remarks on the other paragraphs .
Ninety-five percent of drugs listed as essential drugs by WHO are off patents and may be produced freely .
The remaining 5 % are drugs patented in most countries .
It is the Commission 's view that compulsory licenses should be issued in accordance with the rules laid down in Article 31 of the TRIPS Agreement .
Tiered pricing , in the sense that pharmaceutical companies voluntarily offer their products at heavily discounted prices to developing poor markets , is something the Commission strongly supports .
It was one of the sticking points in the discussion of the guidelines for the health fund .
We are working towards a global system of tiered pricing that will supply markets on a sustainable basis .
Supplying poor markets at the lowest possible prices should be the rule .
This should comprise all essential and key medicines .
Of course , if large quantities of tiered price products are exported to developing countries , the risk of trade diversion becomes high .
Therefore we are considering stronger measures to prevent the re-importation of tiered-price products into the Community .
In paragraph 38 the report calls for the establishment of a fund for infectious diseases .
You will all be aware that this Global AIDS and Health Fund was launched by the UN Secretary-General at the special session on HIV / Aids in June .
On behalf of the Commission President Prodi pledged EUR 120 million to the fund .
Total contributions have now reached USD 1.8 billion .
We are actively involved in working out the operational modalities for the fund , its governance , legal basis and its focus .
I agree with what a few of the speakers said concerning the situation of women .
The whole agenda concerning reproductive and sexual health and rights needs to be kept in mind whenever we discuss these issues .
Mrs Sandbæk mentioned the issue of testing .
I want to clarify that we are working on testing in Africa ...
( The President called for order to allow the speaker to be heard )
I feel confident that those Members who really want to hear what I have to say are definitely trying to do so .
I thank them from the bottom of my heart .
Concerning the activity of the Commission in the area of research , the reality is that we are proving quite successful in the attempt to organise a big Africa-focused network and to carry out testing as part of the whole research and development process .
This is progressing quite well .
The subject of the Global AIDS and Health Fund was touched upon by many speakers .
I want to give some additional information here .
We are involved in discussions on the modalities of the fund and there are still a few differences that need to be resolved .
They concern the balance between prevention and care , especially in relation to HIV / AIDS .
They concern the question to what extent the fund should supply anti-retrovirals , whether the fund should also cover research activities , the structure of tendering in the fund , and its focus in terms of geography .
Many issues are therefore , being discussed now .
As a background to this discussion we also note that there is a section within the NGO community that sees the fund as a distraction from longer-term development processes , in particular support for strengthening the health systems .
In my view , these words of warning have to be taken seriously .
There are still many questions to resolve before it becomes clear what real added value the fund will create , especially in the most important area of improving delivery on the ground , which is still the biggest challenge .
I thank the rapporteur , Mr Khanbai .
We look forward to working - as we have done until now - hand-in-hand with Parliament and keeping up the pressure to move this agenda forward .
Mr President , on a point of order , when the Commissioner quotes the WHO Essential Medicines ' List he knows that includes not just essential medicines , but the affordability of those medicines .
Therefore , the very medicines we are discussing are excluded from the list in question .
Mr Howitt , you can communicate it in writing , thank you .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at noon .
Madam President , I believe you have been told about the discussion which took place in the House this morning at the opening of the sitting .
It is not my intention to reopen the discussion , because I am sure that Vice-President Imbeni will have mentioned the matter to you .
We are looking forward to your answer , after voting time , if you prefer , because I imagine all the Members wish to vote .
Mrs Napoletano , I was indeed told about your speech at the beginning of the plenary sitting this morning .
However , you referred to a letter that Mr Tajani had sent to me .
I have not yet been able to read the translation of his letter , which I received towards the end of the morning , as the letter had to be translated and that was difficult to do overnight .
Of course , I will only be able to take a position when I have had the opportunity to read the letter that Mr Tajani sent to me .
I therefore give him the same answer : I am sorry .
It deals with a very delicate problem , that of the possible limitations on the freedom of expression of heads of State , Commissioners and Members of Parliament , which is a very serious problem .
Be assured that I am going to give it all the attention that the problem deserves .
VOTE
( Parliament adopted the draft protocol )
Draft regulation on specific restrictive measures against certain persons and entities with a view to combating international terrorism ( COM ( 2001 ) 569 - C5-0455 / 2001 - 2001 / 0228 ( CNS ) ) ( Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs )
Before the vote on the draft regulation
Wurtz ( GUE / NGL ) .
( FR ) Madam President , I would like to know if it is possible for each group to very briefly explain how it voted on this draft regulation .
I am sure you will understand .
This is an agreement that has been reached between all the groups .
Madam President , I would simply like to say that , of course , it goes without saying that my group is , completely and unequivocally , firmly opposed to terrorism and , therefore , in agreement with the principle of the Commission ' s proposal of depriving these terrorist organisations of their funds .
However , my group finds the method imposed on us unacceptable , in other words , having to decide urgently on a list that was sent to us by the United States without explanation ...
... and which could be changed outside our control .
This is why we cannot , unfortunately , approve this draft regulation as it is today .
( Applause )
( Parliament approved the Commission proposal )
Report ( A5-0313 / 2001 ) by Mr González Álvarez , on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council Directive on general product safety ( C5-0298 / 2001 - 2000 / 0073 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the joint text )
Motion for a resolution ( B5-0665 / 2001 ) , tabled by Mr Dupuis and others , on behalf of the TDI group , on the Extraordinary European Council meeting in Brussels
( Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution )
Joint motion for a resolution on the Extraordinary European Council meeting on 21 September 2001 in Brussels
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Joint motion for a resolution on the Stability and Growth Pact and the outcome of the informal meeting of the " Economic and Financial Affairs " Council held in Liège on 22 and 23 September 2001
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0286 / 2001 ) by Mrs Hieronymi , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on the third report of the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament and the Economic and Social Committee on the application of Directive 89 / 552 / EEC " Television without frontiers " ( COM ( 2001 ) 9 - C5-0190 / 2001 - 2001 / 2086 ( COS ) )
Before the start of the vote .
Madam President , I would like to declare an interest in the subject of this report .
Before the vote on recital H
Madam President , I request that the rapporteur and all the Members accept the following oral amendment with a view to replacing the original text of recital H with the following :
Whereas an urgent review of the " Television without frontiers " Directive is necessary .
It is more precise , more accurate and has the same meaning .
I request your acceptance .
Are there any objections to the inclusion of the oral amendment tabled by Mr Aparicio ?
President , as a rights holder I have a financial interest in television .
I will not partake in the vote today .
Are there any other colleagues who wish to say this ?
If so , I invite them to do so now .
Madam President , there is a mistake in the Spanish text , paragraph 6 , with reference to the word ' parents ' , which should come before primary and secondary schoolteachers .
I hope that translation will be corrected in the Spanish text .
Although there is widespread support for some other oral amendments which I was going to make , I understand there is opposition from the Greens so the only oral amendment that I wish to make now concerns paragraph 14 .
There is a genuine error and it should be amended to read , ' Calls on all developing countries to abolish tariffs and taxes on import of essential drugs and equipment in order to make healthcare more affordable . '
There is no tax when we export medicines from Europe or the United States , so the current paragraph is factually incorrect .
I hope Members will support this .
( Parliament indicated its agreement with the tabling of the oral amendment )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , I was somewhat surprised that , prior to voting on the Council ' s Regulation on the combating of international terrorism and the freezing of funds of terrorist organisations , we did not allow all the parties one minute ' s speaking time to outline their standpoint .
Indeed , it was agreed earlier with all the political parties that we would discuss this prior to voting in view of the urgency with which the material was presented and since we had no time for a debate .
It is a very important matter .
I therefore regret that we did not get that opportunity .
For the rest , I will submit the substance of our contribution in writing . But what concerns us is that we think it very important , where this proposal is concerned , that a judicial review should take place .
We are delighted with this proposal from the Committee . We are pleased that it is based on Article 308 of the Treaty .
This means that there is a role for the Court of Justice and this means that there is a role for the European Parliament .
We are very disappointed in the Council ' s rejection yesterday of this legal basis .
The Council has not understood the urgency of this proposal and has also failed to understand the need to base it on Article 308 .
By wishing to base it on various articles of the Third Pillar , the Council of course wants to exclude both the Court of Justice and the European Parliament .
It is a serious matter that should most certainly have been discussed in Parliament .
Mrs Buitenweg , I would like to answer you with regard to the way votes are conducted in this House .
I did of course scrupulously apply the Rules of Procedure .
I have to say that I was expecting every group to ask me for this minute of speaking time .
It was not my job to grant it by virtue of an agreement made in the corridors .
In fact , what should have happened and what I was expecting was for a number of Members , 32 to be precise , in order to comply with the Rules of Procedure , to request a debate , which in any case was not possible because we had voted on the topical and urgent debate and at that point the groups asked me for a minute each .
Mr Wurtz was the only one to make this request .
I was the most surprised of all , Mrs Buitenweg .
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE
To those colleagues who are asking for the floor for an oral explanation of vote on the procedures without report , I remind you that oral explanations of vote cannot be made for procedures without report .
I am sorry , that is the rule .
Does that come from the Rules of Procedure , Madam President ?
Yes , it is in Rule 137 :
" When a Commission proposal or report is on the agenda of Parliament pursuant to Rules 62 , paragraph 5 , or 114 , Members may submit written explanations of vote pursuant to Rule 1 . "

International terrorism ( C5-0455 / 2001 )
President , I have supported the request for specific measures against terrorism in particular because the right of judicial challenge to the European Court of Justice is enshrined in the legal base .
This has been clarified by the adoption of the amendments put forward by the Green Group in order to protect human rights .
Civil liberties , the infringement of which some are fearful of , should be protected as all procedures are subject to challenge at the European Court of Justice .
We cannot be neutral against terror .
Europe should support the US in finding and suppressing the terrorists but we should also have a long-term plan to deal with conflict resolution and to put in infrastructural support in places like Afghanistan where humanitarian aid is needed but is only a stopgap to a fully functioning society .
For years the European Parliament has called for the support of the civilian population in Afghanistan which has been the subject of terrorism from the Taliban .
Women in particular have suffered .
There have been increasing numbers of attacks on women throughout the region and in Kashmir by Islamic extremists who have thrown acid in their faces injuring them horribly in order to make them wear the burka , a full face covering .
While reaffirming our complete opposition both to terrorist methods and to the reactionary objectives pursued by those responsible for these acts , we refuse to associate ourselves will all of the proposals from the Council of the European Union .
The political leaders of the big imperial powers , both American and European , are trying to channel the legitimate emotions caused by the attacks in New York to serve a policy aimed solely at ensuring their domination over the world , and not at preserving the interests and the safety of the people .
We reject any initiative , even a partial one , aimed towards military operations , which would inevitably make victims of the people , who have nothing to do with terrorism .
Individual terrorism does not justify State terrorism or make it acceptable .
We protest against the measures restricting individual freedoms that this climate of war is bringing about .
As for the fight against the funding of terrorist groups , if the governments really want to conduct it they should immediately abolish banking secrecy and business secrecy .
The prevarications and measures in this area which are as limited as they are ineffective only prove that we prefer to put up with terrorist money and money from organised crime than to ensure total transparency , which could unveil multiple trafficking and ignominies in the capitalist system itself and the considerable wastage that it costs society .
We wish to once again affirm our complete and unequivocal condemnation of the terrorist acts witnessed in the United States of America , and the need to provide a response based on joint action and international cooperation within the UN that fully respects its Charter .
We must , however , state our strong disagreement with the method that the Commission has sought to impose in presenting its " draft regulation on specific restrictive measures directed against certain persons and entities with a view to combating international terrorism " .
As part of the fight against terrorism , we feel it is necessary to adopt measures for combating organised crime , which specifically involve attacking money-laundering and the various forms of trafficking and abolishing tax havens .
We feel it is unacceptable , however , that a list of organisations and individuals , possibly supplied by the government and intelligence services of the United States - a country which not so long ago opposed any monitoring of tax havens - should be submitted for the approval of the European Parliament , when no supporting evidence has been provided .
Furthermore , it is our view that the necessary fight against terrorism must not be used as a pretext for influencing essential aspects of sovereignty of the Member States of the European Union .
It cannot be repeated often enough that we support the fight against international terrorism and we approve of taking initiatives to freeze funds if it can be shown that they belong to , or come from , individuals or organisations that carry out acts of terrorism .
We recognise the need to react quickly but believe , at the same time , that thorough reflection is important .
The proposal for a regulation is an expression of the fact that the EU is in a position to take action , but not to reflect .
If we are not voting against Parliament ' s approval of the initiative , it is for the following reasons .
First of all , we do not believe that Parliament should be consulted on this issue , on which it has no influence .
We think it is completely unacceptable that Parliament should take a view on a regulation proposed by the Commission on the basis of the paper before us , which has been presented in a hurry and which Coreper criticises for lack of cohesion and consistency .
We believe that the procedure whereby Parliament is asked to approve the hasty adoption of the Council proposal is being used by the Council to legitimise a regulation on which thorough work has not been done .
The list attached to the proposal in Annex 1 is of organisations and individuals suspected of being directly or indirectly involved in acts of terrorism .
In our view , the fact that a list prepared in the United States has been approved without hesitation is a matter for criticism .
The proposal contains no guidelines as to how , or in accordance with which criteria , individuals or organisations are to be added to , or crossed off , the list , and it has not been specified which authorities are authorised to draw up the list and according to what principles .
We would criticise the fact that the proposal invalidates fundamental principles of a society governed by law , principles that protect those who have been accused against unfair and unlawful treatment .
It is a fact beneath contempt that the traditional , threefold division of power into legislative , judicial and executive authorities has been invalidated so that the EU can comply with the United States ' desire for rapid intervention .
At the same time , it must be emphasised that no infringement of these principles can justify acts of terrorism .
. ( SV ) Naturally , I agree without reservation with the total condemnation of terrorism which constitutes the stated motive for this regulation .
However , both the decision process and content of the regulation constitute an insult to that very democracy and rule of law whose protection is claimed to be the aim of the proposal .
The European Parliament has been forced into rushed action without any reports , debate or access to the text of the legislation in many languages , including Swedish .
No positive reason has been given to explain why normal forms of democratic decision-making have to be bypassed .
As it is the Member States which in the final analysis will implement the proposed freezing of suspected terrorists ' financial assets and as this must in any case be carried out through measures within each Member State , there is nothing to suggest that an EU regulation is required or that it will speed up the implementation of necessary measures .
At the same time , the regulation is a legal rush job and a mockery of all the grand statements to the effect that the fight against terrorism should not be perceived as a war against Islam or the Arab world .
The regulation contains no definition of terrorism , terrorists or terror organisations whatsoever .
Instead of the legislating body operating in the normal legal way by formulating a general definition of the crime and leaving it to the judicial system to trace , arrest , prosecute and judge those whose actions correspond to the definition of the crime confirmed by law , the legislating body , i.e. the Commission as proposer , the Council as decision-maker and the European Parliament as the body considering the proposal , has pre-empted the application of the law and circumvented the need for a definition of the crime by instead directly announcing 27 ' guilty ' organisations and people .
The origin of this list cannot be traced to any legal procedure whatsoever , but comes from the CIA .
The list contains a number of names with no more specific information - names which probably belong to several people .
In addition , all the names on the list are easily identifiable as Arabic / Muslim .
The result has been a diversion which is not needed in order for necessary measures to be taken in EU countries against terrorists ' financial assets , which breaches fundamental legal principles and which must also be perceived as a one-sided political attack on the Muslim / Arab world .
Through its decision to adopt a number of amendments , the European Parliament has pointed to possible ways of partly , but far from entirely , reducing the deficiencies to which attention has been called .
I believe it would have been more just of the European Parliament in this situation to have shown its dissatisfaction unambiguously by recommending the complete rejection of the Commission ' s proposal . In this way , the Commission would have been able to return with a new proposal which would have genuinely increased the chances of fighting terrorism , would have been based on legal principles and would have ruled out any suspicion that the proposal is one-sidedly directed against the Arabic / Muslim world .
Against this background , I , like a number of my colleagues in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , voted against the proposal in the final vote .
The Commission ' s proposal is not only contrary to Article 308 of the Treaty , but it also disregards elementary legal principles and the basic laws of the Member States .
The main reason why I cannot contribute to bringing about this legislation is that the effect of the Commission ' s proposal would quite simply be to abolish any form of legal protection .
Even suspected criminals are entitled to fair trials .
It is this fundamental right that the Commission would have us abolish .
The United States has issued the Commission with a list of 27 individuals and organisations .
We have not been given any proof of the activities of these 27 , not even the slightest explanation of why precisely these 27 should be judged without evidence and without trial .
What is being required of us is that we undertake to judge these 27 with blindfolds on - definitively and with no recourse to appeal .
We are to wield the rubber stamp here and now and , in classic Dr Strangelove style , shoot first and ask questions afterwards .
Are not democratic principles of law precisely what we wish to defend ?
What will be next in line if we give in now and accept that the end justifies the means ?
We have voted against this draft regulation because we do not think that appalling terrorist acts such as those on the World Trade Center can be opposed by violating fundamental freedoms .
This draft regulation quite simply asks us to trust the CIA in cutting off the means of subsistence from the 27 groups described , rightly or wrongly , as terrorists by the very agency which , more importantly , is behind some of them .
We did not wait for Mr Bush to denounce tax havens , but under no circumstances will we give his secret services a blank cheque .
The list , put forward with no explanation and which , we are warned , will be extended , no doubt in line with the interests of the USA and its allies , is only an alibi list when compared with the battle as a whole , against both tax havens and the perpetrators of death who profit from them .
As we definitely do not have the same definition of terrorism as Mr Bush , and as the list of the guilty remains open , we propose that the company TotalFinaElf should be added to it as the 28th organisation , as it is responsible for tens of thousands of deaths around the world and is directly linked to terrorist activities , particularly in Africa .
The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have today voted in favour of the European Parliament ' s amendment to the Council proposal for a regulation on specific arrangements placing restrictions upon certain persons and groups with a view to combating international terrorism .
We agree that the EU must combat international terrorism in all areas .
Nonetheless , we have general reservations about the proposal and , for example , reject the list of 27 terrorist organisations .
These organisations all appear to be Muslim , which may be construed as discrimination when there are also non-Muslim terrorist organisations .
These organisations ought , in the nature of the matter , to be included in the list , which cannot therefore be regarded as complete .
Moreover , we have reservations as to whether such a list can in practice be used at all .
I abstained on the final vote because although I agree with the principle behind this regulation , I cannot agree to the inclusion of Annex 1 .
This regulation speaks about International Terrorism generally and does not specifically refer to the events of September 11 .
Therefore it seems totally wrong for this Annex to be included which only refers to individuals and organisations who appear to be solely from the Islamic Community .
I am also concerned that the evidence against the people and organisations listed in the Annex has not been seen by European Parliamentarians and therefore we have not been able to decide for ourselves whether those listed are guilty of terrorism or not .
The European Parliament has been asked to act urgently and decisively to freeze funds that could be used for terrorists .
We have risen to this challenge , and in doing so have made essential amendments to protect liberties of innocent people .
I am personally proud of the amendment that demands action to give details that make persons named in the annex actually identifiable .
It would be absurd to go forward with a list of names that could refer ambiguously to thousands of people in the Islamic world , rolling innocent people in with sinister ones .
The Council of Ministers has called for speed and decisiveness .
We have responded and underlined the need for judicial safeguards fully compatible with decisive and immediate action .
We are effectively challenging the Council to keep faith with us and not delay matters by devising a new version without judicial safeguards .
We voted against this draft regulation for a number of reasons .
We strongly believe that granting such powers without proper debate and without a parliamentary report on the matter is legally questionable .
The fact that the protection of civil liberties is not addressed in the regulation is appalling , and the invoking of Article 308 sets a dangerous precedent for rushing through emergency legislation without any open and transparent debate .
It is also questionable whether the European Commission had the right to invoke this article in such circumstances and it could be in breach of some national constitutions .
The European Parliament was asked to vote on a list of 27 organisations without any explanation as to the basis under which they were chosen , who or what they are , and without any mention of safeguards if one of these organisations or persons was wrongfully accused .
We do not believe that the European Parliament has the right to act as judge and jury on such matters and most especially when the facts are not clearly explained in a transparent and open manner .
We of course welcome any new measures to combat terrorism ; however , such measures must be properly thought out and properly debated in a transparent and democratic manner , not , as happened this week , in a atmosphere of panic .
Any new measures must enshrine human rights , protect civil liberties and recognise the assumption of innocence , if they are to be truly effective .
. ( NL ) It is an old custom to isolate political opponents by labelling them terrorists .
When ex-terrorists became the leaders of South Africa , Israel , the Palestinian Authority and a very large number of former colonies , they suddenly became reasonable and respectable people in the eyes of many , and their former opponents were blamed - rightly so - for causing the violence .
By nipping in the bud every prospect of peaceful means towards a better life , they had driven the opposition to desperation .
That is why we must always draw a sharp distinction between opposition , in particular , campaigns resulting in socio-economic and administration changes , and irrational violence , which is only aimed at bringing about fear and destruction .
The American list of 27 suspected organisations with an Islamic background raises in some cases the suspicion that the support of governments in the battle against international terrorism is being bought by labelling their internal opponents terrorists as well .
We are , then , committing the same error as in making abortion , euthanasia and trading in soft drugs by inhabitants of Member States indictable offences where these are permitted by the legal administrations of other Member States .
In the justified battle against real terrorism , not everything now being proposed is fair and appropriate - not by a long chalk .
I do not agree with this ill-considered approach .
I believe that it is sensible to freeze the bank accounts of organisations or individuals who perpetrate or support acts of terrorism such as those which took place on 11 September 2001 .
What has been submitted here , however , is a list of individuals and organisations who are merely assumed to have been involved in some way in the terrorist attacks on New York and Washington .
However , it is possible to proceed against them , even without a judicial process or final proof .
Such a measure would be comparable with being remanded in custody , when suspects have not yet been found guilty in a court of law .
If no evidence of guilt is found , prisoners on remand are released and paid compensation .
No such provision is envisaged here .
Moreover , the clause contained in Article 2 ( 2 ) enables other unpopular persons and organisations to be included on this legally dubious list .
Given that the Justice and Home Affairs Council has already talked about urban violence in connection with terrorism , I fear that this will make it possible to freeze the bank accounts of individuals or organisations who demonstrate against the EU 's policies at European Councils , for example .
Had I voted in favour of this resolution , I would have given my support to a questionable and arbitrary act .
I therefore voted against the resolution despite my sharp condemnation of terrorism .
The members of the MPF group in this House have voted in favour of the Council regulation that makes provision for , following the Extraordinary European Council meeting in Brussels on 21 September , a number of measures to fight terrorism .
It is not the case that we think these measures in themselves constitute a total , satisfactory and coherent response to the formidable threat we face .
We simply think that it is a first step in the right direction and that we now need to tackle , without delay or taboos , the task of generally reviewing our legislation so that the intention expressed by the Presidency of the Council to conduct a policy against terrorism that is both ' global ' and ' sustainable ' does not remain some kind of mantra , but is something that can be translated into reality .

In this respect , some of the proposals made here yesterday by Minister Michel concern us , because they reflect the persistence among some of our leaders , despite the events of 11 September , of the same ' old way of thinking ' , to use Mr Gorbachev ' s expression , of the same ideological vein which for years has inspired , at European level , lax and demagogical measures with regard to the movement of people , which have led to us giving up control of our territory and have made the European Union an epicentre for Islamic terrorism .
When Mr Michel asserts that the wide-ranging legislative review advocated by our fellow member Mr Berthu that aims to make the safety of our people a priority ' leads straight towards a liberticidal society ' , he is adding to this confusion that is the root of all of our shortcomings .
Is it not as a result of seeing every removal of controls as a step towards freedom that we have paved the way for terrorists such as those who went on to attack the United States ?
The fact that any serious measure of control , particularly if it is a national measure , is still seen as a liberticidal proposal , says a great deal about how far there is to go before the old libertarian ideology is abandoned and before the debate can rise to the challenges we are having to face as a result of current events .
( Speech cut short pursuant to Rule 137 of the Rules of Procedure ) .
Extraordinary European Council ( RC B5-0666 / 2001 )
Calling an Extraordinary European Council meeting was undoubtedly the right move following the terrorist attack in the United States .
Naturally the European Union is being cautious in its response , so far at least , but there a number of sensitive points which merit special attention :
a ) the reference to Article 5 of the NATO Treaty , without specifying the country from which the attack has emanated , creates a particularly dangerous climate of war and reckoning ;
b ) police measures to combat terrorism must be limited by respect for citizens ' freedoms ;
c ) a policy needs to be defined towards " friendly " countries such as Saudi Arabia , which have helped by funding the spread of fundamentalism ;
d ) resolving the Palestinian question , especially the problem of Jerusalem , will release huge numbers of Muslims from under the spell and control of Islam ;
e ) fundamental intervention in the global problem of poverty will free whole societies in Asia and Africa from the despair which feeds terrorism ;
f ) the European Union must avoid Mr Berlusconi 's divisiveness and Mr Blair 's sermonising and take a calm and friendly approach towards Islam .
We wish , once again , to state our total condemnation of the terrorist acts witnessed in the United States and , once again , pay respect to the suffering and the struggle of the victims ' families and of the American people and call for the fight against terrorism not to contribute to creating more victims .
The fight against international terrorism will only be totally effective if it is carried out under the auspices of the United Nations and this is why we specifically reject the use of Article 5 of the NATO Treaty , which runs the risk of dragging the European Union and the international community into a spiral of violence with incalculable consequences .
It is also our view that the fight against terrorism , which is , of course , necessary , must not be used as a pretext to undermine individuals ' fundamental rights , freedoms and protection under the law , or affect essential aspects of the sovereignty of the European Union ' s Member States , including militarisation .
What we do feel is important is that , in parallel with the fight against international terrorism , we pursue the fight against money laundering , including the abolition of tax havens .
Our vote , therefore , reflects our profound disagreement with some of the joint resolution ' s main aspects , voted for by a majority in plenary , although we support most of the remaining points .
I voted against the resolution for several reasons .
I believe that bringing to justice those responsible for the terrorist attacks in the United States should not mean suffering and terror for other innocent people .
It is vital that any action taken in response to these atrocities does not trigger more attacks like it or even worse .
The international community has a duty to seek to understand what may have led to these terrible crimes .
It must try to understand because to refuse to do so will contribute to the likelihood that much worse lies ahead .
I believe that the United States , and the coalition of countries that has been formed , must be sensitive to global security as a whole .
If the US responds with attacks on Afghanistan it too will be killing innocent people and two wrongs never make a right .
I strongly feel that we , as politicians in the democratic world , have a great responsibility to uphold the principles of non-violence and to ensure that such unjustifiable violence does not escalate .
. ( NL ) The fact that people should kill themselves and many others in the terrible manner of 11 September in New York and Washington is a sign of hate and desperation .
You can only combat terrorism by helping to remove the breeding ground for violence , not by causing yet more outrage .
The way in which Israel seeks out and liquidates violent Palestinian opponents only appears to evoke more sympathy for violent resistance .
There is now the threat of that very mistake being repeated on a global scale .
When it comes to matters of climate , armament and racism , the US President sought isolation .
The formation of a coalition of the rich and powerful , led by him , against the poor and rebellious will be counter-productive in the long run .
I side with the only American politician who had the courage to vote against the warmongering , following in the footsteps of those few German socialist dissenters at the beginning of the First World War .
The money we are about to waste on war would be better spent on prevention .
Within Europe , this would involve making ourselves as secure as possible against attacks , something which would be possible if we did not privatise airport security and air traffic safety and if we paid closer attention to safety standards for very tall buildings .
Outside of Europe , it would involve helping to solve the problems of poverty , neglect and injustice .
British Conservatives strongly support measures which are specifically designed to combat terrorism in all its forms .
In this spirit therefore , we have supported the motion for a resolution and the counter-terrorist legislative measures being adopted by Council .
However , we do not support the proposition that ' combating international terrorism implies a distinct strengthening of the relevant EU competencies ' , or that the EU should have responsibility for negotiating agreements on judicial and police cooperation with the US , which are properly a national responsibility , given the very different constitutional , judicial and operational traditions of key Member States such as the United Kingdom .
We see no connection between the need for a resolute response to the recent terrorist attacks and the call for intensification of efforts to operationalise the European Security and Defence Policy .
On the contrary , recent events underline the need for stronger transatlantic ties , and an enhancement of NATO , rather than the potentially divisive pursuit of some autonomous EU military capability .
In addition , we wish to ensure that any new counter-terrorist legislation is also used to bear down on those terrorist organisations , such as the IRA in all its forms , and ETA , that have been conducting terrorist campaigns from and within EU Member States over the past several decades .
Stability and Growth Pact ( RC B5-0602 / 2001 )
The collapse of liberal dogmas is becoming increasingly apparent .
The ' stability pact ' and the anti-democratic powers that the European Central Bank has been given operate in an extremely restrictive fashion , at a time when radical change in the direction of European integration is becoming particularly pressing .
The demonstrations by trades unions and other organisations that arose as a result of the meeting of the Ecofin Council in Liège and debates at the European Citizens ' Congress have highlighted the urgency of the social and democratic demands made by movements that are opposed to the prospect of globalisation in line with the current capitalist globalisation .
The Ecofin Council , however , once again demonstrated its inability to communicate .
It did not make any proposal in proportion to what is at stake .
Its debates continue to be characterised by a total lack of transparency and responsibility , as illustrated by the fate of the Tobin tax .
Ministers went back on their public commitments in referring the matter to the Commission , which we know is hostile to such a decision , no matter how elementary it may seem .
In the same vein , the burning question of tax havens was only voluntarily broached from the specific angle of the fight against terrorism .
The governments of the Union are not yet ready to change direction .
This is the fundamental issue hidden behind the joint resolutions put forward for the vote .
And this is the reason why we will vote against them .
Japan is now experiencing a recession .
The United States are not far behind , Europe is seeing considerably less growth and a recession is not completely out of the question .
In order to prevent a global recession , it makes perfect sense to boost economic activity by means of coordinated action with Japan and the United States , through increasing public expenditure up to a limit of 3 % of the public deficit of each EU Member State , on the condition that :
the purpose of increasing expenditure is to improve public investment and to encourage private investment ; and
at the same time , efforts are redoubled to implement structural reforms that stimulate employment , investment and competitiveness .
The Stability and Growth Programme must , therefore , be made more flexible , in addition to the flexibility resulting from ' automatic stabilisation ' , and this is why I abstained on the motion for a resolution tabled by the PPE-DE Group .
Hieronymi Report ( A5-0286 / 2001 )
The adoption of the " Television without Frontiers " directive was a milestone in Community legislation .
Yet , here we are , over ten years on , and the editorial changes needed to protect viewers and European cultural productions have still not been made .
Below are the three most important points :
a ) viewers need to be protected from the flood of advertisements by strengthening the binding arrangements in the directive and controlling and punishing televisions stations which infringe them ;
b ) minors need general protection at Community level from advertising and from programmes which desensitise them to violence and anti-social behaviour ; and
c ) stricter , specific measures are needed to promote European productions and make it easier for producers in small countries to break into the wider European market .
, Färm , Hedkvist Petersen , Hulthén , Hans Karlsson , Theorin ( PSE ) , in writing .
( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats believe that it is vital that minors be protected from television advertising aimed at children , as this group is particularly susceptible and may have difficulty differentiating advertising from other programming .
In Sweden , TV advertising aimed at children under 12 is totally forbidden under the Swedish Radio and Television Act .
According to Directive 97 / 36 / EC , advertising must be clearly identifiable as such .
Children under a certain age cannot appreciate the difference between advertising aimed at children and normal children ' s programmes .
Slightly older children can appreciate the differences but not understand the purpose of the advertising . ( Research report by Gunilla Jarlbro of Gothenburg University ) .
We therefore believe that this must not be promoted , which is why we are voting against this part ( paragraph 1 aa ) of the report .
First and foremost , I must thank both our rapporteur in the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , Mrs Hieronymi and the whole of the Committee for the high-quality work they put before us and their interesting reaction to the third report from the Commission to the Council , the EP and the ESC on the application of Directive 89 / 522 / EEC " Television without frontiers " , whose main objective is to put a legal framework in place to promote the free movement of audiovisual broadcasting services within the single market and to guarantee certain general interests such as the promotion of cultural diversity and the protection of consumers and of minors .
Many reasons can be given to justify my vote in favour of this report ; I shall simply mention them .
Taking into account that 98 % of homes have a television , the report firstly and quite rightly points out that the social impact of television is becoming increasingly significant , especially for children .
Meanwhile , regarding the protection of minors , the report asks the Member States to step up their dialogue , to define common solutions without threatening their independence in terms of national restrictions for the protection of minors .
This can be put in another way by saying that the audiovisual sector plays an essential role in democracy and informing the people , and is therefore emerging as a reflection of the level of freedom of expression and plurality of ideas that can be expressed and understood .
Moreover , the report also highlights the extent to which the audiovisual sector is a leading sector both in the economy and for employment in the European Union : in 1997 , the audiovisual sector employed more than a million people in Europe and its revenue should increase by 70 % between now and 2005 .
( Speech cut short pursuant to Rule 137 of the Rules of Procedure )
Berès Report ( A5-0307 / 2001 )
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , on 1 January 2002 , economic and monetary union will be completed .
For each Member State , there will be a continued and binding obligation and need to consolidate public budgets on a sustained basis .
This is set out not only in the Commission report but also by the rapporteur herself .
I fully support this objective .
I therefore welcome the report 's proposal that the current requirements of the Stability and Growth Pact be expanded with new and individual objectives for each country .
Consolidating the public budget is the main priority for every government in order to create the required scope for action .
As a representative of Austria , I know what I am talking about .
Despite all the difficulties and a mountain of debt , the new government is working to ensure that the ambitious goal of achieving a zero deficit remains in place .
Färm , Hedkvist Petersen , Hans Karlsson ( PSE ) , in writing .
( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats have abstained from voting in the vote on paragraph 2 and recital B.
Paragraph 2 :
It is good that the Eurogroup is developing its cooperation on monetary issues .
However , to transfer all cooperation on economic policy to the Eurogroup would be wrong .
We do not , therefore , support a possible amendment to the Treaty in order to strengthen the Eurogroup ' s powers in the economic area , in any case not until we have more concrete proposals .
Against the background of EU enlargement , it is particularly important that Member States outside the Eurogroup have the opportunity to take part in economic cooperation .
Recital B :
We do not wish to give our support to progressively binding legislation in the economic area , at least not until we know more about the specific implications .
The report makes the indisputable observation that " Economic Europe is not yet a reality " .
The reasons for this are no mystery .
Each national State is , more than anything else , concerned with protecting the interests of its own capitalist class and favours national policy most suited to that objective .
The ruling classes have no need , however , for the European institutions to harmonise their policies , apart from settling national rivalries , in order to improve the profitability of their capital to the detriment of the working classes .
In terms of freezing salaries , widespread lack of job security , mass redundancies , savings on public services and attacks against social protection , capitalist Europe has no need for institutional harmonisation in order to be united .
The Bérès report considers that " sound public finance " is the prime condition for " strengthening economic policy coordination within the euro area " .
However , it does not say how that financial balance should be reached .
Who should pay ?
Capitalist companies or consumers through VAT ?
Who should benefit more from budgetary spending ?
Public services or private employers ?
Without tax gifts to capitalist companies , budgets could be used more for public services without being in deficit as a result .
This is clearly not the line taken in the report .
Under these circumstances there was no question of us supporting it with our vote .
The Berès report is interesting because it acknowledges the failure of a social liberalism that thought it could combine acceptance of the Treaty of Amsterdam with genuine social policies in Europe .
The report advocates the coordination of economic policies , but realises that the institutions that could perform this do not exist .
The ECB is obsessed with one single issue , Parliament is powerless , and the Eurogroup is semi-clandestine .
The report simply begs it to please keep Parliament informed .
The report does however contain a large amount of truth , as throughout there is concern about the institutional void and regressive policies that risk being implemented under the influence of neo-liberal dogma .
But instead of saying out loud what is being discussed increasingly widely , that it would be reasonable not to apply the Stability Pact , the report is content to advocate coordination of ' their respective stability programmes ' .
This quite pitiful desire to limit damage cannot make us forget that the shackles were put in place with the active support of liberal socialists , particularly in Italy and France .
This is why we did not lend our support to vague and ill-conceived orders that , more than anything , serve to make us forget that we have in fact made a huge mistake .
. ( EL ) A single currency requires a single economic policy .
This , basically , is the conclusion drawn by both the Commission report and the rapporteur 's report .
Member States are being further restricted in the exercise of economic policy to a framework of decisions taken in advance and national parliaments are required to do no more than observe or , even worse , execute decisions taken by the ÅU .
This is an attempt to undermine the workers ' facility to react , as they are doing more and more decisively , to the choices made by big business .
The EC report welcomes the EU 's anti-grass roots policy and includes proposals whose sole function is as an alibi for the rampantly neo-liberal economic and social policy of the ÅU and the tragic impact which it has on the lower classes , such as prior agreement on the allocation of fortuitous or exceptional tax revenue - just to make sure nothing is spent on the social security sector .
Integrating the " issue of the ageing population " into national budgets is another move in the same direction .
While the report posits that unemployment still affects 14 million Europeans and that the economic and social situation has not improved , it remains faithful to the policy of structural change and unemployment sharing .
The involvement of the national parliaments in the form of an annual evaluation of the application of the broad economic policy guidelines decided in the European Council and the debate on the stability programmes approved by the Commission and the Council , are no more than a semblance of democracy , the aim of which is to entrap national representations in Community procedures , especially when it is proposed to strengthen the role of the Commission and impose sanctions on Member States which fail to apply the economic policy imposed by Brussels .
It is an attempt to make national institutions accessories to a process which , on the pretext of coordinating economic policies within the broad economic policy guidelines , is further subjugating wage measures and social policy measures in general to the suffocatingly restrictive criteria for cohesion and of the Stability Pact .
The Member States are expressly called on to " coordinate their actions and refrain from adopting tax , budgetary or wage policies " .
The break-up of the guaranteed national insurance system , in conjunction with wage cuts and the fact that working hours and costs are arranged to suit employers , are demonstrably increasing poverty and social exclusion among the working classes and reducing the quality and extent of services offered .
Obviously , the more measures passed to restrict income and workers ' rights , the greater the pressure for more structural measures , and the more the signs of slump in the economy increase , the stricter austerity policy becomes .
Peijs report ( A5-0306 / 2001 )
I voted in favour of the excellent report presented to us by Mrs Peijs for the following reasons .
As we all know , the last 30 years have seen an excessive increase in public spending in Europe , which has forced Member States to raise taxes to an unsustainable level .
It is , therefore , crucial that we reduce the tax burden , by implementing the reforms necessary to achieve this , so as to improve incentives for employment and for business activity .
The attempt that is being made to define a sustainable method of tax relief is , therefore , to be applauded .
I hope that the Commission will continue in its efforts to guide national governments ' approach to tax relief , specifically by establishing a ' code of conduct ' .
With regard to the issue of trying to ensure that the largest possible proportion of the active population has access to the labour market , it is essential that we abolish the social , fiscal and administrative obstacles preventing women and older people from returning to work and / or from remaining in work .
This is particularly important because features of demographic change have been - as the United Nations ' report for 2000 quite rightly points out - a slowdown in the growth of the population of active age and the increase in the population over 65 years old , which raises the enormous concern of maintaining the social security system or even of trying to prevent potential economic hardship arising as a result of having an insufficiently large workforce for our labour markets .
It is equally important that we give priority to the access of young people to the labour market as well as to lifelong learning , which will require an increase in public and private spending in the fields of education , research and development , along with , of course , the respective structural reforms , so that the effective transition to a knowledge-based society can go ahead .
This report demonstrates little concern for the social and economic situation of certain Member States and dwells on the need to pursue budgetary consolidation and compliance with the Stability Pact .
This is a very short-sighted position , which is why we propose it be removed .
What is really required is the immediate suspension of the Stability Pact and a thorough review of its objectives , criteria and bases .
We also disagree with the idea that public investment is not a solution to the crisis or that it is generally poorly managed and led , which is why we have tabled a proposal for an amendment that highlights the importance of public investment for economic growth and employment .
A degree of commitment to solving social problems , job creation and combating social exclusion and poverty require no longer attaching priority to maintaining monetary stability at all costs , when we know that the consequences of this will be further unemployment , wage caps and more poverty .
Deplorably , the various amendments we tabled on a thorough rewording of the report have not been adopted .
The Peijs report is a true neo-liberal anthem that portrays public finances and social protection as the root of all evil .
For example , the report contrasts inevitably " ill-managed " public investment with the private sector , which is , naturally , efficient .
Its main function is to once again affirm the neo-liberal dogma codified in the " Stability Pact " signed in Amsterdam in 1997 , and to condemn the adjustments suggested at the Gothenburg summit on automatic stabilisers .
Now that the economic climate is changing due to a persistent wage moderation policy , the report affirms the right to inflict a fresh recession on Europe .
It advocates blindly applying a policy that everyone will notice goes against the announced objectives for growth and employment .
When the economy slows down , the Stability Pact contributes to the chaos by slowing business down , because in reality it aims to achieve an unemployment level that will bring salaries back down and increase profits .
We must vote against this report , as applying it would pose a genuine danger to the workers of Europe .
. ( NL ) Fluctuations , with their peaks and troughs , are characteristic of a market economy .
At times of economic stagnation of growth or when consumption levels fall , there is no sense in talking people into unrealistic optimism .
This would be a form of deceit and would lead to recklessness in consumption and risk-bearing investment .
It would be better to expand existing governmental provisions or to introduce new ones .
This was the method successfully used in America under Roosevelt during the ' 30s crisis , and with which western Europe was successfully rebuilt after 1945 .
For that matter , it was also the method by which authoritarian states such as Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union were able to build economies which were much stronger than outsiders had predicted .
In all those cases , whether we agreed with them or not , the result was an unexpected number of satisfied people .
Instead of learning from that , we now see a reversion to the primitive standpoints of the 19th and early 20th centuries preceding these successes .
Tax reductions , in favour of high incomes and big business , are now considered to be positive , while government spending is considered to be very negative .
The report by Mrs Peijs fits in with this now predominant trend .
As I expect poverty and instability as a result , I am not in favour .
Longo report ( A5-0299 / 2001 )
Prominent in this report is a whole set of demands for speeding up the process of liberalisation in various sectors .
It even criticises the Stockholm European Council for not having fixed a timetable for the definitive liberalisation of the gas and electricity markets , which is unacceptable .
We also reject its call for Member States to move ahead rapidly and in a uniform way on opening up the energy , transport and postal services markets .
It therefore comes as no surprise that it attacks the public monopolies , specifically in the field of electricity , that it calls for the local call market to be opened up or that it considers that the privatisation and liberalisation of public services will lead to lower prices and higher quality .
. ( EL ) The real world today is a world in which huge monopolies abuse dominant market position , where gigantic companies merge , consolidate or are taken over on a daily basis and where monopoly groups acquire terrifying power , invariably accompanied by thousands of redundancies , which have a huge impact on employment , and the monopolisation of wealth-creating resources , markets and consumers .
There were 345 new mergers in 2000 , to quote the report , thanks to increasingly flexible legislation which fosters the creation of large monopolies which acquire dominant market positions .
However , this is of no concern to the ÅU .
What does concern it is setting a timetable for the definitive liberalisation of the natural gas and electricity markets , speeding up the rate at which the energy , transport and postal services markets are liberalised and safeguarding universal access to services of general interest , in order to improve the competitiveness of the economy .
It is also concerned with abolishing state aid .
However , the desperate attempt to abolish state aid is really an attempt to increase the profits of the already strong players and to consolidate their market position by excluding new competitors and applying the law of the jungle , the law of might is right and the supremacy of monopoly interests .
State intervention does not , of course , touch the heart of the capitalist system and it often strengthens companies and businesses on a selective basis .
However , without state intervention , even with the tiny , balancing role which it can play , the gulf will widen constantly to the detriment of less developed areas and sectors and the poorest sections of society , given that structural measures and denationalisation are carried out not for their benefit but to strengthen the profitability of big business .
That is why the constant pressure for measures such as the proposed register of state aid and the subsidy scoreboard is intolerable .
All the choices made by big business illustrate how worried it is about the possible renationalisation of competition policy ( i.e. control by the Member States , not the Commission of the European Union ) , which is why the report proposes an international competition system in the framework of the WTO .
The competition policy applied has resulted in large branches of European industry dismissing workers and losing important shares of the global market and hundreds of thousands of jobs .
The disgraceful concentration of power , in strategically important sectors , has put the economy of entire countries in the hands of speculative multinational groups , with everything that implies for the workers .
The loss of hundreds of thousands of jobs has caused unemployment to spiral .
The workers are facing the biggest attack yet on their employment and social rights , they are watching their standard of living being eroded , poverty spread and the public sector and productive base in most countries in the Union being restructured and dissolved in the name of rampant and catastrophic competition , in the name of an absolute market economy and in order to promote the monopoly aspirations of big business .
That is why protests against globalisation and the prevalence of the uncontrolled rules of the market economy are growing day by day .
We consider that the competition policy applied is responsible for all this and we intend to express our complete opposition to it by voting against the report .
Huhne report ( A5-0301 / 2001 )
In spring last year , together with the Council , we adopted the Electronic Commerce Directive which is due to come into force on 17 January 2002 .
The pillar of this Directive is the country of origin approach .
When the report before us was discussed in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs for the first time , I was surprised to find that some members of the relevant Committee wanted to call this country of origin approach into question again for online financial services .
Yet this is quite absurd .
If the European Parliament and the Lisbon European Council have set a deadline of 2005 for establishing an integrated market in financial services , we cannot afford to adopt incoherent legislation or keep re-examining decisions which have already been taken , unless we have very good reason to do so .
This applies not only to some Members of this House but also to the Council , whose vote last Thursday on the Directive on Distance Marketing of Financial Services I greatly regret .
We opted for the country of origin approach - so we should now apply it in a targeted and coherent fashion .
I would also like to join the rapporteur in congratulating the Commission on its initiative in establishing the European Extrajudicial Network ( EEJ-NET ) and the Financial Services Complaints Network ( FIN-NET ) .
Simple , cost-effective , non-judicial procedures for cross-border redress can only enhance consumer confidence in the development of cross-border financial services .
Naturally , consumers must be made aware of the existence of these networks , and I therefore also support the proposal that all websites providing online financial services should advertise these networks .
Berger report ( A5-0310 / 2001 )
The services sector is of fundamental importance to the future development of the European Union ' s economy and already accounts for the largest share of its GDP and more than two-thirds of employment . It therefore deserves our full attention to ensuring improvements in its quality and to maintaining employment .
The main concerns of the Commission , however , as stated in its communication , focus on establishing an internal market for services , studying the obstacles to the free movement of services across national borders , proposing their removal , and working towards speeding up the liberalisation of postal services , the distance selling of financial services , acquisition proposals and value added tax on digital products .
The rapporteur , as well as agreeing with the Commission proposal , highlights the need to speed up and complete the process of liberalisation in sectors such as postal services , electricity and energy , which we are bound to reject , since , in general , this is designed to demote the State to a role of merely regulating the activities of public services , establishing supposedly independent regulatory bodies , which are directly or indirectly controlled by economic and financial groups .
By and large , the results of liberalisation are redundancies , increased prices for public service provision , a reduction in the quantity and quality of service provision and the rejection of the right of universal access to public services .
Khanbai report ( A5-0263 / 2001 )
The Khanbhai report makes an extraordinary analysis of one of the most serious challenges facing the world today ; the fight against the main communicable diseases in the context of poverty reduction .
Communicable diseases kill around 10 000 people every day in Africa , with 35 million people throughout the world contaminated with Aids .
HIV / Aids , malaria and tuberculosis are , therefore , a terrible threat to the social and economic development of the poorest communities , and as Mr Khanbhai argues , require a rapid , effective and wide-ranging response , in which the EU must take the lead .
These diseases cause not only human suffering and an extremely high number of deaths , which are in themselves justification enough for such a response , but also cause a drastic reduction in life expectancy and in the labour force , with all the social and economic consequences that this entails They seriously disable large working populations , retard social and economic development and destabilise communities that are already weakened .
I therefore agree with the rapporteur when he states the urgent need to create an Infectious Disease Fund , which is crucial to providing medical treatment for those affected , to identifying carriers , to prevention and research and to the development of new medicines and vaccines .
. ( NL ) In questions to the European Commission , I have already on a number of occasions strongly recommended measures to ensure that medicines to combat prevalent fatal diseases are available to inhabitants of the Third World .
Remedies against tropical diseases are often available to foreign tourists from rich countries , but not to the large majority of the local population .
Existing medicines , which have worked effectively for many years , are even being withdrawn from the market .
The reason for this is the lack of spending power in those countries to buy these medicines .
If we see medicines as mere commodities , protected by patent rights which ensure that the cost of earlier development expenditure is forever passed on , there will be no medicines available to poor countries and certainly not to their poorest inhabitants .
Such medicines often cost more than the annual income of people living there .
The proposals by Mr Khanbhai for international recognition by the EU of the right of developing countries to produce generic treatments for epidemic diseases without having to pay the costs of intellectual property rights , as well as the stimulation of production of treatments for diseases caused by poverty and the periodical review of the TRIPs agreement are essential to reach a solution .
The report makes a number of good points .
However , they pale before the sheer extent of the misery and shame suffered by millions of people throughout the world , especially in undeveloped countries , where they are still living in poverty , deprived of even basic access to health , and dying from infectious diseases such as malaria , tuberculosis , AIDS and so on .
It is even more of a disgrace when there is the certain prospect - based on official studies and research - that the situation will get worse .
The acceptance that health is a " global public good " , as the report rightly points out , cannot be reconciled with the fact that a large proportion of the world 's population is deprived of access to education , housing , employment , food , safe drinking water , conditions of hygiene and health services .
More than 5 million people a year die from infectious diseases , mainly in underdeveloped countries , while a handful of multinational pharmaceutical monopolies continue to patent , profit from and speculate with drugs , even going so far as to withdraw drugs which , although they save lives , fall short of profit targets .
It is not right to channel any additional resources for developing research to the private sector in the form of incentives rather than to public research centres .
It is insulting and hypocritical to state that the " global public good " of health is being hit particularly hard in underdeveloped countries , while at the same time imposing structural changes on these countries by reducing expenditure on the public service sector , especially the health and education sectors .
It is unacceptable to rely on the " charity " of non-governmental organisations ( NGOs ) for action to safeguard this " global good " and to trust in " better cooperation " and " partnership " between the public sector , NGOs and the private sector .
Health is a fundamental and inalienable human right , it is the most important factor of social justice and human dignity and it cannot be ruled by market regulations and the laws of profit .
It is of prime and capital importance to use public-sector means to fight disease and secure the right to health .
However , a radical approach to the problem involves hitting at the root of poverty , at what sustains and exacerbates it .
The report hardly even touches on this sort of solution to the problem , making do with regurgitating constantly repeated " analgesic " announcements and proposals .
Overturning the social policy system and policies which apply the established imperialist and monopoly interests which generate and spread poverty and misery , which have no hesitation in crushing and sacrificing entire populations and nations to their cause , is the only solution to the problem .
TOPICAL AND URGENT DEBATE
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
Support for a framework agreement in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
The first item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5-0617 / 2001 by Mr Haarder , on behalf of the ELDR Group ;
B5-0626 / 2001 by Mrs Pack and Mr Posselt , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group ;
B5-0634 / 2001 by Mrs Muscardini , on behalf of the UEN Group ;
B5-0643 / 2001 by Mr Swoboda and Mr Wiersma , on behalf of the PSE Group ;
B5-0653 / 2001 by Mrs Morgantini , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group ;
B5-0660 / 2001 by Mr Lagendijk and others , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group ,
on support for a framework agreement in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
Mr President , I think that two messages must be sent to Macedonia today .
The first should be to the government of Macedonia .
Much gratitude should be conveyed , as well as admiration expressed , for the courage demonstrated by the Macedonian government in proposing amendments to the constitution and giving the Albanian minority the place required by a modern democracy .
It has been difficult , and the European Union must express its heartfelt gratitude to the Macedonian government for what it has done .
The second message I think we should convey to Macedonia should be addressed to the NLA , or what is known as the liberation movement .
It will be appreciated that this originally emerged under Milosevic - I shall not go through the whole story - but now there is only one thing to say to the NLA and to its remnants in northern Macedonia , and that is : the struggle is over now ; all weapons must be handed in now ; there is now no reason at all for the NLA to continue with the activities of which it has been guilty - and I use the word ' guilty ' advisedly , for the NLA is of course a very mixed organisation , certain aspects of which do not bear too close examination .
Now , the Albanian population has been accorded its full civic rights .
That is the way to solve problems involving minorities .
I myself come from a border area between Denmark and Germany , in which we solved all the problems 45 years ago by according both minorities , north and south of the border , full rights in a modern democracy .
That is what Macedonia has now also chosen to do .
It is the right way , and both parties deserve our thanks .
Mr President , although our views on the NLA might differ slightly , I endorse Mr Haarder 's comments that the task now is to preserve peace .
Peace is still a precarious commodity in Macedonia , perhaps because faith in a shared solution , a shared state and a shared society is not yet fully established .
This is not surprising , for something like this takes longer than sitting at a negotiating table and engaging in negotiations .
However , if we look at the Framework Agreement , I think it is very important that renouncing violence is the first priority .
This is a democracy ; it does not need violence to bring about change .
In a democracy , it must be possible to talk about change , conduct negotiations and then bring forth legislation to achieve change .
The second point is the country 's integrity .
We do not need new borders or new states painstakingly drawn along some sort of ethnic lines , but which can never be drawn precisely .
We only need to look at the capital Skopje to see how impossible this is .
I have never understood why both sides - even if only briefly - have actually talked about the option of dividing the country .
Thirdly , this is a multiethnic state .
Many countries are multicultural , but this is a multiethnic state with a significant Albanian minority which cannot treated in the same way as a five or six percent minority .
Its status must be enhanced .
Its status has been enhanced , and we think it is right that these minority rights are being expanded beyond the usual extent .
I believe that overall , a good compromise has been found .
We will be in Skopje in the next few days .
We will stress the need for the remaining necessary measures to be put in place .
For our point of view , this continual prevarication and threat that there will be no agreement and coordination after all , or that there may be recourse to violence once more , are incomprehensible and unacceptable .
I hope that just as we are able to discuss Macedonia with a greater sense of satisfaction today , this prevarication will give way to a genuine feeling of satisfaction and acceptance within the next month or so .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the weapons have been collected , so it is claimed .
The NLA has been dissolved , so it claims .
We all know that there are still a great many weapons in Macedonia , and the issue of a criminal association is still on the agenda .
It includes those who want it .
I still assume that most Albanians want it .
I also assume that most Macedonians want it .
However , the problem in many Slav Macedonian heads has not yet been resolved - otherwise , we would never have had the problem in the first place .
In recent years , nothing was done to enable the Albanian minority - a substantial 28 percent of the population - to participate genuinely as citizens on an equal footing .
If this issue had been addressed seven or eight years ago , instead of just two years ago , and if progressive measures had been taken to make all citizens equal , the rebels would not have had such an easy ride , in my view .
It is a pity - also for the Macedonian people - that it now looks as if there is only a response when criminal elements appear to be overrunning the country .
It is a pity , but it is the fault of all the political parties on the ground .
Ultimately , we have now achieved what this House has always asked for .
As Mr Swoboda has said , I would also like to remind you that we do not want a divided country .
Macedonia is a state .
It should continue to be a state , and it should not be divided along ethnic or national lines .
Anyone who considers this option puts the entire region at risk .
That is something which is extremely dangerous .
I very much hope that this new Parliament will also now try to implement the laws as quickly as possible .
The problem is that we are now hearing that what they have already voted for is being called into question again , and that sessions of parliament are constantly being postponed .
Obviously , there are reasons for this .
In Tetovo , for example , repeated attacks are being carried out on the Macedonian police .
We must ask ourselves why this is happening .
We must therefore be very diplomatic but firm with all our colleagues in Macedonia and ask them to make genuine efforts to progress with the Ohrid Agreement .
We must not allow any recourse to this dreadful idea of holding a referendum in order to put off these constitutional changes indefinitely .
That must not happen .
Hannes Swoboda , Joost Lagendijk and I will try to bring influence to bear on our Macedonian colleagues over the next two days .
I also think it is very important for an amnesty to be granted in whichever way is appropriate under the laws of the country , but this should not apply to crimes to be investigated in The Hague .
I think we should make a fine distinction here .
Naturally , I very much hope that the parliament will now put in place the laws necessary to strengthen local autonomy and give the minorities - which , after all , are majorities in some regions of the country - the opportunity to take genuine responsibility for their fellow citizens .
I think that if they pursue this course , as Johannes has said , we will have peaceful situations by the end of this year .
Mr President , we support the motion for a resolution , but we find it all very optimistic and hard to believe .
Did the August agreement really ensure that the multi-ethnic society and the single rule of law were in fact maintained ?
We say and we hope that it did .
But the only evidence we have at the moment is that weapons are being collected and the National Liberation Army has been disbanded .
However , we do know that determining in advance how many weapons would be handed in was hardly conducive to being taken seriously .
How were the numbers calculated ?
Just as we also know that it is the easiest thing in the world for a resistance movement to say that it is disbanding and then to regroup without further ado .
That is why we share the incredulity , the degree of difficulty which the Slav Macedonians appear to be having in making further progress .
We hope they will make progress .
We want to remain optimistic , but the only serious argument for being optimistic and supporting the line taken in the motion would be , first , a stable political line , not double and triple messages coming out of the European Union and ÍÁÔÏ , as has happened in the past , with catastrophic results at political level ; secondly , real , generous financial assistance - and soon - and , thirdly , to give European prospects to all the Balkan states at long last , and to this particular country as quickly as possible , so that there is a way out of the crisis , hope and prospects .

Mrs Pack has , I think , rightly pointed out that there are still many problems in front of us . But all in all , the peace process in Macedonia may still be considered a small miracle .
I fully agree with the words of Mr Haarder in congratulating the Macedonian government and pointing to the courage that government has shown .
Indeed , ladies and gentlemen , a Gordian knot has been cut .
The minority rights of the Albanians are guaranteed , the operation ' Essential Harvest ' has succeeded , the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Macedonia remains secure .
The multi-ethnic society is indeed being given another lease of life and dialogue is central to the parties . We must continue to pay attention to this region , to the whole of the Balkan region .
The Afghan crisis , the war on terrorism , must not distract our attention from this part of the world .
We must invest in the stability of the Balkans . We must invest in the stability of Macedonia .
We must ensure that sufficient support for the execution of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement is being granted .
We must provide good guidance for refugees returning home . We must see to the re-building of that country .
And I wish here to underline the words of Mrs Pack .
The political history of my own country has demonstrated that only forgiveness , only reconciliation can guarantee real peace in a country . And so amnesty for the revolutionaries is indeed important .
This does not mean the revolutionaries who may possibly be accused before the Court of Justice in The Hague .
It concerns the others , for whom a regulation is required .
I hope that our fellow MEPs who are departing tomorrow for Skopje will be able sufficiently to alert our counterparts over there to this problem .
I also fully support extension of the mandate of the European Agency for Reconstruction in that region .
Macedonia should be brought under the scope of that regulation , and I also hope that we as Members of the European Parliament will be paying enough attention to the work of the European Agency for Reconstruction , so that we may be sure that the European taxpayer ' s money is well spent in an efficient and timely manner in that region .
Mr President , if the constitutional changes and reform laws in Macedonia come into force - and we hope that this will happen soon - the country will have minority rights legislation which far outstrips the standards in the majority of European countries and most EU Member States .
We always talk very pompously about European standards - which , in reality , do not exist in this form - and often demand that other countries meet criteria which many of our own EU Member States are not prepared to comply with themselves .
Nonetheless , I am gratified by this positive development in Macedonia , not only in the wake of the most recent acts of violence but over the last two years since the Georgievski government embarked on a reform course in this area .
Once again , the violence has jeopardised this process .
I am pleased that the European Union and other international organisations , including NATO , have succeeded in shoring up the process , so that the reform course has not only continued but has actually improved and accelerated .
However , this should not be a reason for us to fob off the Macedonians with mere thanks , as it were .
Like Mr Haarder , I too believe that we owe them a debt of gratitude .
However , this gratitude must be of a practical nature .
We must finally take action in response to the scandalous handling of the issue of the country 's name .
We must finally take action on the financial resources for Macedonia , which must be used to benefit the country as a whole , including the very underdeveloped east and south and not just the capital or the few regions which were particularly affected by the crisis .
What is very important is that we must finally begin to recognise that this country is our partner , based on the Stabilisation and Association Agreement .
We do not need any special instruments , we do not need a ( pseudo ) protectorate status , which is obviously still being mooted in some circles , also in connection with the idea of special agencies etc .
I regard Macedonia as our partner .
The Association Agreement is the instrument through which we can channel our cooperation .
We must continue to work with Macedonia in partnership and assist it in its progression towards membership of the European Union .
Mr President , if the Macedonian Parliament accepts the constitutional changes forced by rebellion and foreign intervention , this means that the large Albanian majority in the north-west regain their rights .
Within the former Federal Socialist Republic of Yugoslavia , the Albanian language was the language of administration and education .
This right was suspended following the independence of Macedonia .
The situation is comparable with the language rights of the Hungarian minority on the southern edge of the equally new state of Slovakia .
National minorities which become a majority often appear to have no understanding for the other language groups within the territory of their state .
In 50 years ' time , the roles will be reversed as Albanians come to form the largest group in Macedonia .
Only through an agreement based on equality can two peoples find a way to live peacefully as good neighbours .
In that respect , much can be learned from the government structures of multi-lingual federal states such as Belgium , Switzerland and Spain .
From that perspective I can now , in contrast to 3 May , consent to support for Macedonia .
Mr President , the Commission fully shares Parliament 's view that the Framework Agreement of 13 August is crucial to peace and stability in FYROM and that the Macedonian Parliament should be urged to adopt the measures recommended under the agreement .
Commissioner Patten and EU High Representative Solana are in Skopje today to underline the importance of , and convey the urgent need for , constitutional changes and a revised law on local self-government , as foreseen under the agreement .
We face truly formidable challenges over the next few weeks and months in FYROM .
The EU is fully behind the Framework Agreement and is committed to providing financial assistance , including assistance for emergency aid and for measures in support of the agreement .
We have provided over EUR 10 m in humanitarian assistance through ECHO since the crisis began ; EUR 54.5 m under CARDS in 2001 , which includes a recent top-up of EUR 12 m for housing reconstruction , local infrastructure and support for host families ; EUR 12.8 m under the Rapid Reaction Mechanism to repair and reconstruct houses , to repair electricity and to support confidence-building measures , such as mine clearance , election monitoring and police training ; and EUR 50 m in macro-financial assistance still to be disbursed from a previous macro-financial package , which is being combined with an additional grant of EUR18 m to help FYROM cope with the specific needs arising from the crisis .
This assistance is , of course , conditional on an IMF agreement with the Macedonian Government .
The Commission and the World Bank are ready to organise a donor meeting on 15 October , provided that the Macedonian Parliament adopts the necessary constitutional changes set out in the Framework Agreement .
It is not an overstatement to say that the effective delivery of EU assistance could be critical to the success of the Framework Agreement and , therefore , to peace .
Our paramount concern is to ensure that we act quickly and flexibly .
We have therefore decided to propose an extension of the European Agency for Reconstruction , which has an excellent track record in delivering assistance throughout the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia .
The agency has people on the ground and direct experience in the region , notably in the sort of emergency reconstruction that we will need to deliver in FYROM this autumn , as well as in longer-term assistance of the type it is now overseeing , for example in Serbia .
We therefore urge Parliament to give positive consideration to our proposal to extend the mandate of the agency .
Beyond the Framework Agreement , we are determined to pursue a strategy of closer integration of FYROM into the European mainstream , simply , first of all , by implementing the new Stabilisation and Association Agreement signed in April .
A lot has to be done in this area and FYROM must demonstrate that it can live up to international standards by respecting minority rights and show that its democratic structures are stable enough for it to pursue its path towards European integration - in simple terms , to become a member of the European family .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 6.30 p.m.
Human rights
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
United Nations World Day
B5-0616 / 2001 by Mr Lannoye and others , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group ;
B5-0619 / 2001 by Mr Van den Bos , on behalf of the ELDR Group ;
B5-0627 / 2001 by Mrs Hermange , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group ;
B5-0635 / 2001 by Mr Ribeiro e Castro , on behalf of the UEN Group ;
B5-0644 / 2001 by Mr Hughes and others , on behalf of the PSE Group ;
B5-0654 / 2001 by Mrs Figueiredo and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group ,
on the United Nations World Day to overcome extreme poverty .
Vietnam - B5-0620 / 2001 by Mr Maaten , on behalf of the ELDR Group ;
B5-0623 / 2001 by Mr Dupuis and others , on behalf of the TDI Group ;
B5-0628 / 2001 by Mr Nassauer and Mr Posselt , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group ;
B5-0636 / 2001 by Mr Segni , on behalf of the UEN Group ;
B5-0646 / 2001 by Mr Van den Berg , on behalf of the PSE Group ;
B5-0658 / 2001 by Mrs McKenna , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group ,
on violations of human rights in the Socialist Republic of Vietnam .
Uzbekistan- B5-0621 / 2001 by Mr Haarder , on behalf of the ELDR Group ;
B5-0629 / 2001 by Mr Bowis and Mr Posselt , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group ;
B5-0637 / 2001 by Mrs Muscardini , on behalf of the UEN Group ;
B5-0647 / 2001 by Mr Swoboda and others , on behalf of the PSE Group ;
B5-0662 / 2001 by Mr Staes , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group ,
on the health situation in the Republic of Uzbekistan .
East Timor- B5-0625 / 2001 by Mrs Figueiredo and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group ;
B5-0631 / 2001 by Mr Costa Neves and Mr Coelho , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group ;
B5-0640 / 2001 by Mr Queiró and Mr Ribeiro e Castro , on behalf of the UEN Group ;
B5-0648 / 2001 by Mr Kreissl-Dörfler and others , on behalf of the PSE Group ;
B5-0652 / 2001 by Mrs Figueiredo and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group ,
on East Timor .
Colombia- B5-0632 / 2001 by Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra and others , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group ;
B5-0642 / 2001 by Mrs Muscardini , on behalf of the UEN Group ;
B5-0645 / 2001 by Mr Medina Ortega and others , on behalf of the PSE Group ;
B5-0655 / 2001 by Mr Marset Campos and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group ;
B5-0659 / 2001 by Mr Lipietz and others , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group ,
on the situation in Columbia .
United Nations World Day to overcome extreme poverty
Mr President , would dedicating a resolution from this House on extreme poverty on this occasion be giving in to opportunism ?
I would like to remind you that on 17 October 1987 Father Wrezinski , with 100 000 people , talked about the life of the poorest families and people in our whole society and since that day , the World Day to overcome extreme poverty reminds us each year that it is our duty to unite in respecting human rights when they are violated .
If we adopt this resolution today , we are paying tribute not only to the commitment of the families and people who face extreme poverty themselves , but also to the commitment of all the associations and citizens who stand beside them .
Also , throughout the European Union , especially since the Lisbon summit , the public , national and European authorities are constantly highlighting the fight against exclusion and particularly the need for an integration policy .
It is in this spirit that today , on behalf of my group , I am presenting this resolution , which asks the Member States to develop real strategies aimed at equal access for all to fundamental rights such as education , housing and healthcare as well as culture and sustainable employment .
It is also in this spirit that we are asking the European authorities and , as far as we are concerned , our Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , in cooperation with the Commission , to make an assessment of the policies conducted in the field every 17 October and thirdly , we ask , for the future of course , that a stone be laid in the square in front of the European Parliament in Brussels in honour of the victims of poverty like those laid in the squares at the Trocadero in Paris , the Council of Europe in Strasbourg , in Berlin , Rome and at the UN .
It is a simple but nevertheless important tribute that we want to pay today by putting forward this resolution .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , before I start my speech proper , I wish to take this opportunity to draw the attention of the Secretariat and the Bureau to the fact that , at least in the Portuguese version , paragraphs 2 and 11 of the Resolution are practically identical , probably as the result of a mistake in the drafting of the text .
Perhaps it would be possible , following the vote , to merge the two texts , because they are practically the same .
The purpose of celebrating this day is to discuss the serious nature of social problems as striking as extreme poverty , which affects more than one billion people across the world , who are forced to live on less than one dollar per day .
We do so in the footsteps of the person who proclaimed this day in 1987 and following the decision of the United Nations in 1992 , which enshrined it throughout the world .
We must , of course , look at the programmes that we ourselves have put together to attack poverty and social exclusion .
Here I would draw your attention to the resolutions of the Lisbon , Nice and Göteborg European Councils and to the work , on which consensus has already been obtained between Council and Parliament , on the programme of cooperation in the fight against social exclusion .
I wish , once again , to pay tribute to the work of our fellow Member , Ilda de Figueiredo .
Specifically , however , we must have an idea of the problems and of our strategy .
We are facing very old problems that concern world development and we must think about the scandal that is war and corruption in so many countries that subject their citizens to the most abject poverty .
Some things have been done in our countries to combat disease , need and profound social inequalities ; there are new challenges that we are aware of , specifically in the context of the information society , but there are also new problems , affecting what we in Portugal call the ' new poor ' .
This is a problem that greatly affects pensioners and the elderly and I am sorry that the compromise motion did not go further than it did .
I think that there is a certain prejudice here against talking about the word ' family ' , but we must be aware that the weakening of the family unit makes us all more vulnerable . It makes individuals lonelier , which is largely responsible for the contradiction we see today , which is that our societies are richer and , yet , we feel increasingly insecure .
This is highly relevant to this problem , which we must look at seriously and with our eyes wide open .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , poverty in the world is a violation of human rights and an intolerable breach of human dignity .
It affects hundreds of thousands of men , women and children .
This poverty has increased in the last six years .
In the European Union there are 65 million people living on less than 60 % of the national average income , to say nothing of the differences within the Member States .
It is thanks to social transfers and social assistance systems that the poverty level has remained at 18 % in the Union .
But with the slowdown in economic growth , we are in danger of exclusion and poverty being aggravated again .
An analysis of the proposals from the associations and the work of the Intergroup on the European fourth world clearly indicate that the fight against poverty and exclusion should become a vital element of sustainable development .
The objectives set should be pursued and integrated into all policies , with more resources .
I regret that the financial provision for anti-poverty programmes is still inadequate .
The Laeken European Council should adopt political measures on income , employment , housing , health , education , training and culture .
Parliament should also have objectives guaranteeing the right to quality housing for all , against the constant withdrawal of employment and services and re-establishing citizenship and equal rights .
This is also why , on the occasion of the World Day against poverty , which will take place on 17 October , the European Parliament , in cooperation with the associations concerned , should also promote initiatives to raise awareness and to mobilise people to eliminate poverty and destitution .
I hope that this day will enable us to make a further commitment to implementing programmes against poverty , by developing economic and social policies that really deal with the underlying causes of that poverty .
Violations of human rights in the Socialist Republic of Vietnam
Mr President , the prospect of economic reform in Vietnam has certainly improved over the past few years . However , there is still no progress as far as political reform is concerned .
There is a constant flow of reports about the arrest , detention and ill-treatment of dissidents in Vietnam .
Defenders of democracy , critics of the communist regime , religious communities and former refugees who want to invest in Vietnam are still at great risk .
International human rights organisations are still not getting a hearing from the Vietnamese government .
They are also banned from monitoring developments and carrying out inspections in the country .
The central government is doing its level best to block any form of communication between the dissidents and the rest of the world .
International donors must challenge human rights violations and must call for political reform in Vietnam in addition to economic reform .
I am very much in favour of strengthening the economic ties between the European Union and Vietnam . However , as one of the country 's biggest donors , the European Union must take a firmer stance and do more to ensure that human rights are respected there .
I would also strongly advocate an independent investigation into the well-being of Mr Binh Vinh Trinh and other investors in Vietnam .
Having made a fortune abroad by working extremely hard after fleeing from Vietnam , as many people did a few decades ago , Mr Trinh started investing in his native country again .
However , he was arrested under the pretext of illegal investment , and brainwashed in solitary confinement , all of his possessions were seized and his investments were confiscated .
This acts as a deterrent and naturally has an extremely negative impact on the decisions of other investors .
There must be proper legal protection of foreign investments and investors in Vietnam and the corruption there must be brought to an end .
This is an essential precondition for future economic and political development in Vietnam and her links to the world economy .
In addition , Vietnam must protect , safeguard and guarantee human rights .
There has been absolutely no progress in Mr Trinh 's case over the past few months .
He is still on the run and none of his or his family 's unlawfully seized possessions have ever been returned to him .
As soon as he sets foot in Vietnam , he will be put straight back into prison .
I call on the government of Vietnam to make a gesture by respecting the rights of Mr Trinh and other investors and those of other political dissidents .
Mr President , twelve years ago , a Czech human rights activist in Prague wanted to appeal to a Western head of government for help in the face of his impending imprisonment .
This Western head of government did not receive him .
A few months later , the human rights activist became President of Czechoslovakia . His name was Václav Havel .
From then on , the Western head of government had a great deal of difficulty in getting an audience with the Czech President , who refused to receive him because he wanted to make it clear that this failure to respond to human rights violations and the flouting of human dignity was unacceptable .
European Union states are pursuing a similar policy today with regard to Vietnam .
It is a policy of autosuggestion .
It is claimed that Vietnam is pursuing a reform course .
It is also claimed that Vietnam no longer has such a repressive regime as before .
Yet the reality sends out a very different message .
Persecution of human rights activists has increased .
Injustice and the suppression of press freedom have increased , as has the suppression of religious freedom .
If we look at the reality of the situation , we must recognise that this regime cannot be set on a reform course without massive external pressure .
Economic and geostrategic interests , too , cannot be sustained in the long term unless there is a stronger emphasis on the rule of law throughout South-East Asia , but especially in Vietnam .
That is why it is in the European Union 's interests to abandon its policies of autosuggestion at last and speak out about human rights violations in Vietnam .
The European Parliament adopted this approach with regard to Central and Eastern Europe before 1989 .
It was fairly isolated at the time , but events proved that it was right .
The European Parliament is pursuing the same course today on Vietnam , and I appeal to the Commission , and especially , of course , to the Council and Member States to adopt a more pro-active human rights policy with regard to Vietnam and genuinely send out a clear signal , for in this region of the world , we are dependent on this important country , with its great culture , returning to a more democratic course based on the rule of law .
Only then can it be a real partner - also in the economic field - in the long term .
Mr President , Vietnam has once again flouted its international commitments and its own Constitution .
The conviction , following a botched trial , on 26 September , of 14 members of the mountain ethnic groups for having peacefully demonstrated in favour of freedom of religion and the establishment of an autonomous area in their province is a fresh illustration of this acknowledged contempt for human rights .
They went to join the dozens of prisoners of conscience who are rotting in jail in atrocious conditions , while international human rights observers are unable to get into the country to do their job .
The failure to respect individual freedoms should not be tolerated in a country that claims to be democratic and which we have ourselves supported in its fight for independence .
The use of the death penalty - more than one hundred sentences passed in 2000 - is also unacceptable .
Vietnam , which is an economic and trade partner of Europe , and which has also ratified the international convention on civil and political rights , must respect its international commitments and stop persecuting ethnic minorities .
Political liberalisation must go hand in hand with economic liberalisation .
Without that , the country cannot be considered by the European Parliament as a democratic State .
Mr President , today I must join with the authors of the joint resolution in standing against the failure to respect human rights in Vietnam .
The European Parliament has spoken out many times on this matter , the last time only three months ago , to condemn the violation of the freedom to practice religion .
The country , which is still run by a Communist party , still represses , on a daily basis , any group or individual considered to be a threat by those in power .
My fellow Members have already said that the freedom of the press , freedom of opinion , religion and association , rights of ownership and the right to vote are flouted .
What is also serious is that no international organisation or independent observer is authorised to come and monitor the human rights situation in the country .
Let us recall that in April , Vietnam celebrated the 25th anniversary of its reunification .
The Vietnamese government , which has signed many international conventions on human rights , had an excellent opportunity on that occasion to reaffirm the commitments it had given in that respect .
Vietnam is demanding a place on the international stage and has potentially everything in its favour to become a prosperous country .
Reality , unfortunately , shows the situation to be quite different .
The Vietnamese people live in poverty , their society is in decline and the country is still under-developed .
By signing a partnership and cooperation agreement with the European Union in 1995 , Vietnam gave a formal commitment to respect human rights and promote democracy .
The joint EC / Vietnam Committee that met in September in Hanoi reconsidered all the aspects of relations with the European Union , including the joint agreement on democracy , good governance , human rights and the rule of law .
I call on Parliament today to give its full support to the European Commission in implementing its partnership strategy in the region .
We must all encourage the process of reform in Vietnam .
Respect for fundamental freedoms , freedom of expression and freedom of conscience should constitute the basis of sound and constructive cooperation with that country .
Health situation in the Republic of Uzbekistan
Mr President , Uzbekistan , the land of Bukhara and Samarkand is now in our thoughts as the border country of Afghanistan with Taliban-linked extremists operating in its territory .
We acknowledge that there are human rights problems in that country to be tackled , but we welcome its partnership in the fight against terrorism .
Yet not many of us are aware of the other crisis in Uzbekistan .
Reporters report on the problem and potential problem of refugees in the area .
They do not report on the 13 million people affected by one of the worst droughts in history in the area , that started in the spring of last year .
They do not report that six million children under 14 are affected .
They do not report that drinking water and irrigation water is in desperately short supply , that most of the crops in the affected areas have failed , that poor-quality drinking water and sanitation problems have resulted in one of the highest levels of ill health in the region .
They do not report that only 54 % of the people in urban areas in Uzbekistan have access to sewage networks , or that only 3 % in rural areas have such access .
As a result , parasitic infection is rife and the third cause of infant deaths is diarrhoeal disease .
Malnutrition and poverty have reached crisis point .
We need urgent action to supply essential drugs and equipment , to strengthen water-quality control , to support and monitor nutrition programmes , to train health workers and conduct health education programmes .
We also need to help the country change from its heavy use of agrochemicals , its diversion of rivers and its poor drainage system .
I commend this motion to the House .
Mr President , anyone who visited Uzbekistan during the Soviet era was enchanted by its glorious Islamic heritage , its thriving markets - especially compared with the markets elsewhere in the Soviet Union - and its lively atmosphere .
We are therefore especially concerned about the situation in Uzbekistan today , after the collapse of the Soviet Union . This is no longer a booming country ; it is a country in a difficult political situation , scarred by hunger and environmental devastation .
Intensive cotton farming with excessive use of fertilisers has undoubtedly contributed to this environmental disaster .
Furthermore , as the previous speaker has just pointed out , Uzbekistan is now in a situation in which we must fear the worst over the coming weeks and months , especially in light of developments in Afghanistan .
The European Union is called upon to help the region as a whole - for in a situation of economic privation , environmental devastation , and a permanent threat from Islamic fundamentalist or terrorist groups , it would be an even greater disaster if the European Union failed to help the people in this region by supporting them in their efforts to overcome the catastrophic environmental and health situation and assisting them to achieve a modicum of economic prosperity , and above all by providing basic foodstuffs .
I am sure that Commissioner Nielson , who is the appropriate person to participate in this debate today , is already giving thought to these issues and making preparations with his staff for what has to be done today , but above all , what must be done in the event of further disasters , e.g. in response to refugee flows from Afghanistan .
Our task is not simply to deliver great sermons .
This is not a clash of civilisations ; it is not a campaign against Islam . What we must do is to take practical action during the coming weeks and months and show the people that we genuinely wish to express our solidarity and support with more than just words .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to fully endorse Mr Swoboda 's words .
I am the chairman of the European Parliament delegation for relations with Uzbekistan .
Please allow me to give a personal account today .
Last June I spent an entire week travelling around Uzbekistan with a European Parliament delegation .
We visited the Karakalpakstan region , the region where they are struggling with the serious problems of the Aral Sea . The situation there is disastrous .
Commissioner , could I have your attention for a moment ?
We met the people there . We met the relief workers .
They expressed their thanks to our delegation , they spoke to us and they gave us messages , but they also told us : We have seen so very many delegations come and go . When will something finally be done about the water problem in our region ?
When will the European Community , when will the whole international community help us to actually do something together with the other countries in this region ?
The situation there is disastrous , including in the area of public health .
Mr Wiebenga and I visited the local hospital in Nukus where patients with TB are treated .
The situation there is degrading .
The sewers in the basement are broken . They are absolutely overflowing with human excrement .
There are mosquitoes flying around . The stench there is unbearable .
Patients have to keep the flies and mosquitoes off their bodies , with the result that patients who should really be staying for three months leave . They go home .
They infect members of their families . They infect other people around them .
I believe that as an international community we must take our responsibility seriously .
I therefore hope that the Commissioner will be able to promise us some concrete measures soon .
Otherwise the text of the resolution that is before us receives my unqualified support .
East Timor
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , East Timor is the first new State to emerge freely and democratically onto the international stage at the start of the new millennium .
The European Parliament must take pleasure in this result .
The issue of East Timor has been on our international agenda for a number of years .
We have given voice to those who have fought to return dignity to the Timorese people and to have their right to decide on their own destiny recognised and we have condemned the violation of human rights by Indonesian troops and by militias sponsored by them .
I must emphasise the work undertaken by so many Members of this House . In particular , I wish to refer to Carlos Costa Neves , who has chaired the inter-group ' For East Timor ' and who has taken part in each of the European Parliament ' s missions to that country .
We may have helped the people of East Timor to regain freedom and democracy , but we also have a responsibility for helping them to consolidate their gains .
East Timor needs help from the international community : political , technical and financial help .
Without this assistance , it will not be possible to rebuild what was destroyed , assemble a new administration and ensure the necessary development .
This is why we call on the international community : to provide more support and assistance .
Our compromise resolution , therefore , calls for an extension of the United Nations mandate , for the return of the refugees who wish to return to their countries and for the fight against the impunity of those who have committed crimes and who have violated fundamental rights .
Lastly , I must say that I am glad to see a considerable degree of consensus and multiparty support for the candidature of Xanana Gusmão for the Presidency of East Timor .
This Sakharov prize-winner could be a reference point for unity and could make a fundamental contribution to consolidating the new democratic institutions .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , normally at this stage in the proceedings , we discuss accidents , disasters , calamities and all manner of things that cause us deep sadness and pain .
As Mr Coelho has already said , East Timor used to be one such case . Today , however , is a joyous occasion .
What we have seen and heard today is the success of the process in Timor . At this moment , I should also like to tell this House of the gratitude of the Portuguese and , of course , of the Timorese people , for the increasing solidarity that their cause has enjoyed in the European Parliament and which has spread throughout the world .
Mr Coelho has already mentioned the various resolutions and the high point , which was the award of the Sakharov prize to Xanana Gusmão , the distinguished leader of the Timorese resistance , who will be , by broad national consensus , the next President of the country .
This should serve as an example to us of how , with tenacity and patience , we can achieve positive results and help good causes .
Three years ago , anyone in this House who said that this would really be happening today would definitely have been called crazy .
Three years ago , we could not have imagined the referendum of August 1999 and the overwhelming consensus of the Timorese people .
It would have been impossible to imagine that the tragic crisis following the referendum would be overcome and that , on 30 August this year , we would have the first elections of a new , free and independent State .
We must continue to help East Timor .
We made a major contribution to winning the independence for which they were fighting , in defence of their identity .
We must keep this sense of responsibility alive and remain vigilant to the potential dangers in a geo-political context that remains highly uncertain .
Mr President , I should like to begin by congratulating the East Timorese people on the conduct of the peaceful and democratic elections for the Constituent Assembly on 30 August .
I am particularly honoured to be able to speak about East Timor today as I was the Chief Observer of the European Union Election Observation Mission in the country between 23 August and 11 September , and was able to see for myself just how important these elections were for the people of East Timor .
Before I turn to substantive issues , however , I would first like to congratulate UNTAET and especially Sergio Vieira de Mello on their work , which was often carried out under very difficult conditions .
I would also like to pay tribute to the work of the Independent Electoral Commission , the European Commission both here and in East Timor , and the smooth cooperation with UNDP , the Embassy of Portugal , and the Belgian EU Presidency .
East Timor has taken the first step towards independence and the founding of a separate state .
What is especially important now is the continued support of the international community and the European Union , for the country faces enormous challenges .
It is therefore essential that the UN peacekeeping units and civilian police remain in the country until East Timor is able to take over these security tasks itself .
The EU Member States must lobby hard for this with the United Nations .
It is important for the European Union and the United Nations , as well as other donor countries such as Portugal and Germany , to continue their technical and financial assistance , for the Commission and the Council to take a positive stance on East Timor 's application for accession to the ACP - the " Everything But Arms " Initiative , for example , could take effect immediately - and for the EU to support the East Timorese government in developing a master plan for the country 's development .
In this context , the EU should focus particularly on rural development and health .
The entire administrative sector must also be strengthened and , in some areas , built up from scratch .
However , it is education , above all , which will be the basis for and a key element of all the development projects - for one thing is clear : these democratic elections are an extremely important step for the country 's future .
However , we must not forget that this is just the first step out of many which must be taken towards a functioning democracy and civil society .
For East Timor 's further institutional development , it is also important for the EU to participate in the arrangements for the presidential elections and the necessary voter education .
There are many other examples , but one thing , above all , must not be allowed to happen : we must not withdraw from responsibility now that the foundation stone for an independent state has been laid and abandon the people who are only gradually beginning to recover from the trauma of the dreadful events of 1999 .
Instead , let us be prepared for the fact that our support will continue to be needed for many more years .
As a key factor in this context , the assistance must be coordinated efficiently if it is to achieve its objective .
After my many discussions in the country itself , I am certain that the East Timorese people are aware of the problems facing their country and understand only too well how difficult the way ahead will be .
Let us work together with the East Timorese people as equal partners .
We will also be sending out a positive signal to the international community - that it is possible to resolve problems peacefully and initiate development , especially at the present time .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , following the tragedy in East Timor , one of the most beautiful pages in recent history has been written .
The principles of an ethical international policy have triumphed in East Timor .
The example of this country gives us further hope that world history is not merely a succession of barbaric acts and cruelty .
At a terrible time , in which fear and apocalyptic concerns prevail , East Timor represents a ray of light and hope .
Elections to the constituent Assembly in East Timor have been the crowning glory of an impeccable democratic process that does honour to the United Nations and , above all , to the people of Timor .
Not all is rosy , however , in Timor as you all know .
It is a very poor country , has an economy to rebuild , a State to organise and health , education and social protection systems to create .
Only with the help of the international community , specifically the European Union , will Timor be able to turn its independence into something marvellous and a fine example for the rest of the world .
My own country , Portugal , will certainly devote a great deal of affection and support to Timor , since it has become both a Portuguese and a universal cause .
Colombia
Mr President , Colombia - one of South America 's oldest democracies and a country which , unusually for this continent , has not been prone to military dictatorship - is tragically a victim of 37 years of civil war and terrorist activity , which have destroyed infrastructure , killed 40 000 people and corrupted its civil and military authorities through guerrilla involvement with the drugs trade .
It seems from the events of 11 September in New York that democracies are particularly vulnerable to terrorism , which has no respect for the ballot box as a way to achieve change in societies .
Now - and in spite of Colombian President Pastrana 's concession three years ago of a large demilitarised zone the size of Switzerland , where 17 000 of its guerrillas roam at will - the FARC , instead of pursuing a legitimate , peacefully negotiated settlement , continues its policy of kidnapping and murdering civilians .
Last Sunday it killed the much-loved former culture minister , Consuelo Araujo Noguera , and on Tuesday Congressman Octavio Sarmiento .
I am sure that this House will join me in sending a message of condolence to their grieving families .
Pastrana 's policy of granting concessions to the FARC , labelled a terrorist organisation by the USA , has remarkable parallels with the policy of Britain 's Tony Blair of granting early release to IRA killers without a prior insistence on the arms decommissioning to which they had already agreed .
Curiously , three IRA suspects are currently under arrest in Colombia for advising the FARC on how to conduct murderous campaigns , on which , as we know , the IRA is an expert .
I do not have a clear answer to President Pastrana 's dilemma , as only 18 % of Colombians in a recent poll supported suspending peace talks , scrapping the demilitarised zone and resuming full-blown civil war .
Only the Colombian Government can decide what is best for the future of its country and what price it is prepared to pay to achieve peace .
Nevertheless , I am sure that , as well as supporting this resolution , this House will join me in praying for the long-suffering people of Colombia and in hoping sincerely that the FARC and the guerrillas will see the folly of their evil ways and that the Colombian Government will achieve a policy of reconciliation without compromising justice or freedom .
Mr President , it would appear from the last speech that the Government of the United Kingdom is responsible for the violence in Colombia .
I would like to state that up to now , in the documentation I have seen , I have not found any involvement by the Government of the United Kingdom in the violence in Colombia .
The fact is that in Colombia people are being killed - the revolutionaries ( the FARC ) kill them , the paramilitary organisations linked to the Government kill them - and to make any kind of pronouncement right now as to the guilty parties in Colombia seems premature to me .
At present there is a situation of violence and those responsible for that violence are in fact the Europeans , because we Europeans left in Colombia , as in many other countries , a trail of injustice , of social differences , which persist to this day .
The European Union has been concerned with Colombia for a long time .
Unfortunately , we have not been able to influence events in a very positive way .
But we have at least succeeded in increasing the country ' s economic activity to the point where , today , 40 % of Colombian exports are destined for the countries of the European Union .
I believe that in the European Union we are faced with a somewhat desperate task , because the years are passing and the violence continues .
The violence also affects us closely .
For example , in Madrid , forty Colombians have been assassinated in the last six months by Colombian drug trafficking organisations , by hired assassins who come specially from Colombia to kill their fellow citizens .
If the events of 11 September have demonstrated anything it is that violence in the world has no limits , that in a globalised world violence affects us all and that therefore , any action we take in a faraway country such as Colombia ultimately benefits our own citizens as well .
We have to protect our citizens and the citizens of the whole world in lands as remote as Colombia .
I know that the Commission and the Council are restricted in terms of achieving such results .
If the Colombian Government , if a large number of people dedicated to achieving the pacification of the country in the country itself ( writers , intellectuals , etc . ) have failed to achieve those results , it is unlikely that we will be able to achieve them , but I believe - I am availing myself of the presence of the Commissioner , who deals with a very sensitive area concerning this issue , to say this - that we should continue our efforts .
Rather as in the myth of Sisyphus , we should continue rolling the stone from the bottom of the mountain to the top , despite all events to the contrary .
I am convinced that both the Commission and the Council will agree with Parliament on continuing to help the Colombian Government and the political leaders of good faith of that country to find a solution to put an end to the escalation of violence , which seems to be plunging Colombia , that magnificent and stupendous Latin American country , ever more into the abyss .
I therefore hope that , between the three institutions , the Council , the Commission and Parliament , we may help in some measure in the pacification of Colombia .
Mr President , the political violence in Colombia is a crucial obstacle to peace and development in the country .
No other country in the world has as many murders of active trade unionists as Colombia .
The Colombian Left has been , and continues to be , subject to a terror campaign without parallel .
Unfortunately , there is a clear risk that the violence will be further stepped up ahead of the presidential election .
The resolution criticises both the guerrillas and the paramilitaries for the violence .
Criticism can fairly be levelled at the guerrillas for kidnappings and violence against the native population .
However , it is quite clear that the paramilitaries are responsible for the majority of the political violence .
At least 90 percent of the political murders are carried out by the paramilitaries or the military .
The paramilitaries would not be able to conduct their campaign of terror without indirect support from , and acceptance by , the regular police and military .
Therefore , Colombia ' s government also has direct responsibility for stopping the paramilitaries ' campaign of terror in the country .
The EU ' s role must be to uphold human rights , support the peace process and oppose the military escalation of the conflict inherent in Plan Colombia .
The demilitarised zone must therefore , also continue as an important precondition for dialogue between the government and the FARC guerrillas .
Colombia can only achieve peace and real democracy if human rights are respected .
If it is not possible for Colombia ' s Left to operate openly and legally , without having its representatives murdered , the guerrillas will not lay down their weapons .
It is therefore crucial that the terror campaign against the Colombian left is recognised and combated .
This applies especially to the Unión Patriótica , to which the murdered Member of Parliament Octavio Sarmiento belonged .
The Unión Patriótica has had at least 4 000 of its members shot by the paramilitaries .
Criticism of this could have been expressed even more clearly in this resolution which we are about to adopt .
Despite this , we in the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left believe that the text of this resolution is sound , and it is vital that , in the future , we carefully monitor and react to developments in Colombia .
Mr President , " Chronicle of a Death Foretold " was the title of a novel by García Márquez , that has now become a sad reality in the birthplace of the winner of the Nobel Prize for literature .
The eight bullets that assassinated Yolanda Cerón , head of social care in Tumaco , were also foretold and once and for all destroyed the already precarious working conditions of human rights activists on the ground .
For a year the paramilitaries have reigned in the town of Nariño .
The government lets them do as they will and the list of the dead gets longer .
Just before killing Yolanda , the paramilitaries publicly executed thirteen peasants in Teima .
On Sunday morning , the former Culture Minister , who had previously been kidnapped , Consuelo Araujo Noguera , was murdered during a chase between the army and the guerrillas .
Then , the day before yesterday , the paramilitaries assassinated Octavio Sarmiento , a Member of the National Congress .
We know that anyone who defends human rights in Colombia is a target for the paramilitaries .
A clean-up campaign was even announced in August .
The government had already withdrawn the legal basis for the existence of the paramilitaries in 1989 , but has never done anything to seriously dismantle them .
On the contrary , the law on defence and national security , ratified by President Pastrana in August , made the situation even worse .
The law , which is a real blank cheque for all sorts of violations of human rights , extends the army ' s powers and freedom to act in a frightening way and reduces the power of the public prosecutor .
The close links between the army and its illegal right arm , the paramilitaries , is well known and the " Human Rights Watch " report , published today , only serves to underline this .
The European Union needs to question the bases of its cooperation with Colombia .
We are still waiting for the first six-monthly report on the progress of human rights in Colombia promised one year ago .
If the European Union takes defending human rights seriously , it should explain its criteria and mechanisms for evaluation and effective protection to us .
If it takes the peace process seriously , it should encourage the pursuit of dialogue between the government and the guerrillas , categorically exclude the paramilitaries from the negotiations and support the report from the committee of experts , published on 28 September .
Finally , if it takes its own commitment to legal reform seriously , the first thing the European Union must do is to support the widespread calls for the law on defence and national security to be repealed .
Mr President , I will respond to each of the five issues .
The UN World Day to overcome extreme poverty is a welcome opportunity to highlight the continuing unacceptable levels of poverty and social exclusion across the world and to stress the need to intensify efforts for their eradication .
Being able to lead a life free from poverty and social exclusion is a fundamental human right .
While the challenge of combating poverty and social exclusion is particularly acute in developing countries , it also remains an issue of major concern within the European Union .
The most recent available evidence shows that 18 % , or over 60 million of our population in the EU , are at risk of falling into the category of being among the relative poor .
This is a very high figure .
At the European Councils of Lisbon , Nice and Stockholm , Member States made a commitment to promote sustainable economic growth and quality employment which will reduce the risk of poverty and social exclusion as well as strengthening social cohesion in the Union between 2001 and 2010 .
The intention is to reaffirm and further enhance the importance of the European social model and to ensure that social policy has an equal status alongside economic and employment policies and that all three reinforce each other .
To underpin their commitment , the Council developed common objectives in the fight against poverty and social exclusion .
It also agreed that these objectives be taken forward by Member States from 2001 onwards in the context of two-year national action plans against poverty and social exclusion .
Furthermore , the Council established a new open method of coordination which encourages Member States to work together to improve the impact on social inclusion of policies in fields such as social protection , employment , health , housing and education .
The national action plans and the development of comparable indicators provide the framework for promoting exchange of good practice and mutual learning at Community level .
This will be supported from 2002 by a five-year Community action programme on social inclusion which was finalised following a successful conciliation session involving Parliament , the Council and the Commission on 18 September .
All Member States submitted their national action plans against poverty and social exclusion during June this year .
The Commission has been analysing these reports and expects to adopt a draft joint inclusion report on 10 October .
This will be the first time that there has been such an EU-level analysis documenting and comparing the situation on poverty and social exclusion across all Member States .
It is intended that the joint report will be adopted at the Employment and Social Policy Council at the beginning of December so that it can be tabled and reviewed at the Laeken European Council .
Parallel to the work on the national action plans against poverty and social exclusion , work has been going on to develop a list of common indicators in the field of social inclusion .
This will also be presented to and adopted at the Laeken European Council .
On the basis of these developments , the Laeken European Council is expected to define the priorities and approaches that will guide efforts and cooperation at Community level .
The issues and concerns raised in the debate on these resolutions are thus well reflected in the initiatives that are being taken .
However , a key challenge for the future will be to ensure that all Community decisions , in economic and employment as well as social , policies , are assessed for their impact on social cohesion .
While a lot is now happening , there is no room for complacency .
Days like the United Nations World Day for the eradication of poverty provide an important opportunity to remind us of the urgency of the challenge we face if we are to build a more inclusive and peaceful world free from the scandal of poverty and social exclusion .
Looking at the global aspect of this challenge , the first and most important point of criticism is the pathetic level of official development assistance , which is now 0.24 % , far from the 0.7 % that was promised .
This is where everyone will be looking on that World Day and we must come up with a European answer to that problem .
Another issue we will be facing is financing for development in March next year .
Ôhe policy of the European Union towards Vietnam , as to all other countries , is to encourage and support continued progress on human rights and democratisation , and to raise concerns both publicly and in private where abuses or any deterioration in the situation are observed .
We have to draw attention , however , to the tendency of the Vietnamese administration to want to control the pace of change and to maintain " social cohesion " during transition to a market economy .
Of course , I do not need to remind you that the European Union is opposed to capital punishment .
In the case of Vietnam , the number of offences where the death penalty can be applied was reduced last year .
Juvenile offenders , pregnant women and nursing mothers were also excluded .
We welcome this progress , but we want to see the abolition of the death penalty altogether .
Our principal concern remains that of freedom of opinion .
The original " offence " of Professor Nguyen Dinh Huy in 1992 was to be a co-founder of the " Movement to Unite the People and Build Democracy " a movement supported by Vietnamese exiles in North America .
Before that , he had been an active anti-Communist .
The detention and interrogation of 15 people last month reported by Human Rights Watch was apparently linked to a request to the government to set up an independent " National Association to Fight Corruption " .
The common thread in all these cases is that , despite some real progress , Vietnam remains a country little accustomed to public dissent .
The situation of the Montagnards in the central provinces arose from a complex set of unresolved old problems , but was certainly exacerbated by the lack of effective channels of communication between the local people and the central government .
What is needed in Vietnam is continued progress in the country ' s reform programme , so that the administration learns to deal with a wider range of views and to appreciate the value of accommodating dissent in the system of government .
When Mr Patten was in Hanoi last July he took the opportunity to raise some of these concerns with the Vietnamese Foreign Minister .
Next month , we will be holding in Hanoi a meeting of the EC-Vietnam Joint Commission , at which all aspects of our relations will be reviewed , including our shared commitment to respect for human rights .
We shall continue to raise particular issues of concern and individual cases and to encourage continued progress on human rights in Vietnam .
On the situation in Uzbekistan , the Commission shares the European Parliament ' s concern about the present situation in Central Asia .
It is clear that the drought is causing damage in the Aral Sea area and particularly in Western Uzbekistan .
For example the Amu Darya , where the major problems lie , is reported to have 70 % of the normal water level in its upper reaches and just 40-45 % in the lower stretches .
In addition to natural causes , some structural reasons can explain the present situation such as poor maintenance of water-irrigation systems , inadequate water management at regional level between the newly independent states , and agricultural practices which are water demanding such as rice and cotton .
Lack of sustainability would be the short version of what this is all about .
The July 2001 UN assessment mission to Western Uzbekistan has attributed the absence of water to fundamental structural problems ( such as irrigation and crop policies ) .
So what is needed are ways to improve water management and agricultural practice .
These activities are of a developmental nature .
The response so far here is not falling within ECHO 's mandate as such .
We are , however , looking at this region from a humanitarian aid point of view , where we see a real risk of a negative fall-out from the situation in Afghanistan .
In fact , ECHO will include a strengthening of the ability to do something relating to this part of the world in a package soon .
The absence of democracy , transparency and accountability , corruption at all levels and misuse of the flow of assistance provided by the international community are all part of the problem .
Since the independence of these countries , no real effort for maintaining the water system has been made .
In addition , national rivalries between the countries in the region have blocked cooperation and also international efforts have been made more difficult .
We have been active in Central Asia in trying to develop long-term projects linked with the structural causes of the drought .
A Tacis programme has been developed to fight against the consequences of the drying of the Aral Sea .
The Commission thinks that only long-term reform by the Uzbekistan Government itself can solve the current problem .
Emphasis should be put on : the creation of alternative forms of employment in the drought-affected areas to improve the irrigation systems in use in these affected areas and , in general , improve water conservation ; the introduction of more drought-resistant and less water-hungry crops through further research into new crops , pilot schemes , model farms and whatever is necessary to farm in a sustainable manner in this environment .
Definitely a more effective allocation of water throughout the region is needed .
We hope that Tacis can develop activities to address these issues , in particular at regional level , but the challenge is huge relating to our actual means .
Let me turn to East Timor .
The democratic elections on 30 August were a cornerstone in the transition towards independence .
The Commission was pleased to see how peacefully the electoral process took place .
The outcome - with no two-thirds majority for a single party - will require the Constitutional Assembly to work together and to seek a consensus .
This will hopefully stabilise the political landscape even further .
I think we can be justly proud of the contribution made by the European Union election observer team , and I am happy to congratulate Mr Kreissl-Dörfler on his leadership of the team of 24 Observers .
We will certainly look into the possibility of sending another observer team to the presidential elections in 2002 .
In general , I am very pleased with the cooperation with the Parliament and Parliament can be pleased with itself because of its ability to deliver high-quality electoral observation .
The next steps in the formal process will be the adoption of a constitution , hopefully before Christmas this year , followed by the election of a head of state by popular vote , probably around May 2002 .
Then will come the withdrawal of UNTAET and the declaration of independence .
This process seems to be well on track .
At the same time , the evolution of the political process appears to be equally well under way .
The highly commendable performance of UNTAET , the recent nomination of an interim cabinet and the further " timorisation " of management functions in the administration have all contributed to this process .
East Timor ' s regional anchorage will add an additional foundation .
East Timor is at an historical juncture .
The emergency phase is over .
We now have the chance to get the ambitious independence process right .
The international community has to consider now the long-term development issues .
The Canberra Donors ' Meeting last June outlined the current , clearly unsustainable , economic situation and signalled the need for further international assistance .
There is a narrow tax base , a lack of skilled entrepreneurs , and rural poverty leading to demographic pressure on the urban areas .
But there is a realistic perspective for substantial oil revenues coming on stream around 2005-2006 .
This could change the picture dramatically .
The national budget could double and could hopefully ensure financial cover for basic state functions , as well as some stimulus for the economy .
We need to support the effort of the East Timorese to manage these oil activities better than what we have seen in many other developing countries .
Statistics will tell us that it should not be very difficult to do it much better , which may not even be good enough , but definitely it is an opportunity .
I would say that so far , so good .
It would be wonderful to have best practice demonstrated in this field .
Lack of transparency in this area is case-by-case across the world the real reason for a lot of trouble .
Against this politico-economic background , and as one of the major donors for East Timor , the Commission has identified its future role accordingly .
We anticipate the need to support one of the poorest countries on Earth until oil revenues provide a more stable economic basis .
We will seek to create a development relationship based on a partnership philosophy .
This means taking a realistic view of all the requirements .
We are currently drafting a Country Strategy Paper , outlining the sectors .
Most likely rural development and public administration will be where we concentrate our activities , suggesting appropriate financial targets for 2002-2006 within these sectors .
This is how we will try to do it : focussing both on poverty alleviation and capacity building .
As was said in the debate , East Timor will also be able to benefit from the ' Everything But Arms 'Initiative , helping it to develop its foreign trade .
Finally , I turn to Colombia .
The Commission shares the deep concern expressed by Parliament concerning the deterioration of the situation in Colombia , in particular , the continuation of human rights violations .
The Commission is seriously concerned with the situation of the Peace Process in Colombia after the recent events that have taken place and it is waiting for the evaluation of this process announced by President Pastrana .
The Commission intends to maintain its support to the Colombian people through ECHO .
EUR 10 m are being spent this year .
In addition , the Commission has approved under its human rights budget , four new NGO projects worth over EUR 3 m .
As announced by myself in Brussels on 30 April at the third meeting of the Support Group for the Colombian Peace Process , the Commission is currently finalising its proposal for a programme of a " Peace Laboratory " in the Magdalena Medio region in Colombia .
This programme envisages the support of actions and movements already being implemented by civil society at local and regional level .
The Commission sincerely hopes that conditions on the ground will allow an early implementation of this programme .
The Commission will continue encouraging the Colombian Government and all other relevant political forces to remain strongly committed to the peace process in Colombia , especially during this time of unrest .
As Mr Medina Ortega said , this reminds us very much of the labours of Sisyphus .
It is true that it is hard to see progress , but there is no doubt that any relaxation or any type of giving up would definitely make things worse .
This is our simple analysis and this is why we continue .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today , at 6.30 p.m.
Southern Caucasia
The next item is the joint debate and then the following motions for resolutions :
B5-0618 / 2001 by Mr Haarder , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on developments in relations between the European Union and the Southern Caucasus ;
B5-0624 / 2001 by Mr Dupuis and others , on behalf of the TDI Group , on developments in relations between European Union and the Southern Caucasus ;
B5-0630 / 2001 by Mrs Schleicher and Mr Posselt , on behalf of the Group PPE-DE , on developments in relations between European Union and the Southern Caucasus ;
B5-638 / 2001 by Mrs Muscardini , on behalf of the UEN Group , on the Southern Caucasus ;
B5-0649 / 2001 by Mr Linkohr and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on developments in relations between the European Union and the Southern Caucasus ;
B5-0661 / 2001 by Mr Gahrton and others , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on developments in relations between the European Union and the Southern Caucasus .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is a great honour and also a little impertinent to speak before the Chairperson of my delegation , Mrs Schleicher , whom I would have preferred to follow .
However I thank Mrs Schleicher , Mr Posselt and my other colleagues who have contributed to raising , and now , debating a subject that is forgotten , that of the Southern Caucasus .
I dare to hope that following the tragedy in New York and Washington , some of us have been made more aware of the importance of this area of the world , of the importance of a region that is in fact the doorway to central Asia , now a hostage of the Russian Federation , as is , to a large extent , not only the Southern Caucasus but also the Northern Caucasus , which is in an even more tragic situation , whether Commissioner Nielson likes it or not .
The Northern Caucasus , as we all know , is experiencing the tragedy of Chechnya , a tragedy that is continuing and that sees opposition from the European Union .
The resolution before you contains a number of very specific proposals .
Most importantly , the Commission and the Council have been asked to draw up an overall strategy for this region of the world , a strategy that could reverse the current constant tendency towards the deterioration of the situation .
The reason that living conditions in Armenia , Georgia and Azerbaijan are so difficult , particularly Armenia and Georgia , is the constant , daily work of the Russian Federation , which the European Union is not acting against in any specific way .
This is so true that even an apparently harmless issue such as the opening of delegations in Bakou and Armenia has not yet been resolved by the Commission .
The problem has been raised on numerous occasions by this House , by Mrs Schleicher as Chairperson of the delegation with those countries .
During our meetings in Georgia , Azerbaijan and Armenia , we have been asked to speak many times .
We have done so and we still have not had an answer .
This is a case that has been open not only for a few months , but for a few years .
Either the European Union must understand that this region is strategically important , particularly for its energy supply , and start to discuss and propose a policy , or in a few months ' or a few years ' time we will witness the birth of the new Balkans , a little further away from us and therefore perhaps a little less uncomfortable than the Balkans of the 1990s .
I think , nevertheless , that it is up to the European Union to give a response .
These countries are part of Europe , they are already members of the Council of Europe , they feel European and in their heart of hearts - they do not dare to ask openly because the Commission and the Council have made it understood that it would not be very appropriate - their ruling classes want to belong to the European Union .
We need to respond with action , with investment , we need to re-establish confidence , we need to take our entrepreneurs , investors and companies there .
It is quite a small market but , and I repeat this especially for the benefit of the Commission , it is the gateway to central Asia , a strategic region which , as we have seen over the last few weeks , is particularly unstable .
I therefore think that the European Union urgently needs to strongly intervene in this region .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , due to the tragic events of recent months , foreign and security policy is currently at the top of the public 's agenda .
In the light of the events in the Middle East and America , it is easy to forget that the situation in the Caucasus is just as explosive .
The problems faced by Georgia , Armenia and Azerbaijan - including the relations between these three states - still give cause for concern .
Political instability repeatedly threatens the still incomplete independence process .
As a result , violent conflict within these countries is often the focus of public attention .
Yet the history of Europe - especially the history of the European Union - shows that despite the differences and conflicts of interest between states , it is possible to form alliances and thus transcend borders .
Where war once dominated the scenario , we now have peaceful and democratic co-existence .
It is based on the establishment of democratic structures and an emphasis on commonalities , which helped the Western European states to overcome their differences .
In the light of the global coalition against terrorism in all its forms which has emerged since the dreadful attacks on the USA on 11 September 2001 , there is thus a need to support the states of the Southern Caucasus in their efforts to combat terror and violence which , sadly , are still a feature of daily life in these countries and threaten many people 's lives every day .
The region 's democratic structures are still quite new and fragile .
The situation is further exacerbated by the fact that disunity is incited from outside , and the neighbouring states in this region could try to impede or halt the democratisation process for their own interests .
For these reasons , one of the European Union 's key tasks must be to give more support to the democratisation process in Georgia , Armenia and Azerbaijan .
Democracy is the only basis for lasting internal stability which in future will also transcend borders .
However , the European Union and the present Belgian Presidency should focus solely on providing assistance and support ; under no circumstances should they intervene in these countries ' internal affairs .
In specific terms , this means promoting these states ' cooperation and cohesion , also as regards the possibility of a free trade area which must be set up without external influence .
The initial elements of trilateral cooperation are already in place ; however , they must be expanded and supported in order to counter existing external influences successfully .
If these countries ' shared rich cultural heritage is integrated into this process , I am confident that in the medium and long term , important results and successes can be achieved .
As Chairman of the European Parliament 's Southern Caucasus delegation , I regard the EU Ministerial Troika 's visit under the Swedish Presidency last February as the basis for necessary initiatives .
The joint motion for a resolution tabled by seven parliamentary groups signals the broad agreement between Members of the European Parliament on this issue .
I hope that the Commission , too , will make our concern its own .
Mr President , I think it would be useful if we concerned ourselves with the Caucasus , possibly with permanent observers and little rhetoric .
This historical moment is pushing us towards regional cooperation even in destabilised areas and towards perhaps unforeseen alliances in the interests of greater stability .
If I wished to make a point about the resolution , it would be this : the three countries - Armenia , Azerbaijan and Georgia - perhaps should not always be treated like Siamese triplets : their recent histories differ , their problems differ and their efforts to build a genuinely democratic system differ .
It would be unfair if any of the three had to wait until the others caught up in the democratisation process .
In this context it would , of course , also be necessary to analyse what the West and the major countries have done in such regions and to analyse , for instance , whether the ethnic revolts in Georgia are local or led from outside , and if so by whom .
I would then like to know why we hear so little about the Minsk Group , founded to seek a compromise between Armenia and Azerbaijan .
Is it still meeting ?
Even that is not clear .
The European Union should develop a political role that is more obviously adventurous and daring in the region , as the document states - this is the main message - beyond the conference of the three Southern Caucasus states and the European Union .
Given the situation , however , a discrete presence of Russia and America might be considered somewhat useful for a proper balance .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , how far is the European Union going to let the situation in the countries in the Southern Caucasus deteriorate before it finally decides to fully commit itself to the region , in keeping with local and regional expectations ?
Europe needs to provide enough funds to support its policies , and that is far from being the case for the Caucasian regions .
A few months ago in this House , members of the delegation for relations with Armenia , Azerbaijan and Georgia urged the European Union to become involved and to commit to a firm and determined policy for the region , where geo-strategic interests are at stake that are both significant and varied .
We cannot continue to say one thing and mean another .
Our commitments need to be followed by specific actions .
Implementing a Commission delegation in each of the countries would send out a strong political signal .
It would be irresponsible to make these countries , who are struggling to affirm their identity , complete their transition process and establish a real democracy , believe that they can count on the political support of the European Union when the reality is that nothing is actually taking place and secretly it is only the oil and gas in the Caspian sea that are of interest .
That would be unacceptable .
Although the Swedish presidency took an initial step by visiting the countries concerned , what has actually been achieved ?
And has the report by Mr Gahrton , not been put back to a later date in the schedule ?
Moreover , as my fellow Members have said , this is a matter of urgency : does the OSCE not describe the situation as a state of no war ?
Let us not forget the powder keg of the impassioned claims on Nagorno Karabakh and the desire for independence of some regions of Georgia , Abkhazia and South Ossetia .
Yes , Mr President , yes Commissioner , the European Union has an essential role to play in this region .
It should take the initiative of a Europe / Caucasus conference with the various States in order to establish , through a non-violent solution to the conflicts , lasting peace and sustainable development .
Mr President , we pointed out years ago that the Caucasus and Central Asia threatened to become the Balkans of the future .
Hardly anyone has shown any interest in this region ; among the heads of government , only the Pope seems to have shown any concern , and what the Pope is among the heads of state , Ursula Schleicher is here in the European Parliament . She has shown exemplary commitment to this often forgotten region .
My fear is that the events of 11 September will be misused in order to create new spheres of influence , with entire nations and ethnic problems being forgotten or sacrificed to energy supply interests .
After President Putin 's speech in the Reichstag , many people have forgotten that he was the person who reignited the war in Chechnya , and that as the head of the secret service under Mr Yeltsin , he incited and manipulated the conflicts in Migrelia and Nagorno-Karabakh .
This is why these European regions are entitled to our solidarity , and we must ensure that we have a presence there .
I therefore appeal to you , Commissioner , to put President Putin 's words to the test .
If he is genuinely interested in improving the situation , tell him you are going to Chechnya , that you want to test the water for more openness and a greater presence for the European Union .
As regards the three states of the Southern Caucasus , we need Commission delegations at last , not only in Georgia but also in the other two states .
This is a region which affects Europe 's vital interests , not only in strategic and energy supply terms , but also as regards human rights and our cultural links with this region .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 6.30 p.m.
Political situation in Myanmar ( Burma )
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5-0622 / 2001 by Mr Maaten , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the situation in Myanmar / Burma ;
B5-0639 / 2001 by Mrs Muscardini , on behalf of the UEN Group , on the political situation in Burma ;
B5-0650 / 2001 by Mrs Kinnock and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the situation in Myanmar / Burma ;
B5-0656 / 2001 by Mr Vinci and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the situation in Burma ;
B5-0657 / 2001 by Mrs McKenna and Mrs Lucas , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on the situation in Myanmar / Burma ;
B5-0664 / 2001 by Mrs Maij-Weggen and Mr Van Orden , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on the political situation in Myanmar / Burma .
Mr President , Commissioner , for ten years , a whole world of citizens , politicians and journalists have taken an active interest in , and been horrified by , the fate of Aung San Suu Kyi .
Despite the enormous support she enjoys among the Burmese people and the crushing victory she and her party , the National League for Democracy ( NLD ) , won in 1990 , she has not been able to take on her leadership role formally .
On various occasions , she has been kept isolated , and now she has been under house arrest for a whole year .
The Nobel Peace Prize and our own Sacharov Prize have drawn attention to her and to her courageous struggle , but they appear not to have swayed the Burmese junta .
The general human rights situation in Burma is alarming .
Representatives of political parties are kept in isolation , thousands of people are in jail for political reasons , dissidents are persecuted and religious and ethnic minorities harassed .
Forced labour and torture are commonplace .
According to Amnesty , there are around 2 000 political prisoners , including journalists and several elected parliamentarians .
The EU Troika and UN observers now confirm that there are some signs of change .
Several prisoners have been released , attitudes towards the NLD have softened and several party offices have been allowed to open .
From a situation in which there was a total refusal to engage in dialogue , discussions have now taken place , and a process of reconciliation may be underway .
It would be very welcome in a country which , for so many years , has been governed by one of the world ' s toughest military juntas .
It may be the case that a window of opportunity has now been opened .
In anticipation of further signs and surer indications that the junta really would like to enter into dialogue and accept the demands of the NLD , the EU should not however relinquish its common policy .
When the Council meets at the end of this month to discuss Burma , it is important to keep the sanctions in place for the time being and to keep the pressure up so that the dialogue continues , genuine steps towards democracy are taken , human rights are respected and , especially , Aung San Suu Kyi is released and allowed to take her place as the elected leader of the Burmese people .
Mr President , the situation in Burma is disastrous .
Hundreds of thousands of people are living , without any real humanitarian aid , packed into refugee camps in Thailand , China and Bangladesh .
Hundreds of thousands of people have been forced into labour or displaced against their will .
The political system is corrupt and repressive .
The democratic opposition has been suppressed since it was elected on 27 May 1990 , and more than 2000 people are in prison .
Amnesty International condemns the institutionalised torture that takes place in these countries .
All these human rights violations are crimes against humanity that need to be stopped and denounced in order to be definitively condemned .
Who finances this regime besides the revenue obtained from the illegal sale of drugs ?
Well , there is TotalFinaElf , also present in Angola , Congo , Chad and Cameroon , and additionally found to be connected with the sinking of the Erika and in the accident in Toulouse .
I think that this company , and this regime , should be boycotted .
More than ever we need to support Burma ' s democrats .
The European Union should affirm that Aung San Suu Kyi is the only real chance for Burma and must take every possible measure as quickly as is possible to move this military dictatorship towards democratic transition .
Mr President , I believe that this is the sixth resolution on the situation in Burma that we have introduced along with fellow MEPs .
It is now more than 10 years since Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi won the election there by a large margin . The country was subsequently taken over by a military dictatorship .
It is also more than 10 years since the elected parliament was dissolved and many of the members of parliament were murdered , went missing or fled .
Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi was imprisoned and then placed under house arrest . Her house arrest continues to this day .
The repression continued even after she had won the Nobel Peace Prize for her peaceful resistance and was subsequently awarded the Sakharov Prize by our Parliament .
This same repression was also unleashed on the population , and in particular on a number of minority groups , with unprecedented viciousness .
Many people fled , with the result that there are many refugees in neighbouring countries such as Thailand , Malaysia , Bangladesh and India .
However , there now seems to be some light at the end of the tunnel .
A number of political prisoners have been released and talks have been going on between the junta and Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi .
Nobody knows what the outcome will be , however , and on that point I would like to warn the European Commission against making any premature concessions to the Burmese military government until it is clear that they are genuinely willing to release all political prisoners . Or that they are genuinely willing to stop repressing minority groups .
Or that they will genuinely allow refugees to return .
Or that they intend to restore democracy or allow Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi to take her place as president of Burma .
In December , it will have been 10 years since Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi won the Nobel Peace Prize .
If there are still no positive developments by then , the European Union will have to step up its measures and put a freeze on investments , for example , just as the United States has done .
We call on the Commission and Council to exert more pressure so that democracy can finally be restored in Burma and Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi can take her rightful place .
Mr President , anyone who knows this paradise in South-East Asia as I do , having visited it several times in the last fifteen years , is bound to be appalled by the chronic supply shortages , the catastrophic infrastructural situation and the brutality of this highly repressive regime .
Yet political systems like the regime in Burma / Myanmar only survive if there are enough states and private companies prepared to keep them alive through economic links .
If we want to change the political system , we must also exert appropriate economic pressure .
The double standards involved in calling for democracy while engaging in intensive trade with this country really should stop .
However , this means that pressure must be brought to bear on those who single-mindedly continue to cultivate their economic links with the military regime with utter disregard for the need for democratisation .
Mr President , like the honourable Members of Parliament the Commission welcomes what could be called the positive developments that have occurred in Burma / Myanmar , in particular the on-going talks between Aung San Suu Kyi and the ruling SPDC , the release of a growing number of political prisoners and the reopening of 20 party offices of the National League for Democracy .
This said , it has to be acknowledged that the improvement in the political climate in the last year is clearly only the beginning of a process which now should be further deepened .
Thus , we still need to see a clear move towards a process of constructive dialogue and achieving respect for internationally accepted standards of human rights .
We have no guarantee of irreversibility in this respect , so we have to be cautious and we have carefully noted the advice given by Members in this debate .
We should encourage the government to continue this progress by fully responding to the concerns of the international community , as articulated by the United Nations Special Envoy , Mr Razali .
At this stage , it is very important to strike a careful balance between recognising the progress achieved so far and maintaining a firm pressure for continued efforts , which can pave the way for democratic reforms .
I am convinced that Members share the Commission 's hope that the on-going talks will lead to concrete results , which could enable the European Union to consider positive measures to support the process .
As regards the situation of the ethnic minorities , the Commission shares the concerns voiced by Members and remains convinced that a lasting political solution in Burma / Myanmar must be based on agreement between the SPDC , the democratically elected " opposition " and representatives of ethnic minorities .
All EC humanitarian aid to Burma / Myanmar is provided through NGOs or international agencies .
The Commission is currently exploring the possibilities of increasing humanitarian aid to Burma in full compliance with the terms of the EU 's Common Position on Burma / Myanmar .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today , at 6.30 p.m.
Patenting of human genes
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5-0633 / 2001 by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten and others , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on the human gene register BRCA1 and BRCA2 ( breast cancer ) ;
B5-0641 / 2001 by Mr Ribeiro e Castro , on behalf of the UEN Group , on the human gene register BRCA1 and BRCA2 ( breast cancer ) ;
B5-0651 / 2001 by Mr Gebhardt and Mr Paciotti , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the human gene register ;
B5-0663 / 2001 by Mr Lannoye and others , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on the human gene register ;
Mr President , I regret that I must remain seated .
On 30 March last year , Parliament declared that people and their genes or cells in a natural environment cannot be patented .
However , if a patent is granted to Myriad Genetics , this will create a monopoly situation for one particular company .
This means that there is a danger that certain genetic tests and some of the DNA diagnostic tests in Europe will be commercialised .
Three applications for patents on sequences and applications of a breast cancer gene have now been accepted by the European Patent Office .
Applications from Myriad for patents on the BRCA2 gene are still being processed .
If these patents are awarded , this US company will have a monopoly on the BRCA gene and consequently on the DNA test .
This means that abnormalities in patients from families with a history of breast cancer and ovarian cancer will only be able to be detected with this American test .
If Myriad is going to use a similar system in Europe to the one it uses in the United States , the samples from all future laboratory tests will have to be sent to the United States , which will also be very expensive if the analyses have to be done there .
This means that there is a danger that a monopoly may be created , which will put the quality of European diagnostics at risk .
It also means that the availability of data for analysis purposes and the development of new diagnostic applications in our own molecular and testing laboratories will be limited , which will push up the cost of breast cancer screening and therefore of health insurance .
Not only Parliament but also everyone in society who is involved in this has registered objections in this regard .
We therefore ask for this monopoly position , which is in nobody 's interest , to be opposed and the patent application to be rejected .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it will not only horrify a great many women to see that a US company , through the patenting process , has effectively acquired ownership of ' breast cancer genes ' .
The fact that in the race for money and profit , a great many people 's health is put at risk is enough to make anyone 's blood run cold .
Yet this is exactly what threatens to occur following the award of patents on the BRCA 1 and BRCA 2 genes .
As a worst-case scenario , many patients may face delays in the early detection of breast cancer as a result of these patent awards .
Yet with this type of cancer in particular , early detection is crucial to increase the chances of recovery .
Furthermore , the virtual monopoly on test methods pushes costs so high that early detection of breast cancer is no longer available to many women .
Nor should we ignore the extent to which the BRCA patents are impeding research in Europe .
One of the leading cancer research institutes - the Institut Curie in Paris - has highlighted this situation and provided impressive and conclusive proof .
It is very welcome that this prestigious research institute has taken action and , with the support of the French Ministry of Health , is initiating an opposition procedure to the patent award .
This House will certainly not be making a mistake if it supports this position .
A welcome step would be to call upon the responsible agencies to lodge immediate appeals against the award of the BRCA patents with the European Patent Office in Munich .
It is also important that we should appeal to the institutions and governments of the EU Member States to lodge similar appeals as a matter of urgency .
We owe this to the women affected .
This is the least we can do for them at this point .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , next Tuesday , in response to an application by the Netherlands which is supported by Italy and Norway , the ECJ will decide on the Patent Directive 's compatibility with the Treaty .
Today , the European Parliament , through its vote , will decide between the reality and the Directive .
The BRCA patents in particular make it clear that the price of medicines is being increased unnecessarily and that monopolies are being created which impede effective diagnosis and therapy and block research into new and useful drugs .
The time has come for the Commission - and I call upon the Commissioner present to make a statement on this issue - to put an end to the conflicts surrounding the interpretation of this Directive , either by amending the Directive or adopting guidelines .
In my view , the Commission should not bury its head in the sand and say , well , we know that many Member States have problems with this Directive because they do not know how to apply it ; we know that the European Patent Office interprets it in a particular way .
I therefore urge you to make a statement on this issue .
The human body must not be degraded to biological material .
Human genes or living organisms or elements thereof must not be subject to patent law .
A discovery must not be recast as an invention .
We must prevent monopolies on human genes impeding research into new and useful drugs .
We cannot stand and watch the early detection of breast cancer falling by the wayside simply because patent rights are to be created for something which is not an invention but , at the very most , a discovery .
Action is required not only by the European Parliament - we have , I believe , made it quite clear with this resolution that we are not prepared to stand and watch - but also by the Commission and the Member States .
Mr President , I shall not speak about the subject but on the institutional issues .
This House has already rejected the option of - or , at least , it has refrained from - lodging an appeal with the European Patent Office .
That is only right and proper .
The European Parliament is a legislative body , and as a legislative body , it cannot intervene in current proceedings .
That is simply not possible !
This is one of the fundamental principles of a democracy under the rule of law .
The legislator passes a law - in this case , the Directive - which will be confirmed next week by the European Court of Justice .
Then it will be down to the authorities to apply the Directive and award a patent or not , and the courts will have to decide whether this award or refusal of a patent is lawful .
That is the due process , and no other process exists in a democracy under the rule of law .
That is why the legislator - in this case , the European Parliament - cannot intervene in current proceedings .
The European Parliament has about as much responsibility for this issue as the Commission , or the Green Party congress or a general meeting of Greenpeace .
It is not for the Commission , or this House , or the Greens , or Greenpeace to decide how a Directive should be applied ; that is the task of the relevant authorities .
They - and the courts - decide on this issue , nobody else !
And that is how it should be .
Other than that , Ms Breyer , almost everything you said was factually incorrect .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party is against the patenting of human genes as such , something we also stated in 1998 when Parliament adopted the Directive on the legal protection of biotechnological inventions .
However , we believe that the directive does not allow patents for genes as such , if they do not contain an invention , and we supported the directive when it was adopted .
We believe that the fact that , in a debate on topical and urgent subjects , we are now discussing a resolution on certain patents constitutes an abuse .
We have therefore not signed the common resolution .
Although we have a Temporary Committee on Human Genetics , where the question of patents constitutes one of the most important issues , the issue of patents is being brought up here so that a general position might be adopted on the matter , and I would like to repeat that this is very wrong .
We really believe that this is an abuse .
There have been no formal opportunities to raise objections , but we believe that Parliament ' s rules should be changed .
The fact that just a few people are to discuss the issue quickly here is therefore very wrong .
We also believe that the draft resolution is not entirely correct .
The patent applications which exist , and I have a summary of them here , expressly state that they apply to methods and not to genes as such .
You are attempting to give the impression that the European Patent Office is now about to approve patents on human genes , and this is not the case .
However , there is one point on which we can agree with those who drew up the proposal , and that is that in certain respects the patents are two ' broad ' .
This means that we should review issues such as compulsory licences with an eye to research and public health .
Unfortunately , this is not something that can be dealt with at Community level , but is the responsibility of the Member States .
I hope that we can discuss the issue of licences in peace and quiet in the Committee on Human Genetics .
We shall not be able to support the resolution .
Mr President , while Mrs Thors was speaking the Commissioner was interrupted by two different people , so he was not paying attention to what she asked and what she said .
It was vitally important to me , as someone trying to learn from this debate , to ascertain the facts of the situation .
I was very interested in what Mr Rothley and Mrs Thors said as to whether we should even be discussing this issue in this Chamber .
But Mr Nielson was otherwise distracted .
I would hope that he gives us a proper response when his turn comes to speak .
Thank you very much , Mr Purvis .
The issue of whether or not Mr Nielson was distracted is something we will be able to decide on at the end of the debate .
Mr President , the previous speaker made a comment .
I think that Mr Rothley attacked me personally .
I would like to make it clear once again that the European Patent Office does not have a court .
It has a Board of Appeal .
That is a significant difference .
I say this so that our colleague is properly informed .
It is quite clear that the patent refers to genes - indeed , to mutated genes - and to the analysis procedure , for the sake of accuracy .
I would recommend that any Members of this House who are interested should visit the website of the Institut Curie in France - the prestigious research institute which has initiated an opposition procedure - as this describes the situation in detail .
It is indeed a fact that only an invention may be patented , not a discovery .
On Ms Thors ' objection regarding the urgency : the deadline set for instituting proceedings against the first patent expires on Tuesday .
This means that we cannot wait for the Fiori report , which will not be discussed until the October II part-session .
What Mr Rothley says is also incorrect .
We are indeed a legislative body , but his own Minister of Justice in Germany , Ms Däubler-Gmelin , once applied this procedure .
Even the Federal Government once appealed against a patent which had been awarded by the Patent Office in 1999 .
Mr President , I will not go into the content again ; I would just like to correct a statement which was made in error .
I spoke for the Group of the Party of European Socialists , and what I said applies to our group .
I just wanted to clarify that point .
The problem raised by the patents granted by the European Patent Office to Myriad Genetics does not appear to derive from the field of ethics .
These patents highlight a technical question deriving from the field of patent law .
The situation is thus completely different from that raised by the famous " Edinburgh patent " .
The problem resides more in the extent of the protection to be granted to these patents .
This question is highly complex since , as it applies to gene sequences , it undoubtedly involves a situation relating to competition and innovation , and in no way fundamental principles relating to the dignity or integrity of human beings .
It should be noted that this patent is of undoubted interest for the scientific community .
It should make it possible to improve the early detection of breast cancer in women .
The Commission considers there are no imperative reasons why the Commission should raise any objections , as the contested patent does not infringe essential ethical rules and concerns the field of application which can be granted to a patent relating to a DNA sequence .
Nevertheless , the Commission will study the question of the field of protection for inventions relating to gene sequences in depth and will communicate its observations to the Council and Parliament in the reports provided for by Directive 98 / 44 .
I am utterly amazed that the Commission is not responding . Number one .
Secondly , I would ask the Commission whether it is in fact willing to do anything before 10 October .
When I say a gene , I mean a gene sequence . According to the patent directive , a gene sequence cannot be patented .
Mr President , I vigorously endorse what Ms Oomen-Ruijten has said .
Commissioner , you cannot take an infinite amount of time over this .
I too expect that the Commission will state its position on this issue by 9 October .
You said that there are no objections of an ethical nature , but that you will study the question of the field of protection for inventions .
However , you have not answered the question put to you by myself , Mr Blokland , and others on whether Article 5.1 now applies in this context or whether Article 5.2 should take priority .
I believe that many Members of this House expect the Commission to clarify this serious and very important issue .
Thank you very much , Mrs Breyer .
I would ask you to exercise a little discipline , because otherwise we will never finish this debate and we still have the voting time at 6.30 p.m. and two further reports to get through .
Mr President , naturally , I am referring to the procedure .
I would like to thank the Commission for the explanation .
I fully endorse its position . Please be assured that the Commission has the support of a large majority of Members of this House .
Mr President , this is a very serious matter .
I call upon the Commission to study very carefully whether these patents which have been awarded genuinely comply with the Patent Directive , and not to act as if this House had no role in this area and were not entitled to adopt decisions .
I hope that you will take serious steps to comply with the decisions which are about to be adopted by this House .
I will put your objections to my colleagues .
I also want to point out that what I have said reflects the way the Commission services , and the Commission as such , analyse this issue .
I will repeat what I just said : " the Commission considers there are no imperative reasons why it should raise any objections , as the contested patent does not infringe essential ethical rules and concerns the field of application which can be granted to a patent relating to a DNA sequence " .
Obviously there is , and may continue to be , disagreement .
This is the reality in an area like this , and ten years of discussions leading up to the 1998 directive may not be enough to create a real , workable agreement .
However , this is the legislation we have as our basis for action .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Nielson .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today , at 6.00 p.m.
Community guarantee for EIB loans to former Yugoslavia
The next item is the report ( A5-0300 / 2001 ) by Mr Seppänen , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the proposal for a Council decision amending Decision 2000 / 24 / EC so as to extend the Community guarantee granted to the European Investment Bank to cover loans for projects in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia [ COM ( 2001 ) 356 - C5-0335 / 2001 - 2001 / 0143 ( CNS ) ] .
Mr President , the European Union has a cheap way of helping other countries : it guarantees credit granted by the European Investment Bank to these other countries .
In practice such aid has not cost the EU anything in recent years .
The recipients of loans have benefited from the guarantees as they have been granted loans at interest rates which are easier to bear than those that are granted on the basis of the much tougher market conditions .
This cheap and effective method of assistance is regulated in the EU and there is a maximum amount for guaranteed loans , which is divided into regional envelopes .
The Commission proposal now being discussed is to increase the envelope for the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , out of which the EIB can grant loans of up to EUR 8 930 million covered by an EU guarantee .
In order to be able to provide financial support for the reconstruction of former Yugoslavia , it is desirable that that country be included among the recipients of loan guarantees .
With that purpose in mind , it is being proposed that the Central and Eastern Europe loan envelope be increased by EUR 350 million .
This amount is not being earmarked for former Yugoslavia ' s use alone , but , after the increase , it will be able to receive loans out of this envelope of loans if it can show the EIB valid projects for its use .
It is being proposed to grant loans to former Yugoslavia covered by a 65 % guarantee .
That is the condition of the guarantee generally in use and the EU has incurred no liability in respect of guarantees in recent years for loans granted in accordance with this condition .
For the increase in the Yugoslavian envelope to take place there will have to be a transfer of funds from the EU budget reserves to the Guarantee Fund , although the increase in the envelope cannot be implemented in full during the current year .
So the transfers will also have to be made over the next two years as former Yugoslavia finds suitable construction projects .
In my capacity as permanent rapporteur for these matters I would , in this connection , like to express my concern that next year the Guarantee Fund will have no margin whatsoever for new and unexpected aid actions .
Next year will be extremely problematic in that sense and the Commission must focus its attention on the problem of the overuse of the Guarantee Fund accordingly .
The situation is further worsened by the Commission ' s proposal for deliberation by Parliament regarding loans granted to Russia by the EIB in respect of environmental protection investments in the Baltic Sea basin .
Quite incomprehensibly , the Council has demanded that a 100 % guarantee be granted to cover these loans , in place of the normal 65 % .
The Council ' s decision shows that there are Member States that want to hamper environmental cooperation with Russia .
The way in which some Member States are acting in this connection is a display of ignorance of how the system works .
Russia will indeed get its loan , but another country will not , as a 100 % guarantee needlessly eats into the margin in the Guarantee Fund set aside for others .
Increasing the envelope for the countries of Central and Eastern Europe for the needs of reconstruction in Yugoslavia is justified and there is no need to table amendments to the Commission ' s proposal .
I would like to express my appreciation to Parliament for the timely preparation of its opinion on this proposal .
This proposal is an integral element of the European Union 's support to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia .
It aims to assist the country 's political and economic reform programme .
I am glad to note that the rapporteur fully agrees with this view .
The proposal enables the EIB to finance , under Community guarantee , basic investments in the transport and energy sectors , investments much needed to rehabilitate infrastructure damaged by the recent conflicts and by lack of maintenance in the past decade .
The proposed increase of the lending mandate and the CEEC envelope by EUR 350 m is in line with the foreseen amount of EIB lending to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia .
The final amount of loans to the country will depend on its absorption potential and on the availability of suitable projects , and could exceed EUR 350 m .
I say this in response to the rapporteur 's warning about the risk of the overuse of funds .
The possibility of hitting or moving the ceiling is there , but it very much depends on the emergence of suitable projects .
I can confirm that the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has agreed to assume responsibility for its share of the outstanding financial obligations of the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia .
We have been informed that an agreement between the EIB and the FRY to that effect was approved by the Yugoslavian Parliament last week .
With the entry into force of that decision - foreseen at the end of this week - I am glad to say that a remaining obstacle to the proposal will be removed .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today , at 6.30 p.m.
Association of overseas countries and territories with the EC
The next item is the report ( A5-0276 / 2001 ) by Mr Fruteau , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the proposal for a Council decision on the association of the overseas countries and territories with the European Community ( ' Overseas ' ) ( [ COM ( 2000 ) 732 - C5-0070 / 2001 - 2001 / 2033 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , when I was elected to the European Parliament , it was with a clear mandate , not only to represent Réunion , the island where I come from , or even the outermost regions , but also to try to make the voice of all of the French overseas territories heard .
This is why I am glad that Parliament charged me with being its spokesperson on the statute of association between the overseas countries and territories , the OCTs , and the European Union .
I would also like to commend the spirit of openness that prevailed when this report was being drawn up .
Allow me first to venture a historical and political look at the relations that some Member States have had with their former colonies , relations that have been marked , in my opinion , by the bond of exclusivity and by supervision , which are pillars of the colonial pact .
We should now break with the past and with the feeling of guilt that goes with it , in order to define a true responsible and equal partnership between the overseas countries and territories , the attached Member States and the European Union .
This is the path that we should resolutely take , in order for this new decision of association to be the real qualitative leap expected by all of the overseas countries and territories .
This challenge is , however , made difficult by the lack of homogeneity among the OCTs and by the structural handicaps that are physically curbing their development : about twenty countries linked with four Member States - The United Kingdom , the Netherlands , Denmark and France - , mostly small and island countries , with the notable exception of Greenland , very remote from the European continent , characterised by an extreme economic and social diversity ( the richest are within the Community average , while the poorest are really under-developed ) , and also by diversity of status in terms of the relations that the overseas countries and territories have forged during their history with their mainland , relations characterised by considerable independence for some and major State supervision for others .
It has to be said that the Commission ' s proposal , as it has been put forward , only partly responds to this challenge and to the legitimate aspirations of these territories found in all four corners of the globe .
There are still acute questions in terms of the institutional , economic , financial and commercial problems .
First of all from an institutional point of view , I would like to welcome the establishment of a forum to facilitate partnership between the OCTs , the Member States and the Commission , although it is regrettable that decision making is not more in the hands of the leaders of the overseas countries and territories .
Next , from an economic and financial point of view , the Commission has indeed retained a differentiated strategy , taking into account the extreme diversity among the overseas countries and territories , but I deplore the fact that the amount of aid is essentially fixed based on GNP per inhabitant .
I think it would have been more appropriate to add demographic and social criteria to this , which are a fairer reflection of the vulnerability of these territories .
I will take this opportunity to call again for the creation of a specific development fund for the overseas countries and territories , separate from the European development fund , which I am convinced would be more in keeping with the spirit and the letter of the association .
Finally , from a commercial point of view , I must stress here that the share of overseas countries and territories in trade with the Community is very low , which makes it difficult to understand the Commission ' s defensive position .
It is true that it is essential that in certain cases , such as that of sugar , it should be extremely vigilant in order to prevent the original rules , which are necessary for the development of all of the overseas countries and territories , from being abused , with the effect of destabilising some European markets , particularly in outermost regions .
However , not only out of a concern for coherence , at a time when the Union is completely opening up its markets to the least advanced countries , but also in view of the common history of the OCTs and the European Union , we do not understand why it is refusing them what it is granting to the least advanced countries .
Community solidarity cannot be two-speed .
It is thus high time that we showed effectively that the overseas countries and territories are not the poor relations of our development policy .
In other words , it is high time that we proved tangibly to these people that they are right in believing in the European Union .
This is why , to finish , I wish to reiterate the desire that I state several times in my report , that the tenth anniversary of the statute of association should be an opportunity for reaffirming the strong political will towards these territories , that have for too long been left to be blown by the wind , across all the oceans of the world , in order to firmly and resolutely undertake the path of partnership and responsibility , in other words the path of development for all .
Mr President , I would firstly like to state that I am speaking on behalf of my Mr Fernández Martín , who is not able to attend .
I would like to make clear that among the wide range of regional associations or groups of countries with which the European Union maintains relations , the group of overseas countries and territories , the PTOMs to use the French term , is certainly the most heterogeneous of all .
In actual fact , they are grouped together more for what they are not than for what they are .
Hence the special merit offered , in my opinion , by the proposed Council Decision and the report which Mr Fruteau has produced in relation to it .
Generally speaking , I agree with the rapporteur ' s proposals , although I would certainly express some of them somewhat differently .
However , I would like to announce that my group will vote in favour of them .
The rapporteur proposes a series of measures which attempt to strengthen the association system which has linked the PTOMs to the Union since 1991 , by stating that on this tenth anniversary of the said agreement , the Union should be more ambitious with regard to the most distant territories of the continent .
I must point out that the PTOMs as a whole , and each one of them in particular , do not form part of the territory of the Union .
Their inhabitants have European citizenship ( French , British , Dutch or Danish , as the case may be ) but the territories in which they live do not form part of the European Union itself - in the case of Greenland , for example , its citizens voted in a referendum to leave what we then called the European Communities ; in the case of New Caledonia , in accordance with a plan drawn up with the French authorities , they have also begun a procedure which will lead them , in a few years ' time , to join the group of ACP countries .
And I could cite in this way further examples of specific cases , almost as many as there are PTOM countries and territories .
This heterogeneity is evident in many other respects and the most noteworthy of these is their sparse and irregularly distributed population .
As the rapporteur rightly stresses , the population of the twenty overseas territories hardly exceeds one million inhabitants and three of them , the Dutch Antilles , French Polynesia and New Caledonia , have more than 150 000 inhabitants each , so these three territories alone account for almost half of the total population .
Therefore , when almost three years ago we discussed the report produced at the time by our colleague Blaise Aldo , we wanted to place special emphasis on the development of the PTOMs ' trade relations with the ACP countries close to them and in some cases , such as that of the Caribbean , with equally close outermost regions .
However , INTERREG did not meet the expectations raised as a basis for developing these trading relations .
Perhaps this could be attempted again now with INTERREG III , and I agree with the rapporteur that the development of the PTOMs should be promoted through a specific fund to simplify the procedures for linking it to the EDF or to Cotonou - although I know that the Commission has its own opinion in this respect .
In conclusion , I request an oral amendment which I hope can be accepted .
In the first paragraph of the explanatory statement the rapporteur expressly mentions the seven outermost regions of the European Union , stating that they opted for full integration into the respective Member States , former colonial powers .
That is not correct .
The Azores , Madeira and the Canary Islands did not have any colonial status at any time in their history , which is why they should be expressly excluded from this statement by the rapporteur , and I hope that the House and the rapporteur himself can accept this request .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to express my great satisfaction at being able to speak for the first time in this House on the issue of the Overseas Countries and Territories .
These twenty territories benefit from a particular association arrangement with the European Union , which , when described in simple terms , is less favourable than the status reserved for the outermost regions , which are integral parts of the Union , but more advantageous than the agreements made with third countries in Africa , the Caribbean and the Pacific .
As a French overseas member of this Parliament my attention is naturally drawn to the fate of the French territories and administrative authorities concerned , which are , and I am pleased to list them here , New Caledonia , French Polynesia , the French Southern and Antarctic Territories , Wallis and Futuna , Mayotte and Saint-Pierre and Miquelon .
In his excellent report , Mr Fruteau welcomes the progress in relations between the European Union and the OCTs from an institutional , economic and financial point of view , even though there remain many questions on the Commission ' s proposals having to respond to the objectives included in declaration 36 with regard to the OCTs annexed to the Treaty of Amsterdam .
With regard to trade relations , the rapporteur emphasises the low level of trade with the Union .
In 1998 , imports from OCTs amounted to 0.21 % of Community imports , with exports to OCTs amounting to 0.43 % of Community exports as a whole .
A liberalisation of trade with OCTs could fulfil the objectives we have set ourselves .
We should be particularly careful , however , that this liberalisation does not result in some kind of diversion from our current objectives .
For several years , imports have been increasing from a particular OCT ( which happens to be Aruba but this is not the time to hold it up as an example ) , which runs counter to the spirit of this association agreement with the European Union .
These products exported to the Union do not come from the OCT , but are imported there from ACP countries for minor processing such as the whitening of rice , sifting , packaging or mixing .
These simple operations only require very low levels of investment , and are therefore in no way a development factor as the Court of Justice in Luxembourg highlighted in its ruling on the " Emesa sugar " case in 1998 , as the only interest is providing easy added value for international operators .
The increase in this type of inefficiency is all the more intolerable given that it goes against the interests of the other OCTs , the outermost regions and the ACP countries .
In this context , without questioning the objectives proposed by the rapporteur , which I willingly support , it is essential that we establish strict original rules to prevent these breaches , which are detrimental to the economies of all overseas territories .
In this respect , the measures for prohibiting cumulation of origin for certain products , increasing the list of inadequate processes or the systematic implementation of safeguard clauses in no way provide a suitable response to this problem .
I wish to begin by saying that I totally support Mrs Sudre 's remarks .
The Commission is always asked to ensure that there is coherence in what we do and we have a strong case of lack of coherence when we look at the trade practices that are at the heart of this debate .
We have had good reason to do what we have done and I definitely hope that some constructive conclusion that ends this traffic will be part of the final solution for the whole matter .
Let me also congratulate the Committee on Development and Cooperation and the rapporteur for a clear and generally balanced analysis of this whole matter , although I need to make some remarks .
The Commission proposal is based on the widest consultation of the parties concerned ever made in this field .
Thus , it is not surprising that some of the indications we have received as part of this wide consultation process point in different , even conflicting , directions .
Inevitably , some delicate compromises have had to be struck , for example in the trade sector .
However , we have kept to the objective of giving an adequate and ambitious response to the expectations of the OCTs and to the challenges facing them .
The motion before you today gives a positive assessment of several innovations we have proposed , such as the reinforced partnership procedure , the simplified financial regulations and the new role of civil society .
In my view , other points also deserve to be mentioned , for example the extension of many budget lines , Community programmes and provisions on trade in services to the OCTs .
There is a tendency to neglect the importance , the scope and the opportunities for the OCTs to be able to access as users Community programmes in general .
This is new and should be highlighted .
I have remarks to make concerning two chapters of the proposal - financial aid and trade .
As to the European Development Fund , it is correct that , in respect of the past , financial aid will no longer be given to three OCTs - Aruba , the Cayman Islands and the British Virgin Islands - because their GNP is now near or even higher than in the Community .
It is important that all Members of Parliament are made aware of this .
We have to get out of the habit of having OCT issues being discussed only in the few Member States that have a direct part in the discussion .
In the past , it has looked a little too much like a self-service shop .
We are talking about Community matters and they should be discussed at that level .
For all the other OCTs , in the future funds will be granted following more objective , transparent and coherent criteria .
Income , GNP , has to be one of them , along with population , as we want to ensure that the taxpayers ' money is spent where it is most needed , and this means in the fight against poverty .
This is the cornerstone of the EU development policy , and I want to stick to this - also in respect of the clear support for this development policy in this House .
Transitional provisions have been proposed .
Substantial funds are reserved for socia