Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 30 January 2003 .
Last Saturday , Mr Joseba Pagazaurtundua , head of the municipal police in a village in the Basque country in Spain , was shot dead by a terrorist .
On my own behalf and on behalf of this House , I have already conveyed our deepest sympathy and sincere condolences to his family .
Mr Pagazaurtundua was an active member of the Socialist Party .
He was also an active member of the Basque citizen 's initiative , ¡ Basta Ya ! - ' Enough is enough ' .
¡ Basta Ya ! won the Sakharov Prize in 2000 and Mr Pagazaurtundua came to our Parliament to attend the Sakharov prize-giving ceremony at that time .
By murdering him the terrorists have shown once more their denial of the right to life and their contempt for the right to freedom of political expression .
After this latest affront to decency we , in the European Parliament , wish to say today that we stand shoulder to shoulder with the victims , with their families and with those who are combating terrorism in Spain .
I ask you , please , to observe one minute 's silence .
( The House rose and observed one minute 's silence )
The Minutes of the sitting of Thursday , 30 January 2003 have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
To the best of my knowledge a moderate degree of flexibility is shown .
It is , however , a matter of concern that the Rules of Procedure be strictly applied .
If , as a result , an amendment needs to be made to that effect , let us do that .
Subject to that observation , the Minutes are approved .
The final draft agenda as drawn up pursuant to Rules 110 and 110a of the Rules of Procedure by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday 6 February 2003 has been distributed .
The following change has been proposed :
WEDNESDAY :
I have received a request from the Group of the Party of European Socialists , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left to include in Wednesday 's agenda , without motions for resolutions , statements by the Council and the Commission on the situation in Iraq .
If this request is accepted the debate on Iraq could be included on Wednesday from 3 p.m. to 5 p.m.
The other debates that afternoon would continue from 5 p.m. to 7 p.m. and Council Question Time would therefore be cancelled .
Mr President , my group has drawn up this request not just in view of the development of events , but essentially in view of the fact that the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Simitis , has called an extraordinary summit , which may be held next Monday .
And we believe it is very important at this moment - and this is the approach my group has taken throughout this debate and we believe it must continue - to try to achieve a united and decisive European position in order to ensure , essentially , that the war is not inevitable and in order to achieve a disarmament process - in relation to weapons of mass destruction , in the case of Iraq - which takes place under international pressure under the auspices of the United Nations .
This is our objective and we believe it is important that Parliament can hold a debate so that you can speak for us at the summit next Monday .
Mr President , I do not want to oppose a debate on Iraq , but your proposal involves cancelling Question Time in order to have one , and I very much want to put my opposition to that on the record , taking as I do the view that every individual MEP 's right to put questions - enshrined , indeed , in the treaties - is one of the most important parliamentary rights , second only to the right to vote on legislative texts .
We are becoming accustomed to important matters - it is always important matters - ever more frequently reducing or doing away with the time available for questions .
I ask you to put a stop to this practice .
Questions to the Council used to be held at 9 p.m. , or from 8 p.m. to 10 p.m. , and for ten to fifteen years that worked perfectly , until the Council decided it was tired in the evenings and had to leave , so that Question Time was moved to the afternoon , and since then , Question Time has been cut back or moved , always to make room for other items of business .
I ask you to take a long-term approach to this problem , and to sort it out .
Mr Posselt , your observation was more a point of order regarding Question Time .
I specifically asked the House to take account of the fact that if we add the debate as requested , it would have the knock-on effect you mention .
( Parliament agreed to the request )
We now come to the one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
Mr President , on a point of order , I wrote to you with regard to the Sandbaek report and a possible referral back .
However , within the last hour there have been developments and I have no need to raise the issue here .
Wonderful !
That sets a great example for the one-minute speeches to follow .
Mr President , on a point of order , I should like to ask you to write to President Bush and the Governor of Texas to protest against the execution by lethal injection of the British citizen , Jackie Elliott , last week , despite mounting evidence that he was innocent of the crime for which he had been convicted and was on death row for 16 years .
There were numerous protests from the United Kingdom and people in prominent positions , and there was new evidence from police reports that pointed to other more likely suspects for the 1986 murder of which he was convicted , as well as urgent requests for crucial DNA testing .
The Texas authorities pressed ahead with the scheduled execution , despite the fact that a number of key legal appeals had still to be heard by the Texas Criminal Court of Appeals .
His local Member of Parliament - a senior cabinet minister - led the protests .
This signals to the world a curious sort of respect by the American justice system for the rule of law and human rights .
Let us at least ensure that such injustices do not go unnoticed .
Mr President , you promised to investigate the matter of the dress code that an Italian MEP attempted to introduce during a hearing in Brussels .
At the same time , you recommended that I obtain a good tailor , and I hope you are satisfied with the result , for the bill will be sent to yourself .
Mr Blak , it is too soon on a Monday for me to rise to such a challenge .
Mr President , something extraordinary happened at the end of the last part-session here in Strasbourg , when , for the first time in many years , a written declaration was supported by an absolute majority of this House .
The statement , signed by 320 Members , demanded that , in future , the President of the Commission be elected by this House and no longer by the Council .
The breakthrough was achieved by the 313th and 314th signatures , those of Mr Barón Crespo and Mr Poettering , whom I congratulate on their last-minute courage .


It is my belief that it will strengthen our delegation to the Convention and help get it to accept this demand .
I wish to request that you forward this position - now an official one taken by Parliament - to Mr Giscard d 'Estaing .
There is now some hope after all that it will dawn even on the President of the Convention that the head of Europe 's executive has to be elected , not behind the Council 's locked doors , but in this House , the people 's open forum .
We can do that , Mr Leinen .
Mr President , I know Mr Leinen to be an upright and honourable colleague .
It could well be , though , that , for a change , he had an ulterior motive for the form of words he had drafted and wanted to make my life difficult .
So I will take this opportunity to reiterate what I told Mr Leinen when he was guiding my hand to where I should sign .
I told him , ' If I sign , I do so not as Chairman of my group , but in my own name , modest person that I am . '
Mr President , on a point of order , I would like to draw the attention of the House to a joint statement by the Communist , Workers and Left Parties against the aggressive war on Iraq .
The statement , signed so far by 60 parties from five continents , notes among other things , that : ' aggression against Iraq , which is based on the new US doctrine of pre-emptive strikes , threatens to destabilise the whole region and bring grave consequences for human civilisation as a whole .
It poses a huge threat to international peace and the system of international law , and creates a precedent for other arbitrary acts of aggression . '
The statement concludes : ' we must stop the aggressive war on Iraq . We must warn against attempts by the big powers to blackmail the United Nations .
We must oppose any form of European support for the war or participation in it . We demand that our countries do not provide the United States with military or other facilities to carry out its aggressive aims ' .
The question is , what will the European Parliament do to avert a war , in conformity with the wish of the overwhelming majority of the people of Europe ?
What will the European Parliament do to ensure that no Member State provides any assistance to the United States if they follow the path of war ?
I will submit a copy of the full text of the joint statement to the Secretariat .
Mr President , on a point of order , I want to welcome the fact that we have decided to hold a debate this week on the continuing developments in relation to Iraq .
It is clear that a peaceful outcome to the current crisis is still possible .
Dr Hans Blix and Kofi Annan have made it clear that if they are given sufficient time and if they get full and active co-operation from the Iraqi authorities , then war can be avoided . There are therefore grave responsibilities on us all to persuade the Iraqi authorities to give this full and active co-operation .
There is also a grave responsibility on us all to ensure we demonstrate that international law applies to us all , and not just to Iraq , and to ensure that the United Nations is given its full legitimacy in the current situation .
I would appeal to the President of this Parliament and the Political Group leaders of this Parliament to issue a joint statement to the Iraqi authorities and the Member States this week , urging that Iraq co-operate fully and that we operate entirely through the United Nations , thereby ensuring that international law prevails .
Mr President , I would like to raise a very serious issue , to talk about a very serious situation , that of Cambodia .
Despite the seriousness of the anti-Thai riots that have taken place in Cambodia , and Mr Hun Sen 's responsibility for these events , or at least the management thereof , nobody knows whether the political groups have decided to address this matter at our next sitting .
I think that Parliament should intervene , however , rather because what is at stake here is democracy , the consolidation of democracy in Cambodia .
Consequently , I would ask you , Mr President , to kindly send a letter to the Cambodian Head of Government to tell him how important the European Parliament and the European Union in general consider this situation to be .
I have also asked the chairman of the delegation for relations with the Member States of ASEAN , Mr Nassauer , to invite the Cambodian ambassador to Strasbourg this week .
I hope he will be able to come .
I believe we should support this country if we want to avoid the risk of a counter-revolution .
Mr President , I have just been in Uganda where I was made aware of the terrible tragedy that is being played out in the northern part of the country and that is being totally ignored by the international press .
The conflict is taking place between the Ugandan army and the revolutionary movement , the Lord 's Resistance Army , which daily abducts a large number of children .
Approximately 800 000 internally displaced persons are living in wretched conditions in refugee camps .
The situation in the refugee camps is now so desperate that many people are attempting to return to their villages only to find that the revolutionaries have burned and destroyed their houses and fields .
A growing number of atrocities committed by the army against the civilian population is also reported every day .
I should like to call upon you to contact the Presidency with a view to the implementation of an EU initiative that might help solve this conflict .
Mr President , I am taking the floor because I should like to warn you that your good name is being misused in the Danish media .
They are saying that , at the Conference of Presidents where we had a video conference with Hans Blix , you said that the latter was warning us against sending a delegation to Iraq .
Now , we both know , because we were present at the relevant Conference of Presidents and both participated in the video conference , that that is not the case .
I think you should have an opportunity to say so , because anyone reading the Danish newspapers would believe otherwise .
Your name is , then , being used in that connection , and this is something I think you should perhaps do something about .
I can do something about that now in making it clear that I have made no statement about the views of Dr Blix or about sending a delegation with regard to this Parliament .
On 5 February , the International Court of Justice in The Hague delivered its verdict in a case brought by the Mexican Government against the United States of America , a case concerning three Mexicans , ? in fact , fifty-four \ u8722 \ ' 2d but three Mexican citizens in particular : Cesar Fierro , Roberto Ramos and Osvaldo Torres , who have been sentenced to death and are sitting on Death Row in Oklahoma and Texas .
Whilst we are of course opposed to the death penalty in any country , there is more to this case than that , as the three Mexican citizens were prevented from receiving the help that is lawfully their due , in the shape of consular support from their own government .
The authorities of the State of Texas reacted in an even more diabolical way , stating that the Court of Justice could not stand in the way of the executions .
This is something about which the European Parliament has , of course , a certain tradition to live up to , and I commend to your consideration , along the lines of the attempt made earlier by Baroness Ludford , the possibility of writing to the governor of Texas about this .
Let me , in addition , take this opportunity to endorse what Mr Dupuis has just said with regard to the situation in Cambodia .
The democratic opposition leader Sam Rainsy has now gone into hiding , accused of plotting to bring down the government .
There is of course not a shred of truth in this , and I think that we should do something about this as well .
Mr President , on a point of order , I would like to extend my sympathy to the family of Joseba Pagazaurtundua , whom I knew personally .
Human damage cannot be repaired .
It is impossible to evaluate human suffering .
Could the last victim of the ongoing conflict in the Basque country become the final catharsis for its solution ?
The European Union 's own history provides recent examples of nations overcoming deep-rooted conflicts .
We shall endeavour to set up a momentum of awareness .
I support all those who are eager to work constructively together towards real peace for my homeland .
Nevertheless , this goal cannot be met without the strong commitment of the international community .
Our failure on this approach has meant a further descent into renewed clashes .
I am sure that a virtuous circle in favour of political dialogue will bring reward and results .
A change of gear in the European Union 's strategy is necessary and urgent .
Mr President , I will recall the words of Mr Leinen by pointing out that , at this time , the majority of this Parliament is in favour of the President of the Commission being elected by Parliament , which represents a substantial advance , because two years ago the majority of Parliament voted against this initiative , and is also evidence of the progress the European political union is making .
It is good to remember this at a time when there may be a humanitarian disaster in Iraq and when , for this reason , there is an attack by the United States with allies within the European Union , and allied with States which wish to join the European Union , against the idea of the existence of a political union present throughout the world .
And I would draw this Parliament 's attention , since this is the place where the political notion of Europe must progress , to those who are attacking us by means of internal allies .

Mr President , we have just heard from the lips of Mr Gorostiaga a defence of murder as a method for resolving political conflicts . I believe this is entirely unacceptable .

I would add something else : a colleague of Mr Gorostiaga , the Mayor of Andoain , has refused to condemn this murder before all his citizens .
I do not therefore accept this kind of argument .
And I would say that , at this time , in the Spanish Basque Country the problem is not that there is a political conflict , but that there is a group who believe that murder is a legitimate method .
And , since we are in the European Union , I draw your attention to the fact that in the Spanish Basque Country , which is the most autonomous of the European Union 's autonomous regions , municipal elections are planned in which many citizens cannot participate since they are in danger of being murdered , like Joseba Pagazaurtundua .
Mr President , we have just been horrified to hear a member of an organisation which encourages , shelters , feeds , protects and funds the terrorists who have just murdered the person for whom we have held a minute 's silence , call for dialogue and peace .
Mr President , there are times when cynicism can reach such a degree of moral degradation that it is truly amazing .
Mr President , I would like to say solemnly here in this House that the presence of Mr Gorostiaga Atxalandabaso in this Parliament degrades the European Union , it brings shame on this House , and words cannot express , while the body of an honoured public servant is still warm , the nausea , disgust and repugnance the presence of this individual in a House of democracy and freedoms causes me .
Mr President , on a point of order , I would like on my own behalf and on behalf of many members of my group who were on the delegation to Iraq last week , to express our disquiet at media reports of you claiming we were being duped and manipulated by the Iraqi regime .
We were accompanied by many members of the media , who surely were not also being duped and manipulated .
Their coverage shows quite clearly that we spoke out against the regime , that we insisted on full cooperation with the weapons inspectors and that we brought up past issues such as the gassing of the Kurds .
In my opinion , this is questioning the credibility of the large number of Members of this Parliament who felt it necessary to go to Iraq because Parliament itself would not send an official delegation .
I fully agree with Mr Barón Crespo that murder is no solution to political conflict .
That is why many of us went to Iraq .
We believe that murder is no solution to political conflict and that we must do everything we can to ensure a political settlement .
It is very disturbing to hear you , as President of this Parliament , criticise us in the media and question our credibility .
You did not hear me , Mrs McKenna , but you may have read something in one Irish newspaper .
Since it was not a quotation of what I said , if you have a problem with it , I suggest that you take the matter up with the sub-editor concerned and not with me .
Mr President , this part of the sitting is usually dedicated to recounting the litany of horrors perpetrated in the world : massacres , breaches of human rights , torture and the violation , in general , of the most basic principles of civilised life .
Today I would like to sound a contrary note and welcome something that has happened recently in Mozambique .
A journalist , Carlos Cardoso , was murdered there for having blown the whistle on a corrupt group of individuals close to power .
It was thought that the legal system would not be able to bring his murderers to justice . The legal system did work , however , and his murderers were convicted , with stiff sentences .
This means that Mozambique , where until recently a war devastated an entire country and threw an entire people into poverty , now has democracy and the rule of law .
Consequently the Mozambican authorities and legal system must be supported and encouraged .
Now , Mr President , I wish to mention something that has happened here .
I am reminded of what Fernando Savater , to whom we awarded a prize , said , recalling Chateaubriand : ' I know of no one more cowardly , more servile and more contemptible than a terrorist ' , and I would add ' or those who protect terrorists ' .
Mr President , I would like to draw your attention to something regarding which the Member States here in the European Parliament do not enjoy equal status .
Parliament 's Visitors Service is its calling card for the public .
Each Member State should have its own permanent official working in the service , who speaks the language of that Member State and can explain to visitors how Parliament works .
Parliament has now taken the decision not to have a permanent official who speaks Finnish .
Finnish will be the only language not used by any permanent official to give explanations to groups of visitors regarding the work of Parliament .
This , I believe , is discrimination against one Member State and one language .
It is not in the interests of Parliament if all languages do not have equal status and if one language is merely catered for by temporary assistants or officers , instead of having senior officials telling visitors what happens in Parliament .
I hope you will be able to do something about this situation and that the Finnish language will enjoy equal status with the other languages .
Let me check the details and I will get back to you with the results of my enquiries .
Mr President , on a point of order , tens and thousands of people around Europe and throughout the free world , including the United States , will take to the streets next Saturday in protest at the proposed war in Iraq .
It is important that we do not let this day go by without acknowledging the initiative taken by Germany , France and Belgium in proposing further United Nations intervention in Iraq to consolidate the search for weapons of mass destruction in that country .
The people of Europe recognise that they are protesting not against America , but against President Bush and against war .
It is very important that this day should not go by without our acknowledging this initiative .
Mr President , the leaders of the USA and Britain , unfortunately with the connivance of many - if not all - of the governments of the members of ? ? ? ? and the European Union , are moving towards all-out attack on the Iraqi people , with incalculable consequences both for them and the rest of the world .
To justify their attack , they have submitted unsubstantiated and obsolete evidence to the UN , provided by the CIA 's ' evidence is us ' department or lifted from PhD theses or bugged telephone conversations in the 1990s , as the US ambassador to Greece admitted to the press the other day .
This is their excuse of an argument for committing a terrible crime against the long-suffering Iraqi people who , as I had the opportunity of seeing for myself last week , have paid a heavy price over the last 12 years for the 1991 bombings , the embargo and the tyrannical dictatorship of Saddam Hussein .
We speak for the overwhelming majority of our citizens taking to the streets day after day , when we say : No to war and the embargo against Iraq !
Respect for the right of the Iraqi people to determine their own future !
No more using the UN to legalise force !
This crime can be avoided .
The problem is whether the European Parliament will abandon its indulgent , Pontius Pilate approach and come out clearly against this criminal war .
Mr President , as part of the mission of the unofficial delegation in Iraq , I was able , along with three other Members , to go to Makhmour in the Northern part of Iraq , which is under Iraqi sovereignty , close to the autonomous Kurdish zone .
Makhmour is a refugee camp for Turkish Kurds , of whom there are around 10 000 .
Because of their support for the PKK at the time , they were unable to find refuge in the autonomous zone and , in the event of war , they are likely to be the first victims .
That is why they want to go home , to their Turkish mountains .
I would ask Parliament , and I would ask you personally , Mr President , to write to the Turkish authorities , asking them to readmit these villagers whose village was destroyed more than ten years ago .
These people want to go home , and they will be the first victims if they are unable to do so .
That is why I think this request is fully justified .
I would ask you please to supply the full details on that matter to my office .
Mr President , I had not intended to ask to speak today .
Political freedom involves allowing the expression of opinions that we find disagreeable .
Today , I hear speakers who are unwilling to hear a Member of this House say what his electors expect of him .
I think that Mr Gorostiaga has been elected to show that there is another side to what others are saying concerning the Basque country , and that is what he is doing , whether we agree with him or not .
I might add that I have not heard him inciting people to commit murder , something that marks a line which none may cross , but I do plead for tolerance for divergent opinions with which we do not agree .
It is only on that basis that Parliament is able to function .
Mr President , on a point of order , two Members have raised the question of comments attributed to you in both Irish and Danish newspapers .
You said that those comments were not correct .
You advised us to contact the sub-editor of the Irish newspaper concerned .
It is my experience that the Independent Newspaper Group , in which these comments appeared , does not accept clarifications or corrections from those of us who do not agree with its political line .
Therefore , Mr President , could you contact the editors concerned in the Independent Newspaper Group and ask them to carry a correction of the remarks you made ?
No , I will not do that .
What they put in as a quotation was correct .
What else they carried , by way of opinion , was not mine .
I can assure you that what they included in quotation marks was true , but the words that were used here by one of the Members about you being ' duped ' are not words that I used .
I am not prepared to deal with the matter in those terms .
( Mr De Rossa : ' It is a point of clarification ' )
No , it is not a point for plenary .
You may take it up with me privately .
I am not responsible for issues that are not quoted .
( Mr De Rossa : ' It is your responsibility ... ' )
I will not accept responsibility for what is not a quotation of my own .
That is the end of the matter as far as I am concerned .
( Mr De Rossa : ' I will pursue this matter ' )
You can pursue the matter if you please , but I will not waste my time on it .
I apologise once again to colleagues who were on the list to speak , but we have overrun the time allocated .
That concludes the item .
On behalf of Parliament I welcome to our official gallery the Committee on Energy Policy of the Danish Parliament , the Folketing , and its president , Mrs Madsen .
We are very pleased to see you here .
I hope that your meetings and your time with us in Strasbourg will be productive .
Thank you for coming .
The next item is the Commission statement on the World Economic Forum ( Davos ) and the World Social Forum ( Porto Alegre ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the World Economic Forum met in Switzerland and the World Social Forum in Brazil .
I wonder why they met in parallel , and thousands of kilometres apart , rather than together .
The European Parliament 's debate today , with its joint discussion , gives a good example , as these two subject areas do not absolutely have to be in contradiction to each other .
If we want to make use of the opportunities afforded by globalisation and to minimise its risks , we need to be prepared to think in an integrated way rather than score points off each other .
This combined approach is in line with the ecologically responsible market economy , which is our model for the political order .
We are in favour of the market , but the market has its limits when it comes to the areas of social responsibility and environmental sustainability .
This joint debate accords with the strategies we formulated in Lisbon and Barcelona , and with our principle that business creates work and that everything that creates work is society 's business .
In his closing address , Kofi Annan , the Secretary-General of the UN , called for a war on poverty .
We share the belief that globalisation must go hand in hand with great efforts at fighting poverty .
Our resolution therefore lends weight to our endorsement of the goals of the United Nations ' millennial declaration of war on poverty and calls on the Commission to submit an annual report to us on what progress has been made worldwide in the war on poverty and what contribution we have made to it .
We are drawing closer together .
State borders , time zones , distance and size divide us less and less as time goes on .
We are becoming ever more dependent on each other .
We bear ever greater responsibility for each other in global terms .
When others are stricken , we are affected .
Globalisation is happening , and what matters is that we make good use of the opportunities with which it presents us and minimise its risks , across both hemispheres .
This is where we need Europe to have more clout on the world stage .
We need a world economic and social order that is fairer and more just .
Issues relating to the global social and economic order are matters of European domestic policy in the same way as European policy is part of national domestic policy .
We need Europe to be stronger and more determined .
Our continent has an answer to worldwide globalisation - that answer is Europe .
We have to do our homework for ourselves .
The Lisbon strategy is the right way ahead , but we have to turn from its lofty aims to the clear definition of specific objectives , laying down timetables and responsibilities .
On our continent too , a place must be found for our common objectives in all government programmes and work programmes .
That is why we emphasise the fact that the potential of the internal market has not yet been exhausted , that unemployment rates are too high and that we have to put all our efforts into reducing them here as much as anywhere else .
We call on the Council to require every single Member State to undertake budgetary and economic reform along the lines recommended by the ECOFIN Council .
Lisbon and the Internal Market are the tools we need in order to respond to globalisation and to discharge our obligations to the world at large .
Mr President , to the statement used as the leit motif or motto of Porto Alegre , ' Another world is possible ' , we should add the issue of whether the world , with its current tendencies , without changes or reforms in view of globalisation , can develop in a peaceful manner .
The events of recent months are not exactly cause for optimism in this regard .
Just as the strategic mantra of the Cold War was deterrence , that is , the threat of mutual destruction , now , within a plural and contradictory framework , it appears that the belief is arising that the dominant concept must , in a disturbed and dangerous world , which is increasingly insecure , be that of prevention .
Nevertheless , we are seeing a growing and increasingly visible conflict over the form effective prevention policies may take .
On the one hand , we see the response of a form of globalisation resulting from deregulated market capitalism , the unilateral leadership of the strongest and the new doctrine of preventive , dissuasive military action and ad hoc coalitions .
On the other hand , we see increasingly large sectors with very opposing ideological positions , but which agree that , in view of the globalised world , the response must be a multilateral policy of democratic rules , global reforms and peace , particularly in view of the threat of terrorism , stating that what we essentially have to do is remove the sources of hate and humiliation in the world .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that , in the face of this emergence of a world public opinion demanding reforms of globalisation , we need a realistic vision , broad consensus on reform and concrete and financially viable initiatives .
Europe has a vital interest in this issue .
It must exert a world influence and be fully aware of its global responsibilities .
Its original raison d 'être was peace , following the devastating wars of the twentieth century .
Over the last fifty years , it has perhaps been the first effective supranational response to the challenges of globalisation .
In order to pursue this development , we must establish ourselves as a global player , with a more united and powerful foreign policy , despite all the current difficulties , because these movements , this global civil society , is increasingly demanding a Europe , a united Europe , and we must not disappoint .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by saying how pleased I am that these two global forums have run their course without violence ; we have experienced rather different ones .
I would like to put forward a few points on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party .
The first is that there is still large-scale and persistent poverty in the developing countries despite all the developed world 's pledges to halve poverty by 2015 , and our good progress towards this has come to an end .
As I see it , this is another area where there is a major role for the private sector .
This is not about the major international concerns always transferring production to the countries where wages are lowest in order to reduce their production costs .
This is about their consciously seeking partnerships with local firms and organisations .
By investing in local trade and industry , by making sure that they make good social provision for their employees and that men and women receive fair wages , they can contribute a great deal to the fight against poverty .
Corporate Social Responsibility is not only a splendid expression but also of fundamental importance .
This must of course be exercised on a completely voluntary basis and from the bottom up .
So I call on business too to be as socially responsible as possible when making investments .
The ideal is that business at a national level should implement this in all its policy areas .
A second point that I want to make has to do with the importance of education in combating poverty .
Here , too , the private sector can do its bit .
By deliberately using their own know-how to support local vocational training , this sector can give the people a better education .
In the long term , this will also be of benefit to their own personnel policy .
In all this , I do not , of course , want to play down the part played by the developing countries ' national governments and by the international community .
Human rights must always be nurtured and promoted .
These include good working conditions , along with democracy and good management , for which the developing countries ' national governments are themselves responsible ; they must take action themselves , even though the developed countries can give them support .
Through constructive policies in their own countries , in which the environment and freedom of access for everyone to all the basic amenities , such as water and land , have a major part to play , they too can contribute to spreading prosperity on a fair basis .
It is to be hoped that the outcome of both forums will be that these points are taken on board , and then we will perhaps have a better chance of reducing poverty , if not by 50 % by 2015 , then by an amount not too far from that objective .
Mr President , I was able to be in Porto Alegre and can indeed confirm that the large number of participants , the diverse regional nature of these participants and of the organisations they represented and also the richness of the debates and of the proposals and conclusions drafted and adopted in the course of the work undertaken there on the main issues of the day established the World Social Forum as an unparalleled expression of social movements and , in general , of world civil society .
As the Secretary-General of the United Nations quite rightly said , these factors confirmed the event especially as a crucial and undeniable milestone in the quest for solutions to the enormous challenges facing humanity today in the various plans put forward and also in creating a real alternative to the neo-liberal model .
Held once again in Brazil , but this time coinciding with the election and inauguration of President Lula da Silva as President of that country , and since he was one of the major driving forces of the World Social Forum , this event was , of course , influenced by these factors . These factors today represent new and more promising prospects , especially demonstrating a new attitude that represents a clear break with the status quo that has prevailed in recent times .
The need to give substance to a new world order of progress and peace , proclaimed by President Lula da Silva in Porto Alegre and also in Davos , was of course the central issue in Porto Alegre and probably represents the greatest challenge we face today . Consequently , and as was made clear there , the United Nations must be given a new boost and a new profile .
It is also crucial to thoroughly change , reform and readjust basic methods and guidelines , in particular of some of the key instruments of the current world order such as the International Monetary Fund , the World Bank and the World Trade Organisation .
Nevertheless , coming at a time when absurd US intervention is being planned for Iraq , the World Social Forum was able , clearly and in line with the will of the broad majority of world public opinion , unequivocally to affirm its rejection of such a war .
Porto Alegre was not , therefore , by any stretch of the imagination , merely a critical counterpoint to Davos .
In its three versions , it established itself as a fundamental pillar in the construction of a real alternative to the neo-liberal model that Davos broadly represented . This model is inextricably linked to the situations of social injustice , iniquity , division and crisis that we are seeing today .
For this very reason and while Porto Alegre grows and is accepted , Davos , which is extremely elitist , is increasingly redundant and caught up in the contradictions inherent in the model it advocates and in the damaging effects it has .
Solutions to these crises were sought unsuccessfully in Davos , because there was no consideration and even less analysis of the underlying causes of this crisis .
Attention was focused on economic growth , but the importance of the fair distribution of wealth that this growth should provide was overlooked . What was omitted in particular were the damaging effects that the primacy of the market causes , especially in terms of deepening the North-South divide , of increasing poverty in the world and of environmental degradation .
It therefore comes as no surprise that President Lula da Silva 's speech in Davos should have caused such ripples .
I hope that it does considerably more than this in future .
As a matter of fact , in this context , I would say that the European Union can and must contribute to ensuring that it does .
Mr President , this was the last time the Porto Alegre Social Forum and the World Economic Forum will take place on the same day .
The Porto Alegre Forum took place against a backdrop of active opposition to and protest against the possible war with Iraq , and the Economic Forum in Davos discussed the future of the world in an atmosphere which one very authoritative commentator described as more regrettable than ever .
I feel that , from this point of view , it is extremely significant that dialogue , which has thus far been greatly lacking between these two events , was represented by the presence of the Brazilian President , Mr Lula da Silva , who , in both cases , upheld the need for huge structural reform - the kind of reform that he has undertaken to carry out in his own country - of the world economic system , wholeheartedly condemning the empty principle of free trade at all costs , which only actually applies to the poor countries since the wealthy countries can afford to be protectionist whenever and however they want .
Not least for all those who firmly believe that the role of the Union on the international stage is not just to be a vassal but to endeavour to bring about democratic globalisation , it is clear that the election of President Lula da Silva and his government is cause for hope and huge expectations , as you will certainly have noticed , Commissioner Lamy , since you were in Brazil in the days immediately following Porto Alegre .
At Porto Alegre , the movements confirmed their mission to become a kind of outpost for an attentive , active world public opinion , and this was quite clear , not least to the 700 members of parliament who were present and agreed on an agenda which I feel is worthy of mention here .
First and foremost , active opposition to the war : four members of the Brazilian Parliament took part in the much-criticised delegation to Iraq , and there was very broad support for the initiatives seeking to instigate parliamentary debates all over the world , in addition to the demonstrations due to take place on 15 February .
The challenge , however , which we feel to be particularly important for our institution and the European Union is the Cancún conference and reform of the international financial institutions .
On this matter , unlike the situation as regards the question of Iraq , Europe does have some clout , and you , Commissioner Lamy , represent it with great authority .
Europe can make a difference .
What we are asking from you is simple and important : transparency , not least towards Parliament , in terms of the negotiations you conduct , and the possibility of open debate at least as regards basic decisions on investments , agriculture and the liberalisation of services .
There is no need to shy away from this .
We need to have the courage to uphold positions which are sometimes uncomfortable but which can make it quite clear that the European Union is not blindly following the lead of the United States but takes its responsibility towards the world seriously .
For instance , Commissioner , please do not backtrack on the agreements you committed to at Doha on medicines and TRIPS .
Mr President , Commissioner , I will not repeat what I have said before on the subject of globalisation and the so-called neoliberalist model .
I will endeavour to go straight to the point . The point is that what we can do , what Europe can do to respond to the many undeniably rightful demands is fight on one particular front , the open , most sensitive front , for North-South relations , and to free , or create the conditions which make it possible to free , hundreds of millions of people from hunger and poverty .
We must fight on the front of protectionism , starting with the slogans , with the many things which have been said even in this debate .
When we say that the wealthy can indulge in protectionism in any event , we are saying something that is undeniably true , but we saw at Doha that , for the wealthy countries , protectionism means introducing social clauses , environmental clauses , talking about food safety and using these instruments - and we were reproached for this at Doha by Indonesia , Brazil and India - for protectionism .
' Do not give us your milk , do not give us your agricultural products , please , because your giving us milk and wheat represents unfair competition for Peruvian farmers ?
Do what you are asking us to do : open up your markets ?
Open up your markets ? trade means work .
If we cannot market our products we will have more unemployed men and women . '
These were the words of the Peruvian President , Mr Toledo , to us a month and a half or two months ago in a formal sitting in this Chamber .
We must respond .
In this connection , I would like to take advantage of the presence of Commissioner Lamy to say that the modalities for the post-Doha agriculture trade round presented by the European Union do not go far enough .
We must be bolder .
We must not continue to let the United States carry off the prizes for genuine liberalisation of the agricultural markets .
The United States adopted its Farm Bill last spring , sending out a lamentable signal of protectionism and farming subsidies - as they had done with respect to trade - with regard to its internal market , but , in the area of foreign trade , putting forward a proposal which goes much further than the European proposal .
I believe that , on this matter , Europe must - if everything we are saying is true , if all the attention we are claiming to pay to the countries of the developing world where others are not is genuine - be much more courageous .
This is a practical political decision that we have to make , in the knowledge that there is a price for going against protectionism .
Not everybody agrees that these are good principles : there will be opposition from the textiles lobby , the farmers lobby .
Do we have the courage to do it or not ?
The Economic Forum and the World Social Forum met concurrently , reflecting the split between the outlooks they represent .
The venues for each were also symbolic : the Economic Forum met in the ski resort of Davos , the World Social Forum in Porto Alegre , in the midst of a continent in full-blown economic crisis .
Yet , in my view , opinions do not have to be so sharply divided .
It is unfair simply to equate globalisation with an unbridled cross-border capitalism that is to the advantage only of multinationals .
Those who were called anti-globalists have themselves understood this , and now call themselves alternative globalists .
I think that general free trade still always offers the best guarantee of economic growth in all parts of the world , even in the poorest .
The European Union is the best example of this .
The thoroughgoing economic integration of Europe by means of the internal market and the opening up of our internal borders have already made it possible for us to live in what is at present one of the wealthiest parts of the world .
It is this unique model of true globalisation that we have to take out into the wider world .
There is certainly no way back .
As the European Union , we have an important part to play in this debate .
We must endeavour to bring the speakers at Davos and Porto Alegre together in an attempt to persuade them that liberalising world trade is an equitable way of improving living standards and bringing greater prosperity to the whole world .
Mr President , I wish , first of all , to talk about something that is of concern to us all : the issue of war and peace , which was addressed in Davos and Porto Alegre .
In Davos , it was discussed because of the effects of the economic situation of the war against Iraq that the United States and its allies have decided on .
Without denying the disastrous effects on the world economy of the militaristic decisions of George Bush , what was at the heart of the proposals made in Porto Alegre against the war and in favour of peace were the serious political and humanitarian issues raised by the United States ' aggression .
We have a situation in which ultraliberal capitalism , which can be seen as the domination of globalisation by the most powerful States and the huge multinational corporations , is leading the world towards disaster .
Especially today , we are on the brink of a humanitarian disaster in Iraq , causing the death of thousands or hundreds of thousands of people , amongst the poorest and most needy members of Iraqi society , especially young people , with the United States counting on the complicity and action of its European allies .
Mr President , we must remember that the governments of the United States and of some Member States of the Union , against the beliefs and wishes of the majority of European citizens , are reaching the point where they are calling into question the model of European political integration that brings with it the awareness of another form of globalisation , which is more human and egalitarian and which demonstrates greater solidarity .
The United States even want to destroy the idea of a constitutional political Europe with an independent role in the world .
The other issue I wish to raise , Mr President , concerns international maritime traffic , the safety of our seas and of our coastal communities .
The World Parliamentary Forum presented this problem as one of the main concerns of the ' old world ' school of thought .
The European Union must attach priority to resolving this problem , which today particularly affects Galicia and other European countries , from the Spanish State to France .
The sea represents life itself .
We cannot allow it to be owned and contaminated by a greedy , irresponsible and corrupt form of capitalism that enjoys the complicity of some European States .
I therefore hope that the European States and this Parliament take the decisions that are needed to prevent the destruction of the sea that gives us life and sustains us .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by congratulating the European Parliament on having scheduled this debate on the differing , if not outright antagonistic positions of the Davos Economic Forum and the World Social Forum of Porto Alegre .
I have taken part in both forums and know what I am talking about - in Davos , around twenty years ago , when I was Prime Minister of Portugal and had to negotiate hard for a loan from the International Monetary Fund . In Porto Alegre , I have taken part for the two last years as a Member of the European Parliament .
The last Social Forum , which took place last January , was particularly significant , as has already been said , for the number of participants , around 100 000 , who had come from all over the world , it was significant for the around 1 500 NGOs and other civic associations that were present and , above all , for the quality of the speeches .
Incidentally , it was not only the World Social Forum that took place in Porto Alegre : there were also other forums such as the World Forum of Judges , the Local Authorities Forum , the World Education Forum , the World Independent Media Forum , and the World Parliamentary Forum .
This World Forum in Porto Alegre gave rise to a new sociological phenomenon : global citizenship , which means people getting together as part of a network , freely and regardless of their political parties or religious or secular affiliations and fighting , in a peaceful and orderly way , for their rights and for what they consider to be fair .
This is an important civic and participatory form of activism , which will continue on every continent with the meeting of various regional forums , since the next World Social Forum will be held in India .
This year , the Porto Alegre World Forum was attended by a unique personality , the recently elected President of the Republic of Brazil , Luís Inácio ' Lula ' da Silva .
In his extremely coherent speech to a crowd of hundreds of thousands of listeners , he explained to the Forum why he had accepted an invitation to attend , following the Porto Alegre Forum , the Davos Economic Forum , which some of his supporters found hard to understand .
It was not so hard to understand , however : Lula explained to the audience of politicians , businessmen and experts gathered at Davos , and I quote ' that his war was different ; it was the fight against hunger and poverty , for access to better education , against diseases and epidemics such as AIDS , not the war against Iraq or to call for higher rates of growth at the expense of unemployment and of greater poverty ' .
Curiously and paradoxically , his speech , which was the same at both forums , was characterised by sincerity and truthfulness , and perhaps this is why it was applauded so loudly in Davos , considerably more than Colin Powell when he defended the inevitability of the war against Iraq .
Even when they are defending interests , people also have a conscience and this is what drives the world forwards , even in these current troubled times .
Mr President , Commissioner , I am delighted to see that you give equal status to Porto Alegre and Davos .
The Greens , like Mr Désir and a few others , we who were behind the Porto Alegre parliamentary forum , are delighted to learn that alterglobalisation is beginning to find an echo among you .
I believe that President Lula has , indeed , taken the right step , because he came to present first to Porto Alegre what he was going to defend in Davos , in other words , the reconstruction of a fairer economic order .
I feel that this democratic , socially aware , political move is a step along the right road : civil society should have its say first and then the decision-makers of the global economy .
Market capitalism cannot continue to be the dominant form of politics .
I would remind you - even if this is perhaps a sophism - that democracy and politics normally take precedence over economic considerations .
It is vital to prove this , as that would also make it possible to avoid a pre-emptive war such as that proposed by the Bush government , which is largely subservient to multinationals which have a far greater need for oil than for ideas .
Lastly , these same multinationals want at all costs to reappropriate sustainable development and the common goods belonging to all mankind such as water , air and energy .
It seems to me , however , that in Cancun , Commissioner , you should help us to defend our idea of globalisation .
It is right that we should concern ourselves with current GATS negotiations , because they represent quite a risk , and it is right that the southern States should know that we support them with regard to each individual 's right to food , drinking water and breathable air .
Mr President , Davos and Porto Alegre are in different continents , but in them global problems were dealt with along the same lines .
Business resources and entrepreneurship combined with the know-how , skills and legitimacy of the rest of civil society can provide lasting solutions to the problems of globalisation .
The average cow in the OECD countries receives two euros every day in state aid , while more than two billion people live on less than two euros a day .
More than a billion people have to get by on less than one euro a day . That is such a small sum of money that it does not even meet the basic requirements of international human and fundamental rights .
The right to life cannot be separated from the right to food , water , health services or work , and the right to have an opinion cannot be separated from the basic rights of a civilised society .
These rights are what the economy is built on .
Human rights are not a luxury which we can afford only when the economy is growing : they are a necessary prerequisite for companies ' viability and stability .
In Russia , for example , conditions for business cannot improve significantly without some fundamental adjustments being made in the implementation of human rights and in the law .
At present in Russia it is possible to solve problems informally with reference to arbitrary , unwritten and ever-changing laws , which only adds to corruption .
It is therefore in the interest of companies too to be involved in the implementation of human and fundamental rights .
One way is participation in the UN Global Compact .
Under this scheme first proposed four years ago at Davos by Secretary-General Kofi Annan , a company commits itself to nine simple basic principles in the area of human rights , labour standards and the environment .
Furthermore , in the EU a framework for the social responsibility of companies has been promoted , but alongside voluntary action we need binding legislation .
We should show up those companies operating in the EU , which either here or elsewhere have contributed directly or indirectly to human and fundamental rights violations , by naming and shaming them .
In addition , we should develop suitable sanctions to impose on companies which are guilty of , or have contributed to , human rights violations and corruption outside the EU .
Businesses ultimately have enormous influence whatever the community , region or state they are located in .
The day business genuinely decides to fight against corruption and human rights violations is the day globalisation will mean and consist of something quite different from what it does at the present time .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , for a long time it was claimed that the movement , which began in Seattle before continuing in both Porto Alegre and Florence , was the expression of an anti-globalisation that was ineffective in the face of the allegedly effective modernism of the world liberal economy , represented by the Davos Economic Forum .
Davos , where the elite were to meet , against Porto Alegre , where popular opinion would meet .
The theory is now belied by the facts .
While the Davos Forum seems to be unsure of itself and on the defensive , the global social movement , that of the citizens , meeting in Porto Alegre , does not hesitate to enter into the dysfunctional world of the elite of Davos and the strength of its proposals is based on civil public force .
In the face of environmental deterioration , the NGOs that take part in the forum propose the internationalisation of environmental protection and universal sustainable development .
In the face of the exploitation which often results from a market economy with no restrictions , the trade unions propose the globalisation of social rights , in particular through universal respect for the seven fundamental work standards laid down by the ILO .
In the face of unilateralism and the return to the policy of pre-emptive war , the World Social Forum proposes global political and social mobilisation in favour of peace .
With regard to the WTO and GATS trade rounds , the Social Forum outlines the territory of universal public goods and declares them world common heritage : water , health , energy and culture are thus included in the list of inalienable rights .
Lastly , in the face of the flagrant inequality with regard to hunger , it was proposed in Porto Alegre to implement better global redistribution of wealth , in particular through cancelling the debt , but also through taxing capital transfers for the benefit of development .
At Porto Alegre , in the face of the discredited image of Europe that the United States wants to disseminate everywhere , another Europe was also discussed , a Europe about whose shortcomings we have no illusions but which many envy us , a Europe that is a model of successful integration .
These are the specific proposals arising from the Porto Alegre Social Forum , where only popular opinion meets , Commissioner .
I am sorry .
The main question remains , however : how will we in the European Union , in the Commission , receive these proposals ?
Could we imagine , more broadly speaking , that these hopes might be included in our European political agenda for another kind of globalisation , our kind of globalisation ?
Mr President , the fact that I was in Porto Alegre and not in Davos is not the only reason why I feel that , of the two fora held at the end of January , the Porto Alegre Forum was certainly the most important .
It outlined a range of constructive proposals for world policies on the environment , peace and freedom of expression and combating hunger and disease .
It is particularly important that the European Parliament should take into consideration what was said at the Forum regarding the forthcoming World Trade Organisation meeting in Cancún .
We know that an agreement on services is planned , but we do not yet know which services will be covered by the agreement and made subject to the rules of free international trade .
The Forum and , I believe , Parliament 's concern is the possibility that the services to be liberalised might include certain essential social services such as education or health and certain essential public commodities such as water .
Any subjection of such services to market rules would be a breach of the fundamental rights enshrined in the Nice Charter and other formal international treaties .
The Commission must give Parliament prior notice of the list which it intends to propose and uphold in Cancún , so that it can assess it and express the views of the European citizens on these extremely sensitive issues .
The Forum also recognised and welcomed enthusiastically the possibility that the European Union should become a model for other structures of supranational and regional democratic governance , first and foremost as a means of limiting conflict and establishing peace .
From this particular perspective , it is no coincidence that the Porto Alegre Forum was held in Brazil and that President Lula da Silva has now intervened .
Indeed , not only can the European Union become the model for a similar political initiative in Latin America , but its very existence and independent international structure will benefit from a decisive boost in a world in which , thanks , not least , to President Lula da Silva and Latin America , multipolarity is developing , although that multipolarity is currently under great threat from the intention of the United States and some of its most faithful allies to declare war on Iraq unilaterally .
Mr President , Commissioner , I have been in Porto Alegre , the civil alternative to Davos , which was discussed earlier .
It would be preferable not to have two opposing fora - one economic and one social , one governmental and one civil - each calling for completely different political orientations for the future .
In Porto Alegre , local authorities , members of parliament , trade unions , non-governmental organisations , judges and teachers proposed - perhaps idealistically - that another world is possible , and not just possible , but necessary .
In Davos , directors of multinational companies and ministers concluded that the key elements for the new world economic agenda are the real value of companies in view of the volatility of their share values , trade as a fundamental instrument for sustainable development and the principles to govern the activities of the multinationals .
In other words , the distance between the citizens and the people with real power is only increasing .
During these two minutes , I will just give a couple of examples : in Davos there were references to AIDS , but there was no reference to the need for pharmaceutical laboratories , whose investments in advertising and marketing are double their investments in research , to open up their patents to developing countries .
Another example : it is considered that commerce is an important factor in development but there is no reference to reciprocity in the opening up of markets .
The protectionism of the rich countries , including the European Union 's agricultural policy , has a negative impact on development .
I believe , Commissioner , that Europe must be a model for reducing the distance between each position .
The economic order promoted in Davos must be accompanied by a social and political order such as that called for in Porto Alegre .
The participation of European parliamentarians in Porto Alegre is a good symptom , but the European Union 's partnership with citizens ' movements must go further .
We urge the Community 's institutions to join in with global campaigns on access to water , agriculture , food safety and public services .
We also ask the Commission to support the creation of a world fund to combat hunger and poverty .
Mr President , those who have taken part in our debate this evening cannot , I believe , fail to be struck by the similarities between the views of the Members speaking on both Davos and Porto Alegre .
The first are Mr Karas and Mr Obiols i Germà , who both , in a way , asked us the same question : is it possible to seek , on a global scale , this domestication , this capitalist government that Europe has cultivated on its own soil for over 200 years ?
Could this social market economy with which you all , with very few exceptions , credit Europe , be a project for the world ?
I believe that the response could be affirmative .
This could be our response , with a certain number of conditions .
The first is accepting that sustainability in the economic , social and environmental sense can be a genuine common project , and it is that sustainability that is the real basis for stability and security .
If we agree on the first point , the second condition to be met is undoubtedly to form alliances on this subject with other parties in the world , and I find the concept of global public goods mentioned by Mrs Zrihen and Mr Désir interesting in that respect .
Then , clearly , the third condition is to succeed in providing our planet with the system of governance it needs .
Undoubtedly that system will have to be more comprehensive than the measure available to us today , which is both partial and unbalanced .
On this point , I agree with what both Mr Miranda and Mr Moreira Da Silva said .
It is clear from the wording of all these conditions that this is unlikely to take place without a Europe that is more solid , more united and more involved than today 's Europe .
In any case , that is what I think I understood on hearing Mrs Frassoni 's statements and , on this point , the Commission agrees .
Much remains to be done , as Mr Désir said with regard to the IMF proposal , and I agree with him on that point , even if his interpretation of the WTO 's General Agreement on Trade in Services continues to pose us a few problems here or there .
However , that is a discussion that I will also have to have with Mrs Auroi and a number of others .
Much clearly remains to be done , and I believe that the consideration of the current geopolitical situation , whether in terms of Iraq or the Middle East , reminds us , if this were necessary , that the objective of a common foreign and security policy - which is inextricably linked to the projects that you would like Europe to implement in the field of globalisation - is still a long way off .
I shall now speak on a number of more specific points .
I agree with Mrs Sanders-ten Holte and Mrs Korhola about the importance of companies ' social responsibility .
Private initiatives might come from the world of business to achieve better management of globalisation , just as , furthermore , there might be citizens ' initiatives on what President Suarez called citizen and social mobilisation .
This is proven , in particular , by fair trade and by consumer movements in favour of labelling that is environmentally friendly or promotes better social conditions for production .
We are quite aware that , in these areas , nothing will be done without mobilising society itself .
As regards the role and intervention of the parliaments and democratic control , Mrs Frassoni , you are aware of the Commission 's position on the place that this House , this Parliament , should occupy in this kind of debate , particularly where multilateral trade issues are concerned .
We would refer you to the Convention , which once again must rule on this point .
Let us hope that , on this point as on others , the Convention will be more productive than the last intergovernmental conference .
I shall not dwell on agricultural issues .
We will come back to them in the debate that is to follow .
With regard to the technological gap to be overcome , Mr Wijkman , you are correct , and I believe that we in the Commission agree on the fact that our public aid to development should , in a number of cases , be reoriented or reviewed .
As regards the service industry , the Commission 's proposals are now on the table .
Your Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy may take them up under the conditions of our institutional agreement .
These same proposals are also on the table of the Council of Ministers .
Thus , the time for public debate has begun , and I personally am delighted .
To end this debate , I have received six motions for resolutions presented in accordance with Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure
The next item is the Commission Statement on the ' Authorisation of generic medicines at WTO level ' .
Commissioner Lamy has the floor once again .
Mr President , this debate is an opportunity to discuss with you the work taking place in the World Trade Organisation on access for developing countries to medicines at an affordable price .
As you know , the members of the WTO have not been able to find a solution within the time set , which was the end of 2002 , to the problems encountered by developing countries which do not have the capacity to produce medicines , since the debate concerned that exact problem following the agreements signed in Doha .
The European Union has put a great deal of effort into searching for a solution .
We are adopting , and that has always been the basis for our position , an approach which , on the one hand , allows reduced-price medicines , including generic medicines , to reach those who need them , and on the other , allows the pharmaceutical industry to continue to invest in research .
We would like to reach a balanced result , first of all because we need to solve what is a substantial , in some cases tragic , social problem in many developing countries , and secondly because this situation clearly weighs heavily on the climate of trust that needs to reign around the table of the WTO in order for progress to be made in the Doha negotiations .
We have therefore worked very hard to try to find a solution that is both legally sound and sustainable , by refusing a moratorium on the regulation of differences of opinion as a solution to this question and rejecting any ideas of derogation from the outset .
We do not feel that either of these two methods fulfils these two conditions of soundness and sustainability .
We therefore cannot accept the current situation which is either failure or half-measures such as the moratorium , even though this half-measure provides a temporary solution .
The Union 's position remains the same .
We need to find a multilateral solution as quickly as possible , a sustainable , fair , solution which provides a sufficient degree of legal security for all the players to be able to join forces .
That is why we have fully accepted the draft agreement of 16 December that was on the table .
We found that it was reasonable and balanced and that it fulfilled the Doha mandate , and that is why , like the overwhelming majority of the members of the WTO , we were won over by it .
The problem of scope as regards the various types of health problem still remains .
We know that only the Americans have been unable to join the consensus on this point .
This situation , I have said this publicly and I repeat it to you now , is deeply regrettable , and this obstacle must be overcome .
It is clear to the Union that the Doha mandate is intentionally broad and that we must respect this .
In case of a serious public health problem , and I reiterate the terms of the Doha Declaration , the WTO mechanism allowing generic medicines to be imported can and must be activated .
We are therefore seeking an agreement that can go further , given the scope provided by Doha , including the assumption henceforth recognised by all that diseases such as AIDS , malaria , tuberculosis and a whole list of others would be covered as a general principle , and that is why we have suggested involving the WHO , which has undisputed experience in the field of public health .
We did so on the basis of a list which I would like to specify is neither exclusive nor restrictive .
We feel that the use of the system should not be limited to the diseases on this list .
There must be no misunderstanding on this point .
For any other serious public health problem , in the event of doubt over the basis for the measure , a member of the WTO could request a medical opinion from the World Health Organisation .
This possibility of requesting an opinion should allow the United States to overcome their reticence with regard to the use of the system by developing countries .
This would simply be a non-restrictive opinion .
There again , I would specify that this would in no way constitute an attack on the sovereignty of the Member States in the field of public health .
We all know that the role of the WHO is , at least currently , purely advisory .
Our objective , in placing this proposal on the table at the beginning of January , has been achieved .
Discussions have begun again .
Our proposal acts as a basis for these discussions and we are going to do all we can , as we have over the past few months , to convince the members of the WTO of the need for a compromise that is as close as possible to that of 16 December .
We must make progress .
Too many countries need to import low-cost medicines .
We know that the temporary measure that enables them to do so today is not permanent , and from that point of view we do not want to and cannot disappoint them .
Mr President , this evening we will identify what are probably the two make-or-break issues for the next WTO round in Cancun - TRIPS and public health and agriculture .
Developing countries ' perception of our good faith , good will and sincerity towards them will be tested by our attitude to these two issues .
As we know , binding agreement was reached in the form of the Doha Declaration , paragraph 6 of which highlighted the difficult issue of WTO members with insufficient or no manufacturing capacities in the pharmaceutical sector , who could face difficulties in making effective use of compulsory licensing under the TRIPS agreement .
The Council for TRIPS was asked to find an expeditious solution to this problem .
Commissioner , we welcome the efforts you have made and the backing you have had to get this implemented .
In an innovative and welcome suggestion you enlist the aid of the World Health Organisation .
If the intention is not honoured , the new constraints would violate the spirit of the Doha Declaration and would show bad faith .
I am sure you are right - and we have had discussions about this - to reject a moratorium on disputes or , indeed , a derogation .
Neither is an adequate solution .
The behaviour of the United States , not just on this issue but also - and far more seriously in some ways - on the issue of Iraq , is becoming increasingly difficult to understand .
Indeed , the only possible explanation is its politicians paying undue attention to the financial interests of pharmaceutical companies who paid for their election .
They have come up with only a unilateral solution and a narrow list .
This is inadequate !
Two deadlines have been missed already , and there is a real risk of deadlock if the efforts which we have channelled through you come to nothing .
Concerns which have been raised , for example on the diversion trade in generic medicines , are being tackled .
Hence the regulation by the Council of Ministers .
Let us welcome your proposal of 7 January .
It is a multilateral solution which enlists a reputable and widely trusted agency , the World Health Organisation .
As you said , the solution must be lasting , fair and legally viable .
The conflict should be examined on the basis of the guideline that public health has primacy over patents .
We cannot overestimate the importance of finding a solution to this issue . I wish you very good luck , Commissioner .
Mr President , in this debate it is perhaps worth citing once again what the Doha Declaration actually says .
I quote : ' The TRIPS agreement does not and should not prevent Members from taking measures to protect public health ' , and it : ' can and should be interpreted and implemented in a manner supportive of WTO members ' rights , to protect human health and , in particular , to promote access to medicines for all ' .
It is worth bearing in mind those words and repeating them for the record , particularly for the consumption of US observers .
I doubt they are listening right now , but perhaps we can send them a copy of the Minutes of this stimulating discussion later on .
The US position is not just contrary to the spirit of the Doha Declaration : it directly contravenes the letter of the Doha Declaration .
As such , it is a slap in the face for all developing countries which invested so much hope in the Doha Declaration and in the objectives of the Doha development round .
It represents a spectacular assertion of narrow and misguided commercial interests over the greater prize of a development round itself .
It is worth making that clear because if you then consider the commercial interests at stake , it becomes even more incomprehensible why the US is single-handedly blocking agreement in this area .
I would now like to quote a press release from the European Federation of Pharmaceutical Industries and Associations .
It states that : ' over 95 % of all medicines on the WHO drugs essential list are off-patent , and studies show that there are relatively few patents on AIDS drugs in Africa ' .
In other words , that statistic alone suggests there is very little commercial risk for either the European pharmaceuticals industry , or the US industry itself .
It is all the more frustrating to watch these deadlines being missed - even applying the logic of their own commercial self-interest - as a particular sector in the US blocks progress in this field .
My group strongly supports the initiatives taken by Commissioner Lamy and the European Commission .
We sympathise with his position and ask why it is that the US pharmaceuticals industry seems to have been able to marshal US government support in backing its irrational reaction to the EU proposal .
Unilateralism with a reason is just about comprehensible .
Unilateralism without any logic whatsoever is unforgivable .
Mr President , I would also like to express my group 's support for the good work of the Commissioner aimed at providing a satisfactory solution to this conflict which has arisen in Doha in relation to the United States ' position .
I would like to point out several inconsistencies : as a doctor and a teacher , I am aware of the range of reports presented each year by the World Health Organisation , which always cite the famous Horowitz vicious circle , according to which illness creates poverty and poverty creates illness .
We therefore have to break this vicious circle by helping to eradicate diseases - amongst other things - because the eradication of disease increases economic capacity and that helps to put countries in a position to produce , to have their own industry , and helps to provide access to these medicines for the people who need them .
We are therefore talking about a duty in which we have a high degree of responsibility .
It is also regrettable - as other speakers have said - that the unilateral position of the United States in this regard is having a bearing on one of the most negative aspects of the process of neoliberal globalisation we are suffering , which consists of increasing inequalities and hindering and weakening the situation of the countries with fewest resources .
We therefore have to understand that it is the European Union , which is based on a desire for peace , development and solidarity , which can introduce elements to ensure a rebalance within the context of this neoliberal process of globalisation which is under way in order to provide it with the elements which - as has been said during the previous debate - arose from the World Social Forum in Porto Alegre .
We therefore believe that the European Union 's efforts to make the World Health Organisation an organisation with the authority to be able to indicate the necessary health situations at any particular time to be appropriate , and we therefore support Mr Lamy 's position .
Mr President , I am amazed and saddened that this matter should be back up for discussion .
In November 2001 , the developing countries were rejoicing in the Doha Declaration , which authorised them to have recourse to compulsory licences for public health reasons .
There is just one cloud on the horizon : countries with no production capacity must have the medicines they need manufactured in another country and a company may only manufacture a medicine if 51 % of its production is intended for the national market .
This problem in paragraph 6 should have been solved before the end of 2002 .
It has still not been solved .
In the meantime , the American pharmaceutical laboratories , who are the main financial backers for the Bush campaign , have returned to the attack .
The proposals made by the United States or the European Union , which are each more restrictive than the last , have resulted in failure .
Today , the Trips Council is proposing to return to the previous wording allowing recourse to compulsory licences in urgent cases , a solution that proved inapplicable and led to the Doha Declaration .
The objective of paragraph 6 must be to ensure that countries with no production capacity can genuinely use compulsory licences .
On the contrary , however , some proposals create discrimination between first-class countries with a production capacity and second-class countries with no production capacity , which are , in fact , the poorest countries .
The former will be able to use compulsory licences to manufacture any medicine that responds to a public health problem that they themselves have identified , whereas the latter will have to prove that they are experiencing a national situation of urgency .
Although , in theory , all countries may have recourse to compulsory licences , in practice , the poorest countries will have to fight to have urgent situations recognised , obtain their licence and have their medicines manufactured .
This proposal is unacceptable and I would ask you , Mr Lamy , to propose a solution that is genuinely beneficial to developing countries so that health takes precedence over profit , as you yourself said so well .
Mr President , the crux of this issue is very simple .
It is that there are 42 million people in the world today suffering from the AIDS virus , yet we have the technology and the treatments available to combat diseases such this .
However , people in the developing countries cannot afford to pay the exorbitant prices for the medicines needed to treat sufferers of AIDS and other diseases such as malaria and tuberculosis .
If we are to provide these medicines to those who need them , we have to override the intellectual property rights of companies who have patented the technology to combat these diseases .
We can achieve this by reaching an agreement between all contracting parties at the level of the World Trade Organisation .
The crux of the discussions is the relationship between intellectual property rights and public health issues .
If developing countries can be given the right to distribute these much-needed medicines to their own people on their own licensing terms , then the cost of these medicines will be substantially reduced .
We all recall the much publicised court case brought by 40 pharmaceutical companies against the South African Government on this issue .
We have a moral obligation to support the effort of finding the way to provide urgently needed medicines to people in developing countries .
This is a matter for the World Trade Organisation , but progress , I regret , is far too slow .
Last November , the European Union presented a compromise proposal to the WTO ministerial meeting in Australia to find a solution to this important matter .
However , it now appears that the US Government is just not satisfied with the terms of this compromise .
The US Government believes that too many diseases are included in the European Union 's proposal .
Too many diseases are included they say , when in the meantime people are dying from AIDS , malaria and tuberculosis .
Over three million people will die from AIDS this year alone .
The technology is there to provide suitable treatment to sufferers of this disease .
Intellectual property rights will have to be put to one side so that we can alleviate the suffering of millions of people who will die needlessly , if we do not find an urgent solution to this issue .
On a separate but related matter , I have called on the members of the international community many times to increase their budgets to combat the AIDS epidemic .
In fact , debt relief programmes must be put in place for developing countries with high levels of AIDS sufferers .
Mr President , in the multilateral spirit of world solidarity and the global coalition against international terrorism immediately post 11 September , we in Europe , under the inspiring leadership of Commissioner Pascal Lamy , have gone all out to build bridges , to win the USA over and to make Doha a successful development round .
Ultimately the deciding factor turned out to be developing countries ' access to cheap medicines without paying for patents , either by their own production or by importing them .
Ultimately the political breakthrough came .
All developing countries can now establish when they are having a serious health crisis or problem and nothing is preventing them , not even the TRIPs agreement , from buying or producing cheap medicines .
That applies to all developing countries and all medicines .
There are no restrictions , and no external prior approval is needed .
The assignment was to round this off in a legally conclusive text .
This should have been done in December 2002 , but it failed because the USA , in my opinion , was no longer adopting a multilateral position .
I believe President Bush trampled all over the Doha agreement in favour of his own pharmaceutical industry .
Commissioner Lamy , you have always told us that you are negotiating on behalf of the whole of Europe and that you accept the European Parliament as possessing powers of democratic control and codecision .
Well , this is an important point for the Group of the Party of European Socialists - and , when I listen to my fellow-Members , for many other groups too .
We should like to say that you enjoy our full support , but we do not wish to bow under pressure from the USA any further .
So : this far and no further .
We want no restrictions on countries , no restrictions on the types of medicines , nor any prior approval by an external authority .
That is naturally a little different from the advice from the WHO .
We do support stringent measures to protect our own European market against dumping , however .
With more than 90 % of AIDS patients in developing countries , we want Europe to unambiguously decide which side it is on and to strictly limit itself to a solution in line with the political Doha agreement .
We urge other groups in this Parliament to vote accordingly .
The interests of AIDS , tuberculosis and malaria patients worldwide must be at centre stage .
Not commerce .
Necessity knows no law .
The TRIPS agreements must not be a limiting factor .
As the PSE Group we are convinced that if this point fails , Doha will be keelhauled and Cancun will have failed before it even starts .
Then there will be no development round !
And that is the last thing that the world will permit in the current , very serious crisis .
That is why we are taking this clear stance .
Having heard my fellow-Members Mr Wijkman , Mr Clegg and Mrs McNally and many others , I think that Parliament is on the point of making a clear judgment and giving Commissioner Lamy , who , as he has understood , enjoys our full support , a powerful mandate .
The arrangements made in Doha are crucial for allowing people in developing countries better access to medicines , particularly those for diseases associated with poverty .
My group is of the opinion that Commissioner Lamy has taken some excellent initiatives with a view to making healthcare more easily accessible , including in the poorest countries and specifically in those countries that do not have their own production capacity .
I would , however , like to put forward one criticism , although I agree with all the things that have been said here .
Access to medicines is not only a question of money .
There are two other issues that I would like to raise .
Firstly the infrastructure in the countries concerned , and in this case I am talking about distribution and about which people in those countries get access to these medicines .
Distribution means that there must be an infrastructure , something that is completely absent in many poor countries .
What is even worse : this is not a priority for the regimes in the countries concerned .
For example , a person taking AIDS medicines has to take them up to three times a day every day .
This means that they have to stick rigidly to their treatment regime and that distribution channels are therefore needed to ensure that the patients concerned can always obtain their medicines .
If this does not happen , the remedy will be worse than the disease , because people will become resistant to these diseases and that will ultimately work its way through to Western countries as well .
Then new medicines will have to be developed .
That is my first point .
My second point is that regimes are often , in fact , corrupt .
In such cases it turns out that the only medicines that are made available are the ones we have exported to these countries at low tariffs or the ones that can be produced there without patents , and even then they are only available to the better-off and not to the poorest population groups for whom we had intended them .
What is more , they are sometimes re-exported or simply exported to Western countries .
Commissioner , Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel is painting a very negative picture of developing countries .
Fortunately , things are progressing at this moment , although diseases are progressing even faster .
It is precisely this race , against AIDS , tuberculosis and malaria , that we must try to win .
Attempts are actually being made to set up basic healthcare systems in many countries , in which , in fact no such things once existed , and the European Union must not be found wanting in this .
It is the case that there was a time when treating people who became sick despite prevention - which , let us be honest , is not perfect even today - was an unachievable ideal .
For the first time , however , there is hope that people - even those who are HIV positive - can in fact improve their lives and the quality of their lives if they have access to medicines .
It is therefore of the utmost importance that you succeed in your assignment , Commissioner .
All of us here in the European Parliament support you in your endeavour to ensure that disease can be overcome , even in countries which do not have the resources to do so themselves .
The failure of Doha does , however , make us pessimistic .
I hope that you will be able to tell us that we can revert to our own proposals , but I am also prepared to give your compromise a chance because I think that it is reasonable , although I find it too paternalistic . I think , though , that it is a minimum and I hope you are at least successful in that .
Mr President , I will not bash America because the whole set of international trading regulations on medicines is in a mess .
Unfortunately , once drug companies - even with the best intention to alleviate suffering - allowed their products and intellectual property rights to be semi-confiscated under the guise of becoming available on affordable terms in developing countries , it was inevitable that all sorts of complications would arise .
These include definitions of what constitutes a measure to protect public health and is , therefore , subject to the compulsory licensing requirements allowed under TRIPS .
Initially , the communicable diseases of HIV-AIDS , malaria and TB were included , but now there are plans to extend this list if the WHO thinks it appropriate .
As these countries become more developed , more western diseases will become endemic , and a case will be made to extend the categories even further .
Also , as more migrants come to Europe , diseases such as the three above will become more common .
This will create markets for these drugs and lead to enormous market-driven pressures for parallel re-importation by unscrupulous middlemen from LDCs , which produce them cheaply as generics .
This will undercut the profits of legitimate pharmaceutical industries .
It also appears that the exemptions discriminate against smaller countries which lack the manufacturing base to produce the required life-saving drugs under compulsory licences .
How much simpler it would have been if we had been more robust in defending the rights of drug companies to maintain their patent rights all over the world and then negotiated some differences in pricing , according to what the markets could actually bear and , at the same time , insisted that the burden of the drugs bill be picked up by and large by aid packages rather than by raiding the shareholder capital of the major pharmaceuticals .
If there are to be reduced profits for the pharmaceuticals , my country , the UK , will suffer disproportionately , as it is a major employer and export-earner , and many of our pension funds are heavily invested in this sector .
After all , many developing countries - even if the drugs were free - do not have the infrastructures to administer the treatments .
Besides , profits are essential to fund further innovative research and development in the future , even into orphan drugs for rare tropical illnesses , which are of little interest in the West at present .
At the very least , I call for a three-yearly review in future to see how this TRIPS agreement works out in practice .
Mr President , the tragedy , as the Commissioner indicated , is that we still have a deadlock over changes that might deliver the real objectives we identified in Doha , which would allow countries - as others have said - to have the manufacturing capacity to export cheaper generic medicines to countries in need .
The reality is that developing countries will not accept the United States ' insistence on restricting exports to those who treat only a handful of infectious diseases .
I fear also that , even if the United States concedes , the reforms will be wrapped up in red tape and have some TRIPS-plus features .
We should now consider a fresh start that is likely to produce a workable solution , although I accept , regrettably , that this is unlikely .
The danger is that this whole issue could drag on until Cancun .
If this were to happen , then the TRIPS issues could then again be used as a bargaining chip in the negotiations on agriculture , services and the new issues .
Is that something you see as likely , Commissioner ?
Surely it would be disastrous if developing countries were expected to do trade-offs in the only real area where they secured such a major victory at Doha .
The spirit and reality of the development round is surely called into question if developing countries have the clear perception - and they do now , as Mrs McNally said - that commercial interest is being put before public health .
That was not the intention at Doha .
You understand , Commissioner , as others have said , that these are issues of justice and equity and that the concept of the development round would become a sham if the industrialised world is seen as , or perceived to be , reneging on the position that was so satisfactorily agreed at Doha .
Mr President , when the United States recently faced the threat of an anthrax attack , the authorities needed adequate and cheap supplies of medicine to treat the illness .
They therefore took it upon themselves to oblige the pharmaceutical laboratory concerned to provide the medicines more cheaply .
Had the laboratory refused to do this , the United States authorities would have resorted to a compulsory licence .
I would remind you that , at that time , no one required the United States to consult the World Health Organisation first to check if anthrax was on the list of diseases deemed to be admissible in this case .
The United States was not required to negotiate the conditions for the potential production of such a generic medicine .
Why then are certain developing countries now being required to do so ?
I will now move on to my second point .
I believe Mr Clegg was right to cite the Doha declaration .
I think my fellow Members were right to remind us that an undertaking was implemented and that this undertaking should be respected .
According to the undertaking nothing in the interpretation of the agreements on intellectual property should prevent developing countries and WTO member countries from tackling their public health needs , whether or not they have the capacity to produce medicines .
These countries should therefore be allowed to make their own decisions on this .
Those with the capacity to produce medicines should be able to decide the circumstances in which they might need to resort to compulsory licences .
Those without the capacity to produce medicines should be able to decide the circumstances in which they might need to resort to parallel imports .
These imports would be legal , as they would be sanctioned by the state .
Mr Rod and Mr Wijkman are therefore right , as are others like Mr Van den Berg , when they say that we would be imposing on the poorest countries conditions which do not apply to industrialised countries or to developing countries with the capacity to produce medicines .
I think we are now faced with the difficult task of finding a simple and effective solution to the problem .
Any solution must not entail long and costly negotiations and procedures .
The latter would eventually cost the lives of millions of sick people who would die without access to treatment .
We heard that our fellow Member , Mr Tannock , is more concerned about the possible fall in the profits of certain industries than the fate of the sick .
Mr Lamy , you are clearly under pressure from certain quarters , including the European industries . I urge you not to give way to these pressures !
Please speak for the people of Europe .
The people want us to help the sick in developing countries .
Mr President , I welcome the European Union initiative in January to break the current WTO deadlock on developing countries ' access to affordable medicines , particularly those countries which do not have the manufacturing capacity to make generic medicines locally .
Just last month , Commissioner Lamy proposed a pragmatic solution which , in his view , is workable , sustainable and legally secure , because it complies with both the Doha mandate and the compromise text of 16 December 2002 that was discussed within the WTO .
The EU initiative covers the most comprehensive possible list of major infectious diseases but is not restrictive , which was the main problem with the negotiations in 2002 .
Commissioner Lamy 's list includes : yellow fever , plague , cholera , meningitis , dengue , influenza , hepatitis , polio , typhoid fever , typhus and measles .
These are all horrendous diseases that have been virtually eradicated in the West , yet millions die unnecessarily in the Third World every year .
The Lamy strategy would save lives , and pharmaceutical companies will not be losing revenue because the people in these countries are too poor to buy the medication as it stands .
The debilitating effect of these diseases affects families , communities and economies throughout the developing world .
This EU initiative should help to improve the standard of living and public health in some , if not all , of the developing world .
However , it is essential that a mechanism is constructed to deal with the other public health issues and potential outbreaks , and not just the diseases listed in the compromise deal .
The list proposed by Commissioner Lamy is not restrictive - WTO members could ask for World Health Organisation guidance for any other serious public health problems which may arise in the future or are not covered by the list as it stands .
This gives the EU proposal some flexibility to respond to unforeseen outbreaks .
The response will be based on World Health Organisation expertise in the field .
The compromise proposal , which is more humane that the US approach , should allay US concerns that patent laws could be breached and weakened .
At the same time , it provides sufficient flexibility to deal with specific disease-related crises , should they occur .
This debate will hopefully send a strong message of support for the Lamy proposal , as the WTO General Council simultaneously discusses the subject .
It is important to help the developing world to eradicate these diseases without depriving the pharmaceutical industry of the funding it needs for further research in this area .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to say how pleased I am that we are holding this debate on the World Trade Organisation and on certain ongoing negotiations . This comes on the eve of another ministerial meeting at which specific political positions on the matter might be sealed .
I am however concerned about the declaration of the Council for TRIPS . It means going back on the undertakings we gave at Doha .
Access to generic medicines for developing countries is not just a commercial issue . It is at the heart of development the world over .
If we do not make progress on this question , all our other efforts to promote development will be in vain . We would be wasting our time .
Achieved in difficult circumstances , the Doha declaration on public health of November 2001 was an important first step towards helping the populations of developing countries and promoting their interests .
We looked forward to at last sending a message of hope to those people .
In December 2002 however , opposition to the agreement , for which the United States was entirely responsible , clearly demonstrated that the interests of the pharmaceutical industry took precedence over the health of millions of people .
This stance is not merely unfortunate .
It is unacceptable and inadmissible , given that as my fellow Member Mr Désir outlined , the United States was prepared to suspend the Bayer patent in October 2001 , because they were experiencing an anthrax attack , which was obviously a matter of greater urgency for them .
We should welcome the efforts of the Commission to reach an agreement on access to medicines .
Nonetheless , the Commission is still failing to take enough account of the legitimate demands of poor countries .
This comes as we are about to retain the division of countries into a first and a second class , as if the deaths in some regions were less important than deaths in others .
Negotiations with a view to reaching an agreement must recommence at the earliest opportunity . The lives of millions of people in developing countries are at stake .
I am convinced agreement could be obtained on the basis of the Doha declaration and Article 30 of the ADPIC agreement , and on that basis alone .
An agreement achieved on any other basis , that did not take account of Article 30 , would extinguish the hopes of the people of developing countries . They want to lift themselves out of poverty and improve their worsening living conditions , conditions that are increasingly unacceptable .
Such an agreement would also send a clear message to the people of Europe .
It could be a fine example of the basis on which the European Union works and of the extent of our concern for others .
Commissioner , we call on you to speak for our collective conscience .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that we have to start by clarifying whether patent laws are actually in place .
The copyright must be valid in the country in which it is sold ; that is to say , it must have been registered and granted there .
Of course , things can always be manufactured in a country where there is no copyright on them , and there must be doubt as to whether , although they clearly bring benefits , the medicinal products have actually been patented in every country around the world ; I really cannot imagine that they have been , but should that indeed be the case , it follows that compulsory licensing is the ideal approach when it comes to giving help quickly and in a consistent way .
We must ask ourselves , though , what happens if a compulsory licence is actually granted .
Will it solve all our problems ?
What about prevention and complete recovery ?
I think it self-evident that medicinal products need to be developed further , and that we have to focus primarily on creating incentives for research , rather than simply allowing ourselves to reduce the issue to patent rights and licences .
When , moreover , the copyright has expired and compulsory licences have been granted , we politicians , too , will bear responsibility for universities and industry having incentives to carry out research .
Another important step in the right direction would be to put out public invitations to tender several times in a given year , to safeguard the fundamental principle that sufferers from disease really should get the most modern and the most effective medication available .
For if , in future , research in this area of medicinal products , and the marketing of them , ceases to be a viable business proposition , we will be faced with the problem of being able to offer medicinal products that may well be cheap , but are not as effective as they might be .
What do we do then ?
Mr President , this is a difficult issue on which feelings can run high . I would first like to thank the representatives of all the groups who have expressed their support for the position I have adopted on behalf of the Commission .
I have noted the statements made by Mr Wijkman , Mrs McNally , Mr Clegg , Mr Marset Campos and Mrs Maes in particular .
The European Parliament is firmly united on this issue .
This is very important for us at the Commission , it is important to me and it is important in the field of external relations .
I would point out that the issue of the use of compulsory licences by countries with a pharmaceutical industry to obtain benefit from differentiated prices and lower prices was settled at Doha .
On that occasion we did not however settle the issue of countries which have to resort to imports . This implies that the system of compulsory licensing could be applied across international boundaries , giving rise to complicated legal problems .
This problem is currently dealt with on a provisional basis .
All developing countries can at present use a compulsory licensing system to obtain benefit from differentiated prices . This applies to medicines to treat diseases like AIDS , malaria , tuberculosis and certain other diseases .
This is possible because of the provisional arrangement that the United States and the European Union implemented in December .
This provisional arrangement is simply not enough however .
We think it is unlikely to galvanise all the parties involved . These parties are the governments concerned , their health systems and the pharmaceutical industry .
A long-term solution must therefore be found .
None has so far emerged from the discussions taking place in Geneva , because of the American position .
Further evidence of this was provided at the Council on TRIPS this morning .
I would like to reassure Mrs Kinnock on one point .
The issue of access to medicines is not on the Doha negotiating programme due to be concluded at the end of 2004 .
It does not feature amongst the fifteen subjects we decided to discuss .
The issue falls beyond the scope of these negotiations and will therefore not be the subject of any kind of trade-off .
It stands alone as a subject in its own right and on the table of the World Trade Organisation .
This issue is not linked to the rest of the negotiations by virtue of the agenda but because it testifies to the capacity of the World Trade Organisation to instil confidence in its members . Consequently , when it comes to discussing the question of whether the compulsory licensing system should be used for Viagra or for medicines to treat toothache for example , members have the confidence to prevent the discussions degenerating into a legal battle .
I am simply referring to this particular example because I have read about it in the press . This all amounts to a major problem for the World Trade Organisation .
I wonder why the pharmaceutical industry has adopted the position it has . The latter resulted in the United States rejecting the compromise on the table in December .
I have to say that I am completely baffled .
I did not understand the position that the American pharmaceutical industry took in South Africa either , and I also failed to understand the position it adopted when it very nearly caused a stand-off between the United States and Brazil , until the United States Government saw the light . I just cannot understand its attitude .
Its stance will only strengthen opposition to the principle of intellectual property across a large number of sectors . In truth , it is easy to present this conflict between health and profits in such a way that , little by little , if the American pharmaceutical industry continues as it has been doing , there will be sound political reasons for starting work on agreements on intellectual property .
This time the determination will be there .
I would urge those of you who have some influence in this field to use this argument to try to convince these people that their attitude will not get them where they want to be , but will lead them in the opposite direction . The United States would do well to consider an example of how to reach a consensus when circumstances make this imperative .
They could study the attitude adopted by the European Union recently towards the Kimberly process on the subject of blood diamonds . This may be a less high profile case , but it is nonetheless important , especially for certain developing countries .
We Europeans were isolated in the World Trade Organisation . We were the only party reluctant to ask the WTO for a dispensation to implement the Kimberly agreements .
We stood alone and eventually decided to go along with the consensus because we did not want to stand in the way of this solution .
We shall do so by coming up with our own interpretation of the articles of the WTO .
The United States could perfectly well adopt the same approach on this issue .
On the question of parallel imports raised by several Members , I am sure you will be aware that the Commission has put forward a proposal for the European Union .
The Council is currently studying the proposal . Those of you with an interest in the matter could join me in urging the Council to take less time than usual to rule on the proposal .
I would now like to move on to my last point .
I agree with those Members who explained that while the problem of price and the problem of taking account of patent law in connection with prices are important , these are not the only problems to be solved . There are many other issues to address if we are to ensure better access to medicines for people in developing countries .
The quality of the health systems must be improved .
There needs to be a system of public research into diseases that no longer exist in developed countries and are therefore no longer of interest to the pharmaceutical industry . Problems of distribution and medical culture must be resolved .
There will still be much to be done , even after the difficulties relating to patent law have been overcome , which I trust will be soon . This is not however a reason for giving up on our determined efforts to ensure that this first , important and highly symbolic step is taken with the help of the European Union .
The Commission will certainly persevere , spurred on by the statements made during this debate .
Pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) I have received six motions for resolution to wind up the debate
The next item is the Commission statement on the WTO agricultural trade negotiations .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Communication that the European Commission has just presented to Parliament on the modalities of the agricultural agreement to be negotiated at the forthcoming WTO Round was unanimously approved on 27 January by the General Affairs Council .
I believe this proposal to be balanced and to be in line with the spirit of Article 20 of the Marrakech Agreement and of the Doha Declaration and makes a genuine and generous contribution to those who until now have gained little from almost 50 years of multilateralism in trade - in other words , the world 's poorest countries .
Evidence of this is the proposal for free access to the markets of the richest countries for the agricultural products of the poorer countries . Also , the compromise proposal intended to ensure that at least 50 % of rich countries ' agricultural and food imports come from the poorest countries .
This proposal is coherent with current practice in the European Union which , as the Commission states in one of its recent documents , imports more food products than the United States , Japan , Australia , Canada and New Zealand put together .
This is what gives us the moral authority to say that this WTO Round must be the development round .
This is also why we have proposed a food security fund that will enable the poorest countries to implement measures to protect their markets from the subsidised exports of the rich countries , thereby enabling them to develop local production and to fight hunger and poverty .
We must also be aware , however , of one important aspect , which is that an excessive reduction of customs tariffs could undermine preferential access to the EU market , which is already benefiting some countries with which we have trade agreements .
Amongst these are the ACP countries , under the Cotonou agreements , and the countries on the southern shores of the Mediterranean .
We will have to be careful about this because if we establish excessive tariff reductions and do not ensure that our market preferences in favour of these countries are consolidated , these same poor countries could lose market share to other , richer and more competitive countries .
It is also because of this attitude of openness and support towards the poorest countries that gives us , the European Union , the moral authority , to say that we also have the right to protect our farmers and to preserve our social model .
The European negotiators can therefore only accept a final agreement at the WTO that firstly preserves the European farming model based on farming 's contribution to rural land-use planning , to the territory 's balance and to the vitality of rural areas , which represent almost 80 % of our territory .
What this means , specifically , is that the EU will be able to continue to support its farmers and to guarantee a reasonable - and only a reasonable - level of Community preference for farm produce .
Secondly , we must ensure the right balance between greater trade liberalisation and greater requirements in areas that are not strictly trade related , but are definitely related to the trade in food , such as , in particular , the quality and safety of food , compliance with basic environmental standards and adherence to the trademarks and denominations of origin and geographical indications of our products which , as we all know , are widely counterfeited by a huge variety of countries across the world , with the WTO rules unable to prevent this happening .
Unless this is done , we shall be doing something that our society does not understand and we shall be attacking our own interests and , even worse , we shall not be supporting the interests of the poorest countries .
I think that the European Union has provided a good example of good , reasonable proposals for these countries that have until now been the most marginal players , the most marginal beneficiaries of the WTO - the poor countries .
We have come up with good and positive initiatives under ' everything but arms ' , and our proposal for negotiation consolidates these proposals . I therefore believe that we must call on other rich countries in the world , even more highly developed than we are , to follow the EU 's example .
Mr President , I am pleased indeed that Commissioners Lamy and Fischler will be going to Tokyo for the mini-ministerial with an approved position .
I agree with you , Commissioner Lamy , that the agriculture negotiations will be very important in determining whether or not the meetings in Cancun are a success .
I am pleased too that you have defined for us ' modalities ' , it is a word strange to the English language , but of course , once you come to rules and numbers you are then beginning to be so clear that certain vested interests begin to take fright , so these negotiations will be difficult .
The European Union certainly has a world responsibility in terms of negotiations on agriculture .
As Mr Cunha has just said , the volume of trade alone would make us significant .
However , we do not have sole responsibility , and countries such as the United States should be reminded that they have a responsibility too .
I am sure in your discussions with Bob Zurlik you will remind him of that .
However , you said quite clearly that the European Union can and will negotiate , so let us look at what that means .
Naturally we have the interest of European producers and consumers in higher food quality , rural development , environment protection and animal welfare .
Some of those issues need clarification , and at the same time , the raison d 'être of the development round are the needs of agriculture in developing countries where , proportionately , it is of far more importance than it is in the European Union .
It is the principal source of income and employment in developing countries and a major tool in the fight against poverty and indeed in the improvement of food security .
So our aim is multi-faceted , we need a better deal for agriculture in developing countries , but we also need to strengthen targeted support for certain aspects of European agriculture .
We have a certain margin of manoeuvre within which to do it .
There is some feeling within the Socialist Group that the proposal is somewhat lacking in ambition .
We expect to be offering to the developing world a bigger and an earlier reduction in all agricultural tariffs and in getting rid of restrictions of imports from the developing world .
We want more insistence on the importance of the greenbox and more attention to special and differential treatment .
You will need to consider whether the current CAP reform goes far enough . The Socialist Group would probably think not .
We will leave it to you to push the agenda forward as quickly as you can .
My group is also of the opinion that the mandate that the Commission has been given is a good one , and that it is quite happy to be publicly associated with it .
Negotiations have only just begun , and we are sure that if the Commission - Europe - takes a certain step , other trade blocs will have to follow .
For us the most important thing is that we have found that the European people do not fully support European agricultural policy at this moment .
Clearly this must change , so we must change European agricultural policy .
We are in favour of the maximum possible reduction trade subsidies that distort trade , and this applies in particular to export subsidies and other similar subsidies imposed by other trade blocs .
We are therefore generally in favour of greater liberalisation of trade in agricultural products .
Something else enters into this , however .
In Europe we have all sorts of rules which have little to do with the health of the product but much more to do with ethical principles , such as animal welfare , the bird and habitat directive , and so on .
Elsewhere in the world , farmers have far fewer of these kinds of rules to contend with .
I always find it very difficult to explain to European farmers why they have to adhere to these rules and at the same time compete with farmers elsewhere in the world who do not have to .
This seems to me to be a recipe for unfair competition , and I think that the Commission should emphasise this , particularly in its negotiations with the World Trade Organisation .
What is more , farmers in various parts of Europe do not always enjoy a very good income .
We cannot change everything from one day to the next , and I therefore think that we need to pay great attention to the European agricultural model ; this is something that we can certainly defend in an international context .
We must be able to reward farmers for their performance on a basis other than their production of agricultural products .
I can therefore only emphasise the need for the Commission to defend the worldwide recognition of regional products grown in Europe and the ban on their being grown elsewhere under the same name .
The Commission must also emphatically underline our endorsement of a system of integrated agricultural production , with control from stable to table , so to speak .
I would also like to emphasise that in addition to the policy of improving product prices , we need another policy to cover the use of agricultural products for industrial purposes .
Finally , everything but arms : the overwhelming majority of my group supports this , and we must do something for the poorest developing countries .
The great question for our group is that of how the Commission is dealing with the principle of origin , and how , as we intend , we can be sure that products imported by us really do come from the poorest countries .
Mr President , I believe it would have been better to have held this debate before , and not after , the General Affairs Council had agreed to the Community 's offer for negotiation of the agricultural aspects of the WTO .
It is clear that this is necessary for institutional balance and the whole decision-making process .
This is not a new practice , however , since there are precedents in the reform of the CAP of 1992 and in Agenda 2000 .
I say this because certain aspects , such as the reduction in internal support , involve the need to adopt very controversial aspects in the proposed regulations on intermediate reform .
We are talking about aspects such as total decoupling which , as well as being rejected by many MEPs - including myself - is also opposed by professions and many Member States .
With regard to the content , I would continue to say the same thing : we are accepting a policy which will lack substantial and sufficient funds and which could therefore have negative effects on Community agriculture and in particular on the least-favoured regions .
With regard to the more specific proposals , I believe that there are some quite positive aspects in relation to the least-developed countries .
However , the assumption is made that greater liberalisation of trade will lead to greater economic development . And this is not always the case .
In this regard , I would like to point out that the two most liberalised markets - coffee and cocoa - are the agricultural markets with the highest level of poverty surrounding them and in which the producing countries call for less liberalisation and more regulation .
Neither can the negotiations be based on world market prices which , although it is true they are linked to the volumes marketed , bear very little relation to production and consumer prices .
In any event , I believe it is important to make progress in order to remove export refunds for agricultural products with damaging effects on local agricultural production in the least-developed countries .
We must recognise the right of the less developed countries to protect themselves from these subsidised exports in order to safeguard their fundamental right to food security , to food sovereignty and to the survival of their small-scale and family-run farms .
I believe the proposal to create a food security box is interesting , since it would be very useful also for the European Union for strategic and food security reasons .
But in this regard the Commission is forgetting our dependency on vegetable proteins from outside and , specifically , from countries , in this case , which are not underdeveloped or developing , but which are very developed .
And our dependency stands at 75 % . This seems to me to be an extraordinary oversight .
Finally , given its distorting use by the United States and other countries , I am very pleased with the proposals to eliminate the de minimis clause , to subject export credits and food aid to strict discipline and to protect geographical indications .
Mr President , Commissioner , many developing world countries , along with many NGOs that are active around the globe , have demanded that responsibility for negotiations on agriculture should not be handed over to the WTO , a demand made also at the World Social Forum in Porto Alegre .
There are good reasons for this . We have to see that , in the past , although agricultural trade affected the world 's agricultural production only to a minimal degree , its mechanisms , and the resultant price destruction had a profound effect not only on European countries , but also on those in the developing world .
Not only there , but also in Europe , its practice of dumping - in the form of export subsidies - destroyed or marginalised rural farming , bringing even greater hunger , forcing countries into a state of dependency , and causing debts to accumulate .
It is abundantly clear that trade does not fill stomachs , and if anyone does get rich from it , it is seldom if ever both the parties concerned .
It is therefore understandable that it is from these sources that highly sceptical questions are being asked about precisely what is to be negotiated at the WTO .
If the WTO negotiations are to be successful , then these mechanisms have to be done away with .
Care must be taken to give absolute priority to the right to produce basic foodstuffs , the right of countries to alleviate their own people 's hunger , the right to cultivate the land and to treat the environment properly , along with the right to pass farms on to the next generation , thus maintaining rural farming , as well as the dismantling of destructive trade mechanisms , and of what we call world trade , which amounted to nothing more than export dumping . This will enable us to develop in solidarity with people in the developing world , as well as with rural farming in Europe .
Mr President , the WTO negotiations on agriculture , combined with the Commission 's proposals for CAP reform , represent fundamental change for European agriculture and the welfare of farm families .
I have said on many occasions in this House that uncertainty about the future is having devastating consequences for farm families .
I query the degree of compatibility between the Commission 's commitment to the EU agricultural model , which is based on family farming , and the proposals in the world trade negotiations .
Trade liberalisation , combined with a progressive reduction in EU farm support - particularly when this reduction is to apply to those already on the margins - raises serious doubts as to our real intentions .
As for the detail of the WTO proposal , what we see once again is a desire by the Commission to exceed the mandate given to it by Member States .
The cuts proposed in export subsidies , import tariffs and domestic farm support are both excessive and unnecessary .
They certainly go beyond any area of commitment entered into in the Uruguay or Doha Rounds .
When we see how our competitors behave - especially in the United States ' Farm Bill - one has to ask why we in Europe have to lie down on every occasion and roll over .
Now that the EU petition has been tabled with the WTO , I plead with the Commission to defend vigorously the vital interests of European and , indeed , Irish agriculture .
Improved market access will intensify competition in the EU market .
I call on the Commission to be particularly vigilant during the negotiations on the products more sensitive to this aggressive competition , in particular beef and butter .
I want the Commission to ensure that only minimal tariff reductions will be applied to those sensitive sectors .
It is impossible to debate the forthcoming agricultural negotiations at the WTO without putting the matter in the context of the Commission 's mid-term review last month .
All six impact studies , which the Commission carried out , assumed there would be no change in the multilateral trading framework .
However , this is clearly not the case .
While it is difficult to forecast the outcome of the current round , the one thing we can be certain about is that a reduction in tariff protection will be part of any agreement .
Given the volume of beef and sheepmeat that is entering the EU at present levels of protection , it is equally certain that most , if not all , of the gap in the EU market created by the reduction in EU supplies will be filled by products from third countries .
I ask where then are the price increases which have been forecast by all these studies to come from ?
Decoupling , taken together with the WTO proposals , will cause a reduction in EU production of beef and sheepmeat .
The Commission already knows my view that this will have a disproportionate impact on Ireland .
Despite Commissioner Fischler being very dismissive of this when he presented his proposals to the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development last month , I still hold firmly to my view .
I am not afraid to be dismissed as a merchant of doom when I hold a view borne out by hard scientific data , compiled in an independent study on behalf of the Irish Government .
For example , the Commission study indicates a 3 % fall in EU beef production , but a 12 % fall in Irish beef production .
We will have to take the worst of both worlds : a serious reduction in production with the associated consequences for the economy , including unemployment in our vital agrifood sector , and the anticipated market vacuum filled by third-country imports .
To conclude , I repeat what I said to the Commission last July when the mid-term review proposals were made and again when the legislative proposals were made last month : the combined effects of the prospect of greatly liberalised agricultural trade under the WTO and the Commission proposals for major reform of the common agricultural policy are potentially devastating for European agriculture .
Less than 10 % of the world 's agricultural production ends up in international trade .
The overwhelming bulk is traded locally or nationally .
This means that proposals intended to regulate trade in 10 % of production , as is the case with the World Trade Organisation , must not lose sight of the effects of these measures on trade in the other 90 % .
I do not have time to go into all the aspects of the European proposal to the WTO , so I will restrict myself to the position of developing countries and the European model for multifunctional agriculture .
For some of the world 's population , food is not something that can be taken for granted .
We must keep a close eye on the interests of these population groups at the WTO discussions .
These interests go further than simply breaking down tariff barriers and preferential access to the European market ; preferential access does not necessarily result in an increase in the income of the developing countries and their people .
A recent study has shown that complete liberalisation of trade only provides poor countries with a minimal increase in their income .
Countries such as India and Nigeria are asking for the WTO agreements to be applied flexibly , and rightly so .
They want to support and protect their agricultural sectors and the development of the countryside in order to offer their rural population some security of existence .
These countries need subsidies in order to guarantee food security and to support small-scale agriculture .
I am therefore pleasantly surprised by the Commission 's proposal for a Food Security Box and by the scope that Europe wants to offer these countries to support their own agriculture by means of subsidies .
Export subsidies are destroying the world market .
The Commission is , quite rightly , proposing to reduce these further .
If other countries agree to this , the result may be an increase in prices on the world market .
I would , however , like to point out to the Commission that this does not help everybody .
As many as 43 countries in Africa are net importers of food .
They will therefore be worse off if food prices on the world market increase .
This is why , in addition to the anti-dumping measures , technical assistance for these countries is of great importance .
The incomes of farmers in the European Union are under pressure .
Trade liberalisation is primarily of importance to trade and the processing industry .
If Europe wants to retain its family-run farms , it will have to take measures that conflict with the principles of free trade .
It will also have to act more effectively than it is doing at the moment .
A study by the OECD shows that only a quarter of every euro of support that goes to agriculture ends up with the farmer .
Further liberalisation without sufficient protection for the European agricultural model will result in a reduction in the number of farmers .
Fortunately , the Commission 's proposal to the WTO is putting the case for the multifunctional agricultural model .
There should still be the possibility of subsidies for aspects that do not disrupt trade , such as the environment , animal welfare and countryside development , but I hope that the Commission also realises that a viable agricultural sector in Europe needs sufficient scope to regulate its market .
Because agriculture still does not operate like a bicycle factory , we need appropriate protection at our borders .
This protection must be transparent .
Food aid as a capped form of dumping is reprehensible .
The Commission rightly highlights this in its proposal , along with other forms of agricultural support such as export credits , export guarantees and state trading enterprises .
Finally , the Commission 's proposal is lacking a significant policy instrument that has a positive effect on the market and prices - I am referring to production control .
This instrument is working properly for sugar and dairy products .
The only discordant note sounded by this system is the dumping on the world market of surpluses caused by excessively high quotas .
We should therefore not do away with the quota system , but quotas should be realistic .
The quota for dairy products is 105 % of consumption .
If we brought this down to 100 % , we would free the world market from dumped sugar and milk powder and we would at the same time offer our farmers a better price .
Mr President , the Commission 's proposals for the WTO negotiation modality , or rules on agriculture , were unanimously supported by Member States at the recent General Affairs Council , following earlier discussions with various trade policy groups and the agriculture fora .
They have now been submitted to Geneva to be considered , along with the proposals of the other members of the World Trade talks , including the United States , the Cairns Group and the developing countries .
Agreement on the rules under which the new agreement will be concluded is due by the end of March this year , and agreement on the new round itself by the beginning of 2005 .
But let us call it as it is . There are marked differences in the positions of the main negotiating parties , and there will be pressure on all , including the European Union , to compromise .
The European Union negotiates at the World Trade talks on the basis of a mandate which was approved by the Council of Ministers back in September 1999 .
That was subsequently endorsed by the General Affairs Council .
That mandate is based on the Agenda 2000 agreement , one of the main objectives of which was to prepare the EU for the WTO negotiations .
Last December the Commission presented a draft paper which it said is consistent with the EU 's negotiating mandate at WTO level , as approved by the Council in 1999 .
It is consistent therefore with Agenda 2000 , and will not require changes to the common agricultural policy ; the EU level of export subsidies and domestic support in the so-called ' yellowbox ' are already below the levels of reduction commitments proposed ; the market access proposals can also be accommodated without disrupting EU markets ; and the EU is already committed to reducing tariffs and quota barriers on imports from the least-developed countries and from all developing countries , as proposed in the paper .
Most Member States question the Commission 's approach in making substantial reduction commitment offers at this stage , given that there will be pressure to make further concessions as negotiations proceed .
Ireland and France had difficulty with a number of specific issues , and a small number of amendments were introduced at the Council to meet these concerns .
The most important of these issues for Ireland related to improved market access , or the reduction of import tariffs .
Following pressure from Ireland and France , the Commission provided a declaration in the Minutes of the General Affairs Council to the effect that it would submit the proposals on market access to the Council , would remain vigilant in the negotiations in relation to products which are exposed to international competition , and would take particular account of sensitive products .
We also recorded in the Minutes a declaration that our acceptance of the Commission 's proposal is on the basis that , at most , minimal tariff reductions will be applied to sensitive sectors , especially beef and butter .
The Irish also had further concerns in relation to domestic support , the redemption of the ' bluebox ' and the exemption from reduction commitments of direct payments which are of vital importance to our farmers .
In 2002 , 60 % of Irish farm incomes were in the form of direct payments to producers which qualify for ' bluebox ' exemption .
The retention of export subsidies is also a major issue to us , as a major exporter of agricultural and food products to third countries .
We are particularly dependent on the continuation of an EU system of export subsidies in order to remain competitive on export markets .
Commissioner Fischler contends that his decoupling proposals will reduce production and therefore increase prices , but this ignores the reality of the Commission 's World Trade proposals of a decrease of up to 36 % in import tariffs amongst other multilateral issues .
We still need answers from Commissioner Fischler as to how he is going to square that circle .
The 36 % , 45 % , 55 % proposals at World Trade talks , together with the mid-term review of the common agricultural policy - which includes proposals for decoupling and modulation - and the uncertain implications of enlargement , have created a climate of serious mistrust in a Commissioner who wants to tear up an existing decision of EU heads of government after only two and a half years of a seven-year agreement .
Yes , we have a duty of care to the developing world , but that must go hand in hand with the duty of care to our own farmers .
Notwithstanding the generosity of the common agricultural policy , and as a result of a combination of falling prices , lower production levels and higher costs , aggravated by exceptionally bad weather , they face ongoing and serious declines in income and uncertain futures .
Mr President , on 27 January , the Commission stated that the EU 's proposal on the WTO negotiations was compatible with our current advocacy of substantial and progressive liberalisation on a fair and even-handed basis .
It is furthermore stated in clear terms that ' the actual measures involve the fair sharing of agricultural burdens and the developing countries , too , should be given greater opportunities . '
That is a logical development in view of the fact that , in the EU too since the 1992 CAP reform , liberalisation keeps making advances in the implementation of the GATT resolutions .
The good ship WTO is steaming ahead , with undertakings in the agricultural and food industries swimming in its wake as best they can , as , every time the consumer spends a euro on groceries , the farmers get only an average of 25 cents .
The liberalisation of agricultural trade has its advocates and its opponents .
There is unanimous agreement that developing countries should be given easier access to the European Internal Market , yet , despite liberalisation - or , indeed , as a consequence of it - there has been no definite improvement in the situation as regards world hunger ; indeed , as the motions for a resolution point out , this has got worse .
It is not clear what sort of permanent and comprehensive body of Europe-wide legislation on non-commercial matters might be able to maintain the balancing act between , on the one hand , the maintenance and improvement of European agriculture 's competitive position on world markets and , on the other hand , the protection of insufficiently competitive agriculture at a time when it is being made more multifunctional for the benefit of society .
My mind is quite open as to whether the European agricultural model , combining multifunctionality with a policy of subsidies , can be implemented with any international legitimacy .
The great danger is already present that this will prove no long-lasting protection and that the abandonment of European subsidy policy will then begin in earnest , because there will as yet be no political majorities , and where they do exist , they will be compromises .
On the other hand , the WTO 's fundamental categories do not include issues of rural development , environmental protection and animal welfare .
What is true of enlargement must also be true of the WTO negotiations , the principle being that nobody should be any worse off .
The situation before the negotiations and after them will be considered in that light , so we can look forward to the result with some excitement .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , two new worrying developments have emerged in connection with the latest round of WTO negotiations .
These developments concern the atmosphere of negotiations on the one hand and the subject of negotiations on the other .
The atmosphere has changed due to the strong pressure exerted by the United States representatives on their European counterparts .
Mr Robert Zoellick has referred to European partners such as France and Ireland as colonialists who are two hundred years behind the times . You are an exception Commissioner , as you have all but been awarded an honorary doctorate by the Bush administration .
All this has taken place against the background of references to ' Old Europe ' , or even cheese-eating monkeys .
We know that your opposite number Mr Robert Zoellick , signed an open letter from Mr Wolfowitz in January 1998 calling for a war on Iraq .
You seem to be negotiating with a hawk Commissioner !
You know him better than I do , however , so you must be best placed to judge if he really is one .
The subject of negotiations has also changed .
To date , we had been discussing subjects which lacked soul .
Now , as we discuss agriculture , we are negotiating on quality , the environment , welfare , animals and consequently essentially cultural matters . The present round does not concern goods .
It concerns knowledge . It concerns the very essence of people , and their very being .
Hence the fear of nothingness , as the Louvain students made clear to you .
Agriculture constitutes an exception to the rule .
There is its unique structure , the AOCs and the countryside .
Hence the deep-rooted fear that you might not stand up for this agricultural exception which goes right back to Mesopotamia .
It is nothing new .
Serious misgivings abound , and they are mainly of a political nature .
We fear that Cancun will be a ' Munich in the sun ' .
There are moreover precedents for this . There is the mysterious agreement of 2001 on bananas .
Chiquita collapsed just like Enron .
There is the failure to challenge the issue of dependency on oil-producing crops , even after the opening-up of former Eastern bloc countries and the consequences of mad cow disease .
Above all there is Mr Fischler 's project , begun in July 2002 and confirmed in January 2003 , which involved deep cuts in subsidies .
At the same time , the United States established proposals to spend 190 billion over ten years from May 2002 .
Nonetheless , the de minimis rule would keep all this within the green box .
Our fears are also based on an unfathomable contradiction .
Surely it cannot be right to destroy our agricultural infrastructure and know-how when by 2020 there will be two billion more mouths to feed .
This is the basis of my fundamental fear .
Commissioner , we seem to be already condemned as we speed along on board the shuttle Earth which is as riddled with cracks as the shuttle Columbia .
Yet here we are discussing commerce and global free-trade when we know drinking water supplies are dwindling and when two billion people lack electricity or medicine .
I am beginning to wonder therefore whether the WTO , like the European Union , is a museum piece .
Commissioner , the subject of this evening 's debate is certainly the basis for a tapestry of some of the major themes of world and European politics .
For example , the first theme is without a doubt that world agricultural trade and the talks which are outlining and will define the aspects and modalities thereof represent the point of confrontation between market liberalisation and governments ' desires to pursue protectionist agricultural policies which go beyond production itself and affect what are known as non-commercial aspects too , such as environmental protection , food safety , the safeguarding and promotion of quality and the preservation of rural areas .
We have listened to you carefully this evening , Commissioner , and it is clear from what you have said that the European Union has expressed a strong desire to negotiate an agreement for the further liberalisation of the trade in agricultural products .
In our opinion , however , the agreement must be well balanced and must be an agreement which benefits everybody .
It would appear that this is also the position which Commissioner Fischler has upheld on a number of occasions with regard to Community agricultural policies .
Not more than a week ago , in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , he pointed out that the rules which emerge from the new rounds of talks next autumn must be fair and apply equally to all .
Thus , the idea which emerges of cutting export subsidies is an idea which is certainly attractive and which I certainly support , but only on condition that other subsidies causing the distortion of the international trade market are also regulated .
Then there is another major political theme which is connected with the subject of this evening 's debate . We need an overall perspective on the matter .
The current economic situation , whose development will interact with and be affected by the future development of the agricultural sector , cannot be viewed purely in terms of international trade , for international trade is directly dependent upon the proposal to reform the common agricultural policy .
What was to be a mid-term assessment review has become a veritable transformation of European agriculture .
The Community policy guidelines in this sector , in addition to seeing the market as a means of economic development , are intended in Europe to ensure consumer protection - consider the recent creation of the European Food Safety Authority .
This principle of food safety has been expressed and accepted at WTO level too , but it has only been accepted as an ideal . Much progress will be needed before quality equal to that of our own produce is guaranteed .
The production costs sustained by the European agricultural economy differ substantially from those sustained by the developing countries , for the standards of quality , safety and health and hygiene are different .
It is as desirable that clear international rules for the protection of agrifoods should be established at the forthcoming negotiating rounds as it is for the Codex alimentarius to be duly valued and respected in the protection of recognised typical European products .
European farms operating in a globalised context must invest in the quality of their produce to acquire specific market shares which are sensitive to new consumer demands .
Production standards are now oriented towards ensuring the traceability of production from stable to table .
In this sense , the possibility of marketing European agrifoods produce at world level must go hand in hand with the economic development of the less wealthy countries , with mutual respect for local agrifoods production in a global context of balanced growth regulated by both the economy and well-defined rules , but , above all , by the clear need for growth which benefits all to the detriment of none .
Therefore , the basic issue before us now is that the proposal you have outlined to us this evening , Commissioner , contains a principle .
We need a common agricultural policy which preserves the conventions we are used to .
Your speech and the documents available to us uphold a principle which we find it very hard to accept , to the effect that the proposal for mid-term review , which provides , inter alia , for decoupling and the non-fulfilment of blue box commitments , should take precedence over the WTO negotiating modalities , which provide for an endeavour to preserve the blue box aid instigated with the McSharry reform .
There is therefore a need to redefine the negotiating modalities , removing the Blue Box chapter altogether and thus irretrievably eliminating the possibility of safeguarding direct payments in a multilateral context .
If this should happen , we believe that it would be the beginning of the liberalisation of the European agricultural sector , which is essential not just for the sector as such but for the whole of the European economy as well .
Mr President , Commissioner , we support and we consider very positive the Commission 's efforts to integrate the developing countries and the least developed countries into these negotiations , access without customs duties or quotas for those countries and the creation of a food security box , but we also believe that in some proposals we could have gone further , such as in the proposal relating to the reduction in export refunds , on which I trust we can make progress during the negotiations .
I would also like to say that the commitment to greater openness must be accompanied by a fair distribution of responsibilities amongst the developed countries .
In this regard , we must condemn the unilateral nature of the United States ' agricultural policy .
Commissioner , I am concerned , however , that the model of agricultural multifunctionality may be jeopardised .
I must tell you that in the proposal for negotiation multifunctional considerations are mentioned just once when the Commission refers to access to the market for the poorest countries .
With regard to Community agriculture , it is true that we are now referring to social objectives such as the protection of the environment , public health , obligatory labelling or the need to compensate for the additional costs of animal welfare .
But European agricultural multifunctionality no longer plays an important role in this offer for negotiation and the main focus has passed to the decoupling of aid , the principle which the Commission is going to concentrate the negotiation on , in the internal support chapter .
Commissioner , I believe that , if we allow our entire negotiating strategy to rest on the principle of decoupling , we may find ourselves without any room for manoeuvre in terms of guaranteeing elements which are essential to European agriculture , such as the stability of markets , with the maintenance of stable and economically viable prices which allow producers to earn an income .
Mr President , it is abundantly clear that the European Union intends to sacrifice small and medium-sized farmers and support for agriculture at European Union level at the alter of the World Trade Organisation .
The inviolable principle behind all European Union decisions is how best to serve the interests of big business and the multinationals .
The forthcoming reform of the CAP - which is a catastrophic overhaul , not the mid-term review it claims to be - is being carried out in the run up to and under pressure from WTO negotiations .
The proposed WTO agreement speeds up the liberalisation of the international trade in agricultural produce on the pretext that international trade will increase and benefit the developing countries .
The same was said of GATT , and look what happened there .
GATT was going to increase the international trade in agricultural produce and generate wealth .
Not only did the developing countries and their people not benefit ; they were worse off than before , with no margin for development even in countries with a high output like Argentina .
All that happened was that the multinationals producing and selling agricultural produce sent their profit figures soaring .
The same will happen with the WTO agreement , for three basic reasons .
The first has to do with the approach , which favours monopolies , as did GATT .
The second has to do with the international system of prices and subsidies for agricultural produce and the international system of prices for industrial goods .
The rich countries buy cheap agricultural produce and sell expensive industrial goods , including medicines .
The third reason has to do with who produces and owns the agricultural produce in numerous developing countries , where farming and agricultural produce are owned by huge multinationals paying starvation wages .
That is why the Communist Party of Greece is against the proposed agreement and is doing everything it can to coordinate the grass-roots fight in every country for international trade based on mutual benefit of equal value to all .
Mr President , the European Union has made clear its commitment to reforming the agricultural trading system - firstly to secure a future for Europe 's farmers and , on the other hand , to recognise the need for special treatment for the developing countries .
This is no mean feat .
In fact it is very difficult , as we have people on one side who believe the Commission is going too far , and others who believe that it is acting far too cautiously .
If the European Union is to have a credible voice in the Doha process , this procrastination must stop .
With enlargement on our doorstep we must act immediately .
The Commission 's proposals will benefit European farmers in the long term and improve prospects for meaningful global trade liberalisation talks .
I hope that we send the clear message that it is the farmers themselves who should receive a greater share of the market price , and not the increasing numbers of powerful monopolies that are controlling , in a devastating manner , our agricultural industry at the present moment in time .
The balance we seek is to support small farmers - 90 % of the farmers in my country , Wales , are small farmers who farm in less favoured areas - and rural development and Pillar II , on the one hand , while also taking account of farmers in the Third World .
It is a very difficult balancing act .
We can no longer continue with a situation where the average European dairy cow now has a bigger annual income , thanks to European subsidies , than half of the world 's population .
Mr President , Commissioner , what I actually would like to do is to address just a few points , as my colleagues have already had a lot to say .
I believe that the difficulty we have , and that you in the Commission have in particular , is , in essence , the fact that you have to reconcile two different strategies .
On the one hand , you have to implement reform in the European Union 's agricultural production , and on the other , you have to improve developing countries ' access to the market .
That is of course extremely difficult , and is made more so by the very ambitious timetable , as you are required to be able to point to successes as soon as this year - successes in the Cancun negotiations .
You must at least say in what direction you are taking us , and in doing so you also have to keep sight of your obligation to successfully conclude the negotiations in 2005 .
Add to that the complications with your trading partners , and the whole thing , taken together , amounts to a thoroughly tricky act .
I have looked at many documents and position papers from Germany , but also from other countries , so that what is here on the desk in front of me is a pot-pourri .
On the one hand , much that is said is complimentary ; people approve of the fact that something is happening at last , and that we are going in the right direction .
On the other hand , there are also many reservations and concerns , with fears that the European Union will end up with the model of what I might summarise in general terms as a sort of ' leisure agriculture ' , and that we are to some extent losing sight of the need to be flexible enough to be truly competitive and to be able to compete internationally .
We may well be able to do a great deal for the environment and agriculture , but there is the risk of other instruments falling by the wayside .
Commissioner , both you and Commissioner Fischler have , I believe , always said that we have enough room to manoeuvre .
We have flexibility .
We have to look at the details , perhaps at the milk prices for example , or in other areas , to see what else we might do .
Let me conclude with a very brief question . At a seminar of the Group of the Party of European Socialists last week , representatives of the developing countries kept referring to the development box , and expressed the desire that more be done about it .
Perhaps you could say something about this .
Mr President , Commissioner , the motto we need to adopt for negotiating our agricultural policy at the WTO is : ' More empty words ?
No , thank you .
Specific proposals ?
Yes , please ' .
And the proposals and the timetable for applying them are nothing if not specific .
The overall package being contributed to the forthcoming WTO negotiations by the European Union puts the ball very firmly in the European Union 's court .
Rather than just tabling proposals , it needs to make a studied demand for something in return .
We need to know , for example , what the other developed countries are going to do and which parts of the system of protection for European Union farmers need to be safeguarded .
While we are on the subject of protecting our farmers , and I mean the farmers of the 25 Member States of the European Union , not just the 15 , we need first for the multifunctionality model of European agriculture to be recognised and protected .
Secondly , the review of the common agricultural policy - and the Socialists ' agree with the general philosophy here - must not pay the price for any misplaced commitments undertaken at the negotiations .
Thirdly , as far as the environmental dimension of rural development , striking an ecological balance , food standards and so on are concerned , the European Union must lobby for a common clause for all countries based on its standards .
It is both pointless and unacceptable to make it easier to import agricultural produce from developing countries which do not meet European standards .
Finally , we are not doing poor countries and their farmers any favours if we manage to increase farmers ' incomes in poor countries , merely so that the developed countries can sell them extortionately expensive AIDS drugs , for example .
In other words , what we need at the negotiations are not just impressive proposals of good intent ; we need to juxtapose them with social benefits , we need a certain type of negotiation which serves broader social interests .
Mr President , I think one of the conclusions we can draw from the debate this evening is that this House always has much more to say about agriculture than about access to medicine , Davos or Porto Alegre .
I am not sure this is news but it is nevertheless the case .
We should ask ourselves what is really at stake in this whole affair of multinational commercial agricultural negotiations .
The issue is whether the European Union can and should subscribe to controls , ceilings and rules . In the future these would limit the support and protection we currently afford to our farmers and would like to continue to afford them .
Further , I would like to remind you of some of the principles on which my position and Mr Franz Fischler 's position are based .
I would then like to dwell on two or three points in a little more detail .
Firstly , at Doha we made a number of commitments on negotiations . Our undertakings went considerably further than those we gave on the previous occasion .
I am referring to Marrakech in 1995 . We agreed to increase market access by reducing our support within the Union and reducing export subsidies .
These matters form part of our negotiation mandate .
We shall pursue this , as previously agreed .
Our second principle concerns our work on these issues .
In allocating concessions , we should give priority to developing countries and ensure that concessions and consequently control measures are applied in an equitable manner .
There is no question of the European Union as part of the developed world accepting control measures other developed countries would reject .
I would now like to outline my third and last general principle . This debate is not the same as our internal debate on the reform of the common agricultural policy .
The debate over our position in relation to the World Trade Organisation is quite separate from the internal debate on the reform of the common agricultural policy .
We are not debating the reform of the common agricultural policy in Geneva , Tokyo , Washington , Sydney or Cancun .
It will be debated internally , along our own lines .
It is true that we are debating our position in relation to the World Trade Organisation in Brussels and Strasbourg , but in the spirit I described .
The Commission has indeed put forward a proposal .
If adopted , it will usher in further reforms in the management of the common agricultural policy .
It remains to be seen if and when these decisions are taken .
It has yet to be established also which of these decisions will be used as negotiating tools and when .
This is not the case at the moment however .
I must make it clear to Mrs Doyle that the 36 % , 45 % , 55 % , that Mr Franz Fischler and I have now put forward with the agreement of the Council , follow from reforms already adopted .
They do not compromise the eventual outcome of other reforms in any way .
Turning to whether what we have put forward is too ambitious or is not sufficient .
You have already responded to this question I think .
Some of you think our proposals lack ambition and others think they go too far .
Mrs McNally made it clear that , in her opinion , we could have gone further .
I would like to say that I do not believe we could have gone any further , at least not at this stage .
If here and now all the contracting parties within the WTO made the type of commitment we have put on the table , we would all have taken a great step forward towards establishing better control measures to support agriculture throughout the world .
Now for the question of whether we are going too far .
I believe this is what Mr Hyland is concerned about .
I do not believe that we are .
I do think however that we have already gone too far in reforming the common agricultural policy in recent years .
This was perhaps the essence of what Mr Hyland was saying .
As you can well imagine , this is not the view of the Commission .
I would now like to address the points made by Mr van Dam , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf and Mrs Erika Mann .
They rightly pointed to the issue of food security . They based their arguments on the fact that in agriculture , only 10 % of production is traded on the international market .
This contrasts with the situation in other sectors .
They are right in what they say and this is why we have introduced a new measure that has been widely commented upon .
We are building in the concept of food security , a safeguard clause , a separate section devoted to food security .
As I said in my introductory intervention , we have taken inspiration from various quarters , in particular non-governmental organisations .
Before I finish , I would like to respond to Mr Mulder .
It is true Mr Mulder , that the rules of the so-called ' Everything but arms ' initiative include very strict controls on the origin of products that mean that only products from the least advanced countries benefit from the ' zero duty , zero quota ' measure agreed for their benefit .
These rules are very restrictive and some of the countries believe they are excessively so .
It is therefore right the rules should be so rigorous .
I would say two lessons have been learnt from this debate .
The first is that Mr Martinez appears to have certain existential concerns .
This in itself is excellent news . The second is that , for once , there are excellent reasons for such concerns .
On this occasion , I do actually share the view that agriculture concerns not just goods but our very being .
I am sure my colleague Mr Fischler would agree on this too .
Mr Martinez is right on this point .
Agriculture is about goods that are produced , distributed and end up on our own or other people 's plates .
Agriculture is also about a service , however , and there is far less talk about that .
The goods component of agriculture can be found on the market and in trade links .
Goods are bought and sold .
The service component of agriculture encompasses food security , the environment and welfare . This is not discussed .
In general it is poorly served by market forces .
Agriculture is therefore made up of two interdependent elements .
One can be seen to circulate , and could be deemed to fit the same rules as applied to the production of socks , tyres and shoes The other element cannot be equated to the trade in socks , tyres and shoes in any way whatsoever .
This is the service component , and because of it we have a special relationship with what we eat and what we produce .
The coexistence of the goods and the service components of agriculture is at the root of the difficulties we are up against .
This is how we in Europe perceive agriculture and this is why Europe has adopted a balanced position on a number of outcomes .
We are not , however , prepared to sacrifice what we believe to be the collective cost of agriculture .
We will pursue this concept of the two aspects of agriculture in our discussions .
I have already made it clear to those of you who are interested in or indeed passionate about this issue that there is everything to gain from discussing this whole matter again , before the Cancun meeting .
We should , if possible , debate the negotiation program as a whole , and not bit by bit disjointedly as we have this evening .
Mr Franz Fischler and I are certainly willing to do so .
As an exception to the rule , I will give the floor to Mr De Rossa .
Mr President , I apologise for being late .
I wanted to speak because my position in relation to agriculture is not the same as the position presented to this House by a number of other Irish Members .
I say this because it is important for the variety of opinion that exists in relation to farming to be on the record .
I welcome the proposals put forward by the Commission in relation to farming .
One of the issues that is constantly ignored in Ireland and elsewhere is the contradiction between our spending a considerable amount of money on development aid in assisting developing countries , and yet maintaining a common agricultural system which , at the same time , undermines the very people we claim to be trying to help with our development aid .
That is an issue we have not yet come to grips with in Ireland or , to some extent , in the rest of Europe .
It is not a position that you will hear too often from an Irish Member in this House and , for that reason , I wanted to put it on the record .
This intervention does not set a precedent since , as you know , if for any reason a Member cannot speak , they can present a written statement not exceeding 200 words once per part-session .
To end this debate , I have received six motions for resolutions presented in accordance with Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure
Freedom of movement and residence for EU citizens
. ( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Commissioner Vitorino for this introduction , which paves the way for the presentation of my report .
Indeed , the directive we are discussing represents a genuine leap forward in the debate on citizenship of the Union and the free movement of persons .
For the first time , the citizen is recognised as having rights not just as an economic entity but as a person , as the holder of individual rights which , together with general rights , make up European citizenship .
The rights of free movement and residence derive directly from the European Treaty , they have long been established , as the Commissioner said , and they confer on the citizens new , major fundamental rights .
Indeed , one might say that this directive lays the foundations of dual citizenship - national and European citizenship - as formulated in the draft Treaty discussed in the Convention too .
The introduction of the right to permanent residence is a concrete example of this .
Before looking at the directive in more detail , we should specify its scope .
It is directed at Community citizens and members of their families , of whatever nationality .
The principle of equal treatment of third citizens who are members of a Community family has been established since the sixties and the directive makes it even more efficient and effective .
This is a right derived from the right of the Community citizen of whose family they are members .
It must be made clear from the outset that this directive does not apply to the citizens of third countries or , in any case , not to those who are not related to Community citizens , even if they are living in a Member State or enjoy free movement within the Union .
The great merit of this directive is that it combines all the previous provisions on the subject in a single text .
Another merit is its clarity and , in this regard , I feel that some of the rapporteur 's amendments , not least , have helped to simplify the excessively bureaucratic sections as far as is possible .
The most innovative elements include the proposal to replace the residence card , as the Commissioner mentioned , with a simple certificate of registration with the competent authorities .
The registration procedures must be straightforward and direct and , in any case , the principle of self-certification must be applied , as it already is in some Member States .
The principle of self-certification must also apply to the provision of proof of income and health insurance cover too .
In the case of family members who are third-country nationals , an identity document must be supplied in order to prove the existence of a family relationship , purely in order to prevent abuses , which are always possible .
A further innovative principle introduced by the directive concerns the expulsion of third country citizens who are entitled to residence on Community territory .
The directive stipulates that they cannot be expelled under any circumstances whatsoever .
This approach applies the ' Amsterdam objective ' , namely the creation of a border-free area of freedom , security and justice , but some of the Member States will probably want to establish their own rules on this matter .
I have saved the most controversial issue until last , as always happens when debates are introduced in this Chamber : the family , its composition and the definitions of couple and spouse .
To avoid such a vast wealth of innovative legislation being hijacked by the usual tug of war , as rapporteur , I have striven to be as open as possible , stretching my principles and the principles of the political group I represent to the limits in the interests of completing the process with the directive intact .
Moreover , there is no ambiguity over the definition of spouse in terms of Community law , as the Court of Justice has confirmed on a number of occasions .
In this connection and in relation to unmarried couples too , the rapporteur has appropriated a number of amendments tabled and then withdrawn by the Group of the Party of European Socialists , which appeal to the laws of the different Member States with a view to putting an end to the discrepancies which still exist at Community level .
In my opinion , this democratic appeal to subsidiarity , to national sovereignty , respects all interests and should avoid the usual crusades which could well diminish the content of the report and render its scope ineffective .
In short , each Member State can regulate family issues on the basis of its own legislation and concerns .
It would be a real shame if we were unable to succeed in delivering a worthy text enjoying broad support to the Council , considering the marvellous opportunity of codecision we have on this matter .
Moreover , it is inconceivable that we should impose on 13 States a model supported by only two of them , or that priority should be given to symbols and dogmas rather than responsible rules awaited by millions of citizens who want to be able to organise their lives .
To sum up , it has to be said that the rapporteur 's approach is , for the most part , in line with that of the Commission , which has produced a coherent , objective text which , as we already know , also expresses the Council 's position .
We have the opportunity to give the citizens new , modern rules which provide greater guarantees of civil liberties .
I am confident that they will be adopted at the vote in this Chamber and I would like to thank the committee draftsmen and all the Members who have contributed to the report with their amendments , which have , without a doubt , improved the content of the directive .
Madam President , European citizenship was one of the great achievements of the Union Treaty adopted in Nice in 1992 .
In accordance with the judgments of the Court of Justice , the rights of European citizenship , including the right to free movement and residence within the Union , were fundamental rights of European citizens , whose recognition did not require any legislative implementation .
In accordance with this legal basis , the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market considered that there was no reason for the establishment of restrictions of an administrative nature , either for entry into a country or for free movement and residence .
Much progress has been made in the field of legislative organisation by means of the Schengen Agreements , but it is the case that certain countries are still resisting this progress and are not participating in it .
Therefore , the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market hoped that this proposal for a directive would represent an effective step forward by removing all the restrictions in terms of administration and content to a citizen 's ability to establish themselves in another Community country .
This was the purpose of the amendments adopted by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
The amendments of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market were not accepted by the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , and the rapporteur would naturally like them to be maintained , but has not insisted , in order not to jeopardise the agreements reached in this field .
I would like to draw attention to an amendment , however , which could to a certain extent respond to the concerns of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
I am referring to Amendment No 23 - which introduces a new Article 4 ( b ) - which says that ' This Directive shall not lead to the withdrawal of existing rights established by the legislation of the European Union or Court of Justice decision ' .
I believe this amendment is essential if we do not want to move backwards in terms of the rights of European citizens within the Union .
Madam President , the Commission proposal for a directive on the right of citizens to move freely is , without doubt , an important step in removing the unjustified technical obstacles that persist even in united Europe .
The proposed amendments submitted by the European Parliament have of course improved the Commission 's proposal significantly .
The amendments submitted by the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities aim to bring about a number of improvements to reinforce the free movement of women , taking account of the specific problems faced by women and the principle of non-discrimination on the grounds of gender .
Unfortunately , Commissioner , your ambition to allow European citizens to exercise their right of residence freely and without impediment has not resulted in a text that is gender neutral and takes account of the specific problems faced by women .
The main problem concerns women who are economically dependent on their husbands and who , in the event of death or separation , have no prospects of extending their right or continuing to reside in another European country .
In other words , they are automatically deprived of any legal rights derived from their residing in another Member State of the Union .
We feel this needs correcting .
The Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities also emphasises the importance of protecting all interpersonal relations by giving live-in partners of either sex the same rights as a spouse .
More and more Member States are finding ways of recognising couples who live together without officially getting married .
Most countries now allow partners to be officially registered and this category therefore needs to be included in the definition of family members .
Madam President , on behalf of my colleague , Carmen Cerdeira , who has been shadow rapporteur for this report , and who unfortunately cannot be here , I will try as far as possible to speak on behalf of my political group .
Citizenship of the Union - institutionalised and created as such by the Treaty of Maastricht and later modified by the Treaty of Amsterdam - confers a series of rights and duties on the nationals of all the Member States .
The intention is to associate the citizens with the process of European integration , giving them more involvement , strengthening the protection of their rights and promoting the idea of a European identity by means of the creation of a sense of belonging amongst the citizens of the Union .
The citizenship rights and the Union as a whole will only have credibility amongst the citizens if they can be applied in practice in their everyday lives .
Within the context of citizenship of the Union , one of the fundamental rights that citizenship confers is laid down in Article 18 ( 1 ) of the Treaty , which gives every citizen of the Union the right to enter , move and reside freely in the territory of the Member States .
The same right , with a similar wording , is conferred on the European citizen by Article 45 ( 1 ) of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , and this seems to us very significant .
Consequently , these rights are of a constituent and not a declarative nature .
In other words they are acquired regardless of any permission granted by the Member States .
We welcome the Commission 's proposal , which we consider to be a genuine step forward .
The movement of the Union 's citizens amongst the Member States should be carried out mutatis mutandis in conditions similar to those of the citizens of a particular State .
In reality , Madam President , the Union 's citizens have taken this principle on board much more quickly and thoroughly than their governments .
They have taken it on board and they exercise it .
I can assure you that in my part of the Union , on the coast where I spend several days , there are many European citizens residing illegally who simply come and go between their two houses , one in their country of origin and one in my country , whenever they want and without filling out any papers .
It cannot be demonstrated whether these people have spent the last six months in their house , because sometimes it is 60 km from the neighbouring country .
The euro will make this even easier and more possible and I hope that progress can be made within the Commission .
Therefore , my group has presented amendments that intend , once and for all , to end the consideration of the economic situation of people , giving priority to the condition of citizen , and to recognise that at this moment the citizens and their families are already exercising the right to free movement within the European Union .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as I highlighted in my report on European citizenship , which we adopted in plenary last September , recognising European citizenship has been a slow process that even today faces too many obstacles , with initiatives having to be carried out to ensure that the concept of European citizenship is fully implemented in its political , administrative , judicial , social and economic aspects .
I also recommended at that time that , in order to deal with the obstacles still hampering EU citizens ' exercise of freedom of movement and residence , the proposal for a directive that we are discussing today should be adopted as rapidly as possible .
By reworking existing texts , this proposal attempted to introduce the much -needed streamlining by combining in a single legal instrument the right to free movement and residence in the European area , and enshrine , specifically , the right of permanent residence at the end of four years of continuous residence .
This is a welcome proposal .
The work of our rapporteur , Mr Santini - and very good work it is - has helped to introduce into this proposal a set of contributions that I believe are extremely positive .
There are , nevertheless , two areas that have already been mentioned in this debate , which still pose problems .
They concern the definition of the family , an excessively broad definition , which appears to seek to force national legislation to recognise the definition of an unmarried partner as a family member .
I believe that common sense would here dictate respect for national law and for the provisions laid down in each Member State .
This also applies to the excessively broad concept of family member , on which I think it would be more reasonable to uphold the current acquis for direct descendants and direct relatives in the ascending line , contrary , therefore , to the widening put forward in the proposal .
This could lead to an enormous increase in the number of people requesting family reunification .
The widening of the definition proposed by Mr Santini is therefore acceptable on humanitarian grounds or on serious health grounds .
Madam President , we have said a thousand times in this House that a global European immigration policy must be based , firstly , on the establishment of legal immigration rules and then on strong instruments to ensure that these rules are complied with .
We are today discussing a proposed directive which would constitute the cornerstone of this policy , a directive on which the Council , of course , has not made much progress .
Parliament should also have given its opinion some time ago , but we always lag behind on these issues .
I have chosen this moment to present my report because , for the first time in a long time , the Greek Presidency has included the issue of legal immigration on the political agenda , something which I am glad about .
The Commission 's proposed directive is intended to harmonise the conditions for entry and residence for nationals of third countries who intend to enter a Member State for employment reasons .
It allows the entry of workers from a third country in the event that the post cannot be filled by a national worker or a worker from another Member State of the Union or by a resident of a third country with the right to access the labour market .
The proposal lays down a contract at origin for the immigrant worker , except for those who reside legally within the European Union for other reasons .
The residence permit and the work permit would be combined as one single document .
The adoption of this directive would involved the recognition of the need for legal channels for immigration and would create a more transparent framework with simpler procedures , which would provide economic actors with more facilities and also reinforce the rights of immigrants .
For my part , I welcome the Commission 's proposal .
I only regret that the Commission , no doubt as a result of realism , has not been able to reflect in this proposed directive some of the ideas it put forward in previous communications , because I sincerely believe that we cannot continue to copy models of immigration control employed during the last century , when the industrial society was at its height , but that we must be able to imagine new procedures suited to our world , to a society and a labour market which operate according to principles which are very different to those of the decades following the war .
Some of the measures studied by the Commission , such as mobility , moved in the right direction and reality will oblige us to return to them .
Madam President , this is just an opinion report .
I would have preferred to have produced a resolution rather than a package of amendments - which are unlikely to be read or taken into account by those people with real decision-making powers .
But for procedural reasons we have had to present a package of amendments and these must reflect two fundamental issues .
Firstly , a strong will and a strong signal in favour of a European immigration policy .
We need clear rules which can be complied with .
We have therefore rejected the amendments , above all those presented by the PPE-DE Group , which intended to convert the directive into a kind of recommendation which the States could comply with or not .
Neither have we accepted the amendments which introduced requirements other than employment and which were difficult to verify .
If we accept that the possibility of performing a job of work is what legitimises entry and residence in the Union , we must then ensure that this system works .
By requiring that the immigrant has a contract or a firm offer while still in the country of origin , we are thereby regulating access in accordance with the labour market .
Even in a situation of unemployment , this would simply become paralysed .
Secondly , we must establish rules which can be complied with , thereby incentivising the arrival of immigrants through regular channels and preventing illegal contracts ; preventing immigrant workers from ending up in an illegal situation , for bureaucratic reasons , once in the Union ; and discourage , as far as possible , the entry of immigrants without permits .
We proposed three things in this regard : that people legally residing in the Union , or who are here legally for any reason or have entered with a residency permit and have lost it , can recover their legal situation and not remain permanently in an irregular situation and that the States can , if they wish , establish a six-month visa for seeking work .
Other elements we have introduced are the strengthening of equal conditions amongst workers , with a view to preventing all types of discrimination and the creation of a second-class labour market to which both immigrants and native workers would fall victim .
We also intend for workers to be given equal rights and obligations , for workers to be allowed to move freely within the Member State - for obvious reasons I do not believe we have to go further - and , in general , to reduce the time periods and bureaucratic obstacles to establishing this immigration policy .
Like our citizens and their representatives , like the employers and the unions , I hope that we can create clear rules based on the criteria of efficiency and not on ideological problems , which are of little help .
Mr President , in order to achieve legislation in the field of immigration at Community level we should pay particular attention to the positive effects of immigration , something we are debating here today .
I come from a country - Spain - from which , until a few years ago , many citizens emigrated in search of work and today we are a country into which , thanks to our growth and stability , we receive many immigrants in search of work , often honourable work , who undoubtedly make a positive contribution to our companies and who often carry out work which our citizens reject .
The current reality , with migratory flows which are speeding up all the time , is reflected every day in the Spanish press .
We see thousands of Moroccans and Sub-Saharan Africans arriving on our territory looking for work .
In view of this reality , which is not confined to Spain , we must look for a way to control and regulate the situation , in order to prevent the growing networks trafficking in immigrants .
The fight against illegal immigration requires the regulation of legal immigration .
If there are employment opportunities but we do not allow the legal entry of immigrants , we will be promoting illegal immigration , and with it work which is often sub-human , dishonest and sometimes even verging on extortion .
I therefore welcome the Commission 's proposal since it promotes a coordinated economic migration policy .
However , as other rapporteurs from my group have said , we must maintain the Member States ' competence to regulate how many immigrants they can receive to cover the work possibilities .
We must be prudent .
The admission of immigrants into our labour market may become a problem in the future when the situations of each of our countries change and our labour markets have higher unemployment rates than the current ones .
We cannot provide direct access to the labour market for illegal immigrants , particularly those who entered legally , but who are now in our territory illegally , people desperate to find work .
This would undoubtedly lead to exploitation by many employers and the extortion I mentioned earlier .
We must improve all the possible mechanisms for the employment of immigrants from their countries of origin .
We must give employers the opportunity to employ these immigrants so that the relationship between the immigrants in the State of origin and the employers is as fluid as possible .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in the context of an increasingly global labour market , the European Union has been the target of constant migratory pressure , which must be properly managed .
I agree with the need to draw up a new common immigration policy , but this policy must always take account of the real needs of the labour market and of the economy itself in each Member State .
For this reason we can only adopt the report that Mrs Terrón i Cusí has presented if the amendments retabled by the PPE-DE Group are accepted .
I wish to highlight two points : firstly , this proposal for a directive seeks to establish a common legal framework for conditions of admission and residence of immigrants for the purpose of employment .
Consequently , on the basis of this directive , immigration for the purpose of employment in the European Union will be permitted if certain conditions are met .
In our opinion , however , the power of Member States ' to regulate , through their governments , whether or not to open up their labour markets cannot and must not be taken away from them .
In other words , this is a decision that can only be taken by Member States themselves and not at Community level .
It is the responsibility of each Member State to assess and decide whether or not it needs to increase its labour force , by how much and in what sectors , taking account of their real needs as well as - and I think we all agree on this - their ability to receive and integrate third-country nationals .
Secondly , the Terrón i Cusí report criticises the fact that the Commission 's initial proposal only addresses the situation of individuals who are legally present on Union territory .
It also claims that illegal workers should also have the right to request a residence permit , which should be granted to them .
Regardless of the rapporteur 's generous approach , this would clearly encourage an increase in illegal immigration , basically saying to these people that once they are on Union territory , even if they have entered illegally , they will have the right to be legalised .
Mr President , as in other areas of human immigration , we must always be prudent .
This is not simply a matter of protecting Member State nationals .
In these areas , excessively generous solutions create more problems than they are intended to resolve .
Mr President , firstly , on a point of order , I believe that immigration policy has many elements and I do not wish to discuss issues such as allocations in this report .
I believe that we are going to do so by means of the open coordination method in a future report .

Secondly , as a personal statement , I would like say to Mr Nassauer and Mr Coelho that no part of my report promotes illegal immigration or allows a work permit in the European Union to be granted to people who enter illegally .
I am talking about people whose illegal status has come about for bureaucratic reasons and who have not been expelled and who once again fulfil the admission criteria .
I believe that this is far from promoting illegal immigration .
My report in no way provides for the possibility of entering illegally and seeking work .
Finally , Mr Nassauer , I regret that it pleases you that what may be a majority opinion in this House should be thrown out .
I hope that the participants in the Convention take a different view and that in the future the majority opinions of this House are taken into account .
The next item is the report ( A5-0005 / 2003 ) by Mr Hernández Mollar , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 539 / 2001 listing the third countries whose nationals must be in possession of visas when crossing the external borders of Member States and those whose nationals are exempt from that requirement ( COM ( 2002 ) 679 - C5-0609 / 2002 - 2002 / 0280 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , appropriate management of migratory flows through all Member States , including States of origin and transit , the fight against human traffickers and illegal immigration , as well as the need to reconcile immigration pressure with the capacity of the receiving society , are aspects which from many points of view - as we have just heard - we have been advocating as the necessary means to put an end to the human tragedies and dramas which uncontrolled immigration is producing within and beyond our borders .
Furthermore , we must not forget that the gradual disappearance of the Union 's internal borders as a means of creating an area of freedom , security and justice , as called for in Tampere , is a project which involves certain risks .
The proliferation of mafias of every kind , of terrorist and criminal groups , as well as their free movement throughout the Union , must be combated through the fulfilment by all the Member States of our responsibilities , and it is therefore necessary to strengthen controls at the Union 's external borders .
The European Union therefore reached the conclusion that it was necessary to establish an objective list of countries whose nationals would require a visa to enter European territory , thereby making a start on the harmonisation of the Member States in the field of visas .
Subsequently , the global plan to combat illegal immigration set as an objective , ratified by the Seville European Council , a review by the end of 2000 of this list of third countries , as the Commissioner has just pointed out .
This is the subject of the report we are discussing today , for which I am rapporteur .
It responds to the data provided by the Member States which demonstrate the increase in the number of Ecuadorian immigrants in an illegal situation and which lead to the need to include Ecuador on the list of countries whose nationals require visas .
While it is true that the dramatic events taking place practically every day on the southern coasts of Europe are the most visible and newsworthy aspects of illegal immigration , we must not forget that this is a phenomenon with many other faces .
From a quantitative point of view , the daily trickle of illegals arriving aboard small boats cannot be compared with the number of foreigners who enter the Community by means of other borders , such as airports .
The majority enter as mere tourists , only obliged to carry a minimal quantity of money - which is often arranged by mafias - and once in Europe they become illegal immigrants seeking work on the black market , with the resulting employment exploitation .
It is therefore essential , ladies and gentlemen , that together with repressive measures which only deal with a part of the phenomenon of illegal immigration , we opt for the adoption of rules aimed at promoting the arrival of people on European territory by means of legal channels .
The proposal we are discussing today falls within this context .
On the basis of the reality demonstrated by the data currently available to us , we must facilitate the legal arrival of Ecuadorians , preventing them from falling into the hands of heartless gangs as well as the creation of false expectations about what awaits them on European territory .
Finally , Commissioner , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this measure will require , on the one hand , that the Republic of Ecuador fulfil its responsibility to properly manage its own emigration and , on the other , that the European Union prioritise the policy of cooperation in the field of emigration with the countries of Latin America .
We will therefore vote in favour of the amendments which , to this end , have been presented by the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
Mr President , I would firstly like to clarify that , during the debate on the previous report , I wished to read a phrase in Spanish , which is the correct linguistic version .
I had the right to do so , but I am going to do so tomorrow during the vote , although that is less convenient , since it is different from the phrase read by Mr Nassauer .
With regard to the report we are discussing now by Mr Hernández Mollar , I would like to say that this is not a happy occasion .
We cannot take pleasure in the restriction of the right to free movement , which - as we pointed out this morning - is an essential factor in the Europeans ' world view .
The Group of the Party of European Socialists , however , despite the irresponsible inclinations in favour of illegal immigration I am accused of by certain Members from the PPE-DE Group , will vote in favour of the inclusion of Ecuador in the list of countries whose nationals require a Schengen visa .
It will do so having analysed the information which has been provided by the countries requesting it and because it believes that it will provide better guarantees of the rights of those people who today are being denied entry in the terminals of the European Union 's airports , which often also affects people who wish to enter for the purposes of tourism .
In any event , I would like to call on the European Commission to see this as a serious alarm call with regard to a country which is reaching very serious levels of poverty and , in accordance with its own statements on the Union 's immigration policy , to treat this country as a priority objective , in terms of development cooperation and co-development measures .
I believe we could thereby compensate for the sad message which unfortunately we have to send today from the Union to the citizens of that country .
I thank the rapporteur for his work and for accepting this amendment , because I am convinced that we share this concern .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Vitorino .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0024 / 2003 ) by Mr Marset Campos , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on relations between the European Union and Belarus : towards a future partnership ( 2002 / 2164 ( INI ) ) .
Mr President , after the completion of the process of enlargement and of European construction following the Convention and the new Union Treaty of 2003 , the European Union will have new borders which will not only require a new form of economic , social and cultural partnership and cooperation with these new neighbours but also , above all , a firm , very broad and effective common foreign and defence policy .
The reasons depend on the importance of these new neighbours , from the Ukraine and Georgia to Belarus , in which the presence of the giant Russia plays a pivotal role .
It is therefore a great challenge for the European Union to do the right thing in terms of how relations with these countries develop .
One of these countries , Belarus , borders Latvia , Lithuania and Poland and , until 1996 , had developed in a fairly similar way to the other former members of the USSR but , since that year , it has taken an authoritarian course which has restricted human rights and democracy and imposed abusive social controls which prevent the European Union from establishing mechanisms for relations , association and cooperation such as the ones it has put in place with the rest of these countries .
So much so that the three European institutions which have monitored the development of events in Belarus , the OSCE , the Council of Europe and the European Union - the parliamentary troika - has had no hesitation in describing these events as incompatible with minimum democratic requirements and has suspended its relations with that Republic until those requirements are met .
The presentation of this resolution has been delayed considerably as a result of having to convert an initial draft report on the European Union 's relations with Belarus into an own-initiative resolution by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy due to the deterioration of the situation in terms of the exercise of democracy and respect for human rights in that country .
In 1995 , the European Union had prepared an agreement on trade and commercial cooperation based on the agreement which had existed since 1989 between the USSR and the European Economic Community and furthermore the victory of Lukashenko had given rise to a degree of hope .
But all of this became deadlocked when in 1996 President Lukashenko put the brakes on the democratisation process .
The authoritarian approach of Lukashenko has been characterised by the adoption of mechanisms to harass the opposition , to eliminate critical voices and to create a network of patronage by means of abuses of power and at the same time has tried to come closer to and more dependent on Russia , which Putin has recently pulled back from .
The various elections held since 1996 have been described by the parliamentary troika as lacking in effective democratic guarantees .
This has lead to the consolidation of a democratic opposition platform which has been maturing and which involves a broad spectrum , ranging from parties on the right to parties on the left - the communist party for example - which agree on fundamental aspects such as the establishment of democracy , partnership and , when appropriate , integration into the European Union .
Awareness of the need for democracy is increasing within Belarusian society and there are increasing numbers of members of the current Parliament of Belarus in favour of democratic reforms which bring the legal framework for freedoms closer to the requirements of the European Union .
Therefore the recommendation which we in the European Union must make , and which we are proposing in this resolution , combines two considerations : on the one hand , a firm rejection of reaching an association agreement at this time since that would imply a legitimisation of the current authoritarian regime and would hinder the establishment of democracy , and , on the other , an increase in initiatives which send a clear signal of cooperation and solidarity - with the victims of Chernobyl , for example - or coming closer in social , cultural and trade union terms which will allow democracy to be restored .
This is what our proposal is aimed at .
We must not forget the important role Russia can play in this process .
I would like to end by thanking all the members of the Committee on Foreign Affairs for their significant cooperation and I must finally acknowledge that I do not accept some of the amendments proposed by my own group for the reasons I have just given .
. Mr President , I very much welcome this opportunity to debate Belarus and the relations between Belarus and the European Union .
I congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Marset Campos , for his excellent preparatory work .
I will indicate , in my remarks , where we find ourselves in profound agreement with what the rapporteur has said .
It is a very sad reality that , as on the many previous occasions when we have discussed Belarus , the focus is on a number of very difficult subjects : on the whole question of the cases of disappeared persons ; on the harassment of the media ; on the limitations on the freedom of speech and the freedom of religion ; on the recent open confrontation by the authorities in Belarus with the OSCE Assistance and Monitoring Group in Minsk .
Alas , we have never been in a position to conclude a partnership and cooperation agreement with Belarus .
That country is the only European successor of the former Soviet Union without a privileged contractual relationship with the European Union , including a clear mutual commitment to the common values of democracy and human rights .
It is obvious that the current state of relations between the European Union and Belarus is profoundly unsatisfactory for both sides .
While we are developing new forms of cooperation , for example , with the Russian Federation , while we are about to address the specific challenges and opportunities of enlargement in defining new forms of cooperation with those countries that will be our new eastern neighbours after enlargement , Belarus has sadly chosen the role of spectator .
The Commission has been invited by the Copenhagen European Council to submit proposals on the EU 's future relations with its neighbours , including Belarus .
I am sure a number of honourable Members , during this debate , will want to make reference to this ' New Neighbours ' or ' Wider Europe ' debate .
Obviously , we will have to be prepared for the moment when Belarus sends a signal that it is ready to co-operate with us .
Given the present situation on democracy , freedom of speech and the media , and on human rights in general , it is difficult to imagine when the EU will be able to have normal relations with Belarus .
I am very grateful for the clear message that this debate and Parliament 's resolution will send in this respect .
However , I fully agree with the elements in the resolution - and I am sure this will be followed up in a number of speeches today - which recalled the importance Belarus has , not only for the European Union , but also for the stability and prosperity of the whole region .
I can assure you that this is the common ground we are all working on .
There are many issues where the Commission would like to broaden its activities and its co-operation with Belarus , be it in addressing common threats of cross-border organised crime and illegal migration , or in regional development , economic and structural reform , environmental protection and so on .
Every day lost in dealing with these issues adds to the hardship of the people of Belarus , and to the potential risks building up on this part of our future eastern border .
On different occasions , in particular since early 2000 , the European Union has co-operated with the OSCE and the Council of Europe to build a bridge that would help Belarus move towards normalisation of its relations with the international community .
Belarus has , on several occasions , missed these opportunities , including prior to the elections in 2000 and 2001 .
The European Parliament and its Delegation for relations with Belarus , Moldova and Ukraine , has been very active in the framework of the Parliamentary Troika with the Parliamentary Assemblies of the OSCE and the Council of Europe .
While the European Union has limited its official contacts with Belarus to a strict minimum , this alternative form of political dialogue is very useful and demonstrates that in terms of minimum standards of democracy and human rights , the elected representatives of all three organisations speak with one voice to Belarus .
The Commission strongly agrees with the emphasis in the resolution on strengthening dialogue with civil society , NGOs , democratic forces , the media and with the universities in Belarus .
However , as to the call to the Commission in Article 9 of the draft resolution , to : ' ? develop a strategy for Belarus within the proposal ' Wider Europe ' for the democratisation and the development of a social market economy ' in Belarus , it seems obvious to me that any assistance or help from the Commission could only be in support of a comprehensive government strategy .
It could never replace a strategy by Belarus itself .
The driving force for this sort of change would need to come from Belarus .
Unfortunately , it does not seem to be there yet .
What we can and will do in the Commission , is to use the instruments at our disposal to continue support and assistance to grass roots civil society organisations , to journalists and independent media , to universities and also - where it is appropriate - to local authorities .
Within the limits of the restrictions set by the September 1997 General Affairs Council , the Commission is also proceeding with technical assistance on border and regional projects , as well as projects linked to the aftermath of the Chernobyl catastrophe .
When calling for broader engagement in terms of assistance , we should also not forget the difficult ground we are working on in Belarus .
It is the authorities , with instruments like the notorious ' Decree No 8 ' , that make the work of foreign donors and their partners in Belarus extremely difficult .
We had some joint projects with the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights in Belarus .
The de facto closure of the OSCE Assistance and Monitoring Group in Minsk last October has obviously threatened the further implementation of such projects .
Only after the 19 November 2002 decision of 14 EU Member States to impose a visa ban on President Lukashenko and seven other leading personalities in Belarus was a compromise finally reached to establish a new OSCE Minsk office as of 1 January 2003 .
The coming weeks and months will demonstrate whether the authorities in Belarus are finally committed to take the path towards freedom , democracy and an improvement in human rights .
Normalised relations with the OSCE could be a first step .
Compliance with minimum standards during the coming local elections in early March would be a second step , followed by a convincing commitment to fulfil all the conditions outlined in Parliament 's draft resolution .
These are the sort of benchmarks that could prepare the way for the eventual accession of Belarus to the Council of Europe and , beyond that , open the perspective for a gradual normalisation of relations with the European Union .
I am very grateful to the rapporteur for the work he has done to make these things possible - we all hope - in the future .
Mr President , the European Union is trying in any way it can to put pressure on Belarus to respect human rights and bring about democratic reform .
Until now we have used more stick than carrot .
In the future it will be wise of us to try and find more positive ways of achieving our aims .
After the enlargement of the EU Belarus will be our neighbour , sharing a common border with no fewer than three new Member States : Latvia , Lithuania and Poland .
We must encourage Belarus to maintain its independence as a state and orientate itself towards European cooperation .
Multilateral cooperation will provide us with a good forum for cooperation with Belarus .
Positions in the Council of Baltic Sea States will alter when the Baltic countries and Poland go from being neighbours to members of the EU .
In this situation the EU must be more firmly committed than it has hitherto to the work of the Council and channel more funds to projects to be undertaken .
With Union enlargement the importance of cross-border cooperation will increase .
We have to encourage Latvia , Lithuania and Poland in particular to develop cross-border cooperation with Belarus .
In the future the Union must be prepared to finance projects in connection with this .
There must be a new scheme to provide funds created in the European Union for cross-border cooperation , either in association with TACIS or as a separate arrangement .
There must be more conspicuous channelling of funds on the part of the Union than there has been until now towards development in our neighbouring countries , especially those neighbouring regions across our borders .
Differences in standards of living must also be narrowed down effectively on the Union 's external borders .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Patten .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
( The sitting was suspended for a few minutes until voting time )
Mr President , as the House knows , my report concerns the Spanish initiative to simplify the Schengen rules and cut out as much red tape as possible , by allowing group visas to be issued at external borders to seamen in transit , thereby making things easier for Member States with a navy .
My report is a considerable improvement on the original proposal , because it protects citizens ' individual rights and personal data , using the Schengen provisions on which the regulation is based .
My report also edits the text so that it is gender neutral , in recognition of the fact that many women have entered the seafaring profession over recent years .
Most importantly , we reject the criterion of common nationality because there are insufficient grounds for requiring seamen to be of the same nationality in order to obtain a group visa .
The report therefore proposes that short group visas should be issued to groups of between five and fifty seamen , even if they are not all of the same nationality .
This will help European shipping considerably .
Mr President , my voting machine is making a very strange noise and it has a lot of lights on it .
Mr President , I have no objection to a separate vote , but I agree with the order established since that was what was approved in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy .
Mr President , my proposal is firstly Amendment No 3 and then later Amendment No 6 .
And if there is an Amendment No 6 , a separate vote .
. ( PT ) Although visas should only be granted at borders in exceptional circumstances , common procedures must be established in the Member States for the transit of seamen , a professional category that is subject to enormous labour mobility .
This initiative is intended to update , clarify and streamline rules for granting visas to seamen in transit .
The major legislative innovation consists of the possibility , provided that certain conditions are met , of issuing collective transit visas to seamen from the same vessel who are travelling in a group of between five and fifty people , provided that the period of transit is limited .
They must not be required to have the same nationality , however , because in practical terms , this would basically nullify the effects of this proposal .
It is also important to make the shipping agent and the shipping line responsible for visa requests .
The need for the exchange of information must also be emphasised to ascertain , for example , whether an individual has been arrested , whether he has a criminal record , whether he is suspected of being involved in trafficking or in illegal immigration .
This initiative , with the amendments tabled by the European Parliament can contribute to making the complex Schengen acquis a little more comprehensible and bring solutions which , although perhaps not the ones we would wish to see - such as the introduction of more thoroughgoing reforms of the Schengen acquis - are solutions that are possible .
. ( PT ) I voted in favour of this report for two main reasons .
On the one hand , I acknowledge the clear need to promote the harmonisation of the divergent legislation in this field , an essential requirement for making the Schengen acquis intelligible and accessible .
I would emphasise , however , that even were this not the case , I do not see the slightest problem in there existing differences between national legislations on migratory phenomena .
On the contrary , I feel that any artificial attempt to standardise , exceeding the provisions of Article 63 ( 3 ) ( a ) of the EC Treaty , would be counterproductive .
Furthermore , I also share the rapporteur 's conviction about the importance of controlling external borders as a means of combating illegal immigration and crime .
To conclude , I welcome the integration into the Common Manual of practices applicable to seamen in transit and would highlight the importance of the collective visa which , as the rapporteur quite rightly observed , could become unenforceable if it were only issued to nationals of the same State .
I deplore , however , the ' politically correct ' approach adopted by the rapporteur in insisting on adding gender-related words , when the fact is that basic interpretive rules would suffice and there was clearly never any discrimination in the Commission 's text .
. ( EL ) The motion to allow European citizens freedom of movement and residence on Community territory is on the right track , which is why I support it .
It gives citizens greater opportunity to exercise their right to move freely throughout the Community by calling for procedures to be simplified and pared down .
Of course , making over six months ' residence dependent on financial resources could give rise to social discrimination .
Now that the definition of the family has been extended to same sex or unmarried partners , the directive reflects the diversity of family relationships in today 's society more closely .
Finally , greater flexibility is needed for students studying abroad ; with the length of time studying takes nowadays , this could be considered as a reason for obtaining a residence permit .
. ( PT ) I welcome the improvements being made to the situation of EU citizens who wish to settle in another Member State of the Union , in particular reducing the bureaucracy that currently proliferates .
On the basis of the proposal for a directive put forward by the European Commission , it will now be possible for an EU citizen to remain on the territory of another Member State without having to comply with any formalities , for a period of six months and not only three months , which is the current requirement .
For stays of more than six months , if a Union citizen is engaged in a gainful activity , he is simply required to make a declaration to that effect .
If he is not engaged in a gainful activity , he is obliged to declare that he has sufficient resources and Member States may not fix any threshold for this .
He must also take out sickness insurance cover for his first four years of residence .
The right to permanent residence at the end of these four years is the major innovation introduced by the directive and consists of the fact that this right is granted to the European citizen and to the members of his / her family .
The report makes some positive improvements , widening the concept of the family , eliminating or simplifying some bureaucracy , and guaranteeing more rights than those planned initially .
Hence our vote in favour .
. ( PT ) We are aware that studying this report appeared at the outset to be a difficult exercise , basically due not only to the issue of the categories of person that should be included in the definition of ' family member ' - or of ' beneficiary ' , in addition to the EU citizen , the definition of the right to move to and particularly to reside in the European Union - but also to the problems inherent in defining the conditions that EU citizens must fulfil in order to benefit from this right .
The fact is that the solutions adopted in these nuclear definitions both in the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs and in plenary , have all had the majority support of the parliamentary left .
In fact , with regard to the definition of the term ' family ' , most of the solutions were adopted in a sense that does not match the values that I hold dear , especially Amendment No 53 : the ' spouse ' , regardless of their sex , the ' unmarried partner ' and / or ' person with whom they live ' , regardless of their sex , ' in a de facto union ' , ' with whom the applicant has a durable relationship ' and ' registered ' under the terms of the relevant national legislation , the ' partner ' and / or ' person with whom they live ' from third countries or without a residence permit and lastly , direct descendents and direct relatives in the ascendant line and those of the spouse or registered partner with whom they live .
My position is not rooted in any type of ideological or religious fundamentalism .
I am not judging , and nor is it my place to judge anyone 's rights on the grounds of their sexual or any other kind of orientation .
I see no reason why the EU should promote legal definitions of the family that are far removed not only from national legislation , making it difficult to transpose them , but also from traditional values that have always been commonly accepted .
Apart from anything , such definitions will encourage all sorts of abuses by those who attempt illegally to move to the EU and settle .
Hence my vote against .
. ( PT ) Although I believe that creating a genuine European area of free movement and genuinely defining the Union 's citizens ' right to residence justify promoting a coherent and articulate policy , I have had to vote against the report .
I regret that the excessive approach of the proposals , voted for mainly by the left in the parliamentary committee , remove any merit the report had , and take it far from the considerably more balanced approach of the rapporteur .
The final text suffers from the vices of failing to add to the rights and freedoms that are enshrined the duties that go with them , thereby denying the need to take account of their real value and of their real existence .
They also seek to impose a European identity , ignoring true national identities ; establishing an artificial equation between the family and other human relationships in a way that is no longer surprising and takes opportunistic advantage of one issue in order to impose another ; and it ignores the third largest concern of Europe 's citizens - the fight against organised crime .
In addition to breaking down the internal doors of the Union , this text would not allow Member States to learn about and monitor migratory phenomena , a factor that will affect their domestic social balance and the implementation of their budgets , especially for social assistance .
The European Parliament has therefore opted for what is a clearly excessive approach , which goes far beyond what is needed .
This will , in a counterproductive way , only create further difficulties and new unnecessary obstacles to the adoption of these rules .
As I have already said , those who wish to achieve too much will prevent us from achieving the basic goals .
. ( PT ) The European Parliament has today had to face the fact that five Member States have declared themselves to be in favour of transferring Ecuador to the list of third countries whose nationals require visas , basically because of illegal immigration , trafficking in human beings , regional coherence and considerations of public order .
According to information that has been provided , many Ecuadoreans enter Europe legally under the cover of tourism but then stay on illegally for longer than three months .
The expulsion of Ecuadorean nationals is becoming increasingly frequent , due mainly to a lack of evidence that they have sufficient means of subsistence and their inability to submit valid proof of the purpose of their journey .
There is also the consideration of geographical coherence , because visas are currently required of nationals of other Andean countries , which makes Ecuadorean passports more ' interesting ' and encourages their falsification and counterfeiting .
Since the Commission proposal was drawn up in response to the priority established at the Seville European Council , to combat illegal immigration , we have voted in favour of it .
. ( PT ) I am voting in favour of this report , primarily because it is a further demonstration that East Timor is recognised as a fully-fledged State .
I understand the need to re-examine the list of third countries subject to visa requirements , due to the necessary and urgent fight against crime and illegal immigration , I welcome the possibility of reassessing the impact of making visas mandatory , particularly with regard to journeys undertaken for business , leisure and research purposes .
Going now into the most widely debated point , it is clear , given the Member States ' answers to the questionnaire published by the Commission , that transferring Ecuador to the permanent list of countries on Annex I of Regulation ( EC ) Noº539 / 2001 is justified by the concerns expressed about illegal immigration , trafficking in human beings , regional coherence and public order .
The Ecuadorian Government 's concern at the legislative change we are discussing is understandable , but we cannot minimise the dissuasive effect that experience has proved necessary to step up .
In fact , the human tragedy of being uprooted , of being in an illegal situation and of lacking the means to survive has , with the implementation of this amendment , better possibilities of being avoided upstream , thereby ending the particular attraction that an Ecuadorean passport holds for forgers and counterfeiters .
Belarus has cut itself off from the international community because of the autocratic policy followed by its regime .
This policy involves persecuting the opposition , restricting the freedom of the press , restricting trade union freedoms , imprisoning , mistreating and doing away with political opponents and applying the death penalty .
Belarus needs to start democratising if it is going to be in a position to ratify the partnership and cooperation agreement between the ? U and Belarus in the not too distant future .
It goes without saying that the European Parliament 's call for democratisation must not conceal any attempt by the EU to challenge the right of Belarus to decide its own foreign policy .
The MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece voted against the report on Belarus because it represents monumental intervention by the ? U in the internal affairs of an independent country .
The problem for the EU is not one of democracy ; it is the fact that Belarus insists on respect for international law , territorial integrity and national sovereignty and is against selling out to the multinationals .
The report - and this is pure blackmail - makes future relations with Belarus dependent on its immediate transition to a market economy and even calls for cooperation with the USA in a bid to make its intervention - which nowadays can mean anything and everything , including military intervention - more effective .
There is a problem in Belarus with respect for human rights and democratic freedoms .
However , this is a matter for its own people and does not warrant foreign intervention .
The supposed democratic freedoms which international imperialist organisations and this report are endeavouring to blackmail Belarus into accepting are freedom of action for big business and the freedom to wipe out any achievements left over from the socialist regime .
All this is illustrated by the fact that the amendment proposed by the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece , calling on the ? U to cooperate directly with Belarus in combating trafficking in human beings , was rejected in favour of an amendment requiring Belarus to toe the EU line .
The next item is the recommendation by Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra ( A5-0017 / 2003 ) on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy on the conclusion of an Association Agreement between the European Community and its Member States of the one part , and the Republic of Chile , of the other part [ 13767 / 2002 - COM ( 2002 ) 536 - C5-0589 / 2002 - 2002 / 0239 ( AVC ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would firstly like to thank the political groups in this House for their cooperation in the production of this report , which has been unanimously approved by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy and I would like to stress this cooperation since it does not happen very often .
Secondly , I would congratulate the Commission on its impeccable negotiation of this association agreement with Chile - as Commissioner Patten has pointed out - taking up the suggestions of the European Parliament in relation to the timetable and overcoming the difficulties caused by the negotiation guidelines .
Commissioner Patten asked us to trust in his judgment in order to overcome the problems relating to the timetable and he has been proved right .
The result , Mr President , is that we have the most innovative , ambitious and global agreement the European Union has ever concluded with a third country which is not a candidate for accession .
An agreement which has been described by the Commission - correctly I believe - as an agreement for the twenty-first century , a fourth generation plus agreement .
I believe we must be pleased that this agreement has been concluded with a country such as Chile , since in a way this agreement is a recognition of the great civil maturity of the citizens of that country and their decisive desire for openness and trade .
As Commissioner Patten said to us a moment ago , this agreement also represents a message of hope to a region which is currently experiencing a difficult situation : instability in Venezuela , crisis in Argentina , the hopes and challenges arising from the election of President Lula da Silva in Brazil , poverty on the subcontinent and the phenomenon of violence in Colombia .
I would particularly express my gratitude for the words of Mr Patten , who , on behalf of the European Parliament , is also going to communicate a message of solidarity to the Colombian authorities in relation to the attack which killed many people in Bogotá last weekend .
This agreement - as the Commissioner quite rightly pointed out - takes a similar approach to the Association Agreement with Mexico which has lead to an increase in commercial transactions since its entry into force and which is an agreement which goes much further than these requirements , since it provides for the liberalisation of 100 % of transactions , many going much further than the forecasts established in the negotiations of the World Trade Organisation .
I would like to highlight an aspect which I believe to be particularly important , and that is that Chile has concluded this association agreement with the European Union before concluding its agreement with the United States .
I would also stress that the Commission has stated that this agreement goes beyond mere commercial thinking , since association agreements try to establish a strategic partnership based on the principles and rights contained in the democratic clause for both parties .
This agreement is very rich in terms of commercial liberalisation .
It involves almost 100 % of products , not just agricultural products , but products of every type , it establishes stipulations relating to agreements and technical clauses , it lays down the greatest degree of liberalisation ever to have been created in an agreement on the services sector and also establishes , Mr President , the most generous treatment Chile has ever given to a third country , and , for the first time in negotiations with the European Union , it lays down accessibility for foreign investors in an agreement of this nature .
I believe that this agreement completes the network of agreements being negotiated at the moment .
The only one remaining is that with Mercosur , and we are awaiting negotiation guidelines for agreements on political dialogue and cooperation with the Andean and Central American Community , which we hope - as Parliament has requested on many occasions - can become association agreements .
In this way , Mr President , I believe we will be able to respond to the difficult situations being experienced by certain Latin American countries and create an extensive range of relations between our two regions which should culminate - and this is what Parliament wants - in the coming summit of Heads of State in Mexico , and we hope that these agreements can lead the way to a strategic and bi-regional partnership which will result in this global partnership we want to see .
Therefore this agreement , Mr President , represents a geographical consolidation of the existing links between both regions , which are destined to be political , commercial and strategic partners , and increases the tools at our disposal for responding to the challenges and uncertainties we are faced with in this globalised world .
I would like to thank all the political groups for their positive and constructive cooperation in the issuing of this favourable opinion on the association agreement .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would first of all like to express the satisfaction of the Group of the European Peoples ' Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats - and mine in particular - at the conclusion of this association agreement between the Community and its Member States and Chile , the most ambitious , innovative and global agreement the European Union has ever negotiated with a country which is not a candidate for accession , to use the words of the European Commission , in line with what , as has been said already , should be the bi-regional strategic partnership between Latin America and the European Union that this Parliament proposed .
Furthermore , I would like to , and must , congratulate Mr Salafranca on the work he has done in order to realise this work and the Commission on the efforts and guidance it has contributed to the conclusion of this Agreement , which began as soon as Chile had recovered its rights and freedoms , which would not have been possible without the political vision and tenacity of the Chilean leaders , from President Elwin to the current President , President Lagos , and which reflects the will of Chile and of the European Union and its Member States to establish privileged relations in the political , commercial and cooperation fields which the agreement encompasses and to strengthen links , as a result of the shared values which unite them .
Within the framework of the liberalisation of the markets , the benefits in terms of economic growth and sustainable development which may result from reciprocal economic and trade relations is unquestionable , as are the benefits of a political dialogue aimed at promoting democracy and the formulation of common responses to the great challenges of this millennium .
That is why I am convinced that this agreement - which my group will support resoundingly - is a very positive step not only for relations between the European Union and Chile , but also for the economic and social well-being of the Chilean people in their democratic journey , which has so far been recovered in such an exemplary fashion , and which must serve , and in reality does serve , as an example to Latin America during these difficult times for some of its countries .
Mr President , Commissioner , we must be glad about the establishment of this agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Chile and I also believe it is fair to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Salafranca , on his efforts and the results achieved .
It is a very broad agreement which will undoubtedly increase commercial transactions between the European Union and Chile and this is positive at a time when many countries in Latin America are in a particularly difficult situation .
It should be stressed that the total of tariffs on imports from Chile , relating to industrial products , will be restricted in 2006 and that in the agricultural field this will take place in 2012 .
The agreement also offers great possibilities in the fields of services and financial services , as well as on all aspects relating to investments .
It is also positive that it includes a protocol on fishing enterprises .
I have read the report of the International Human Rights Federation on the indigenous populations in Chile .
These represent 4.4 % of the total population , or 13 % , depending on the source of statistics .
Of these populations , the Mapuche people , in percentage terms , are the most significant .
The problems of the indigenous population relate to forest exploitation and the construction of large hydro-electric projects .
We must remember that these problems were exacerbated enormously during the dictatorship of Pinochet .
We are glad that the report contains explicit references to the protection of human rights and specifically mentions the rights of indigenous minorities .
We hope that this Agreement will create greater transparency and mutual understanding , and that it will also recognise the rights of the indigenous peoples .
Finally , while on the subject of Chile , as a citizen of Catalonia , I must acknowledge Chile 's reception in former times of Catalan exiles fleeing the Franco dictatorship .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the EU / Chile Association Agreement enacts particularly ambitious , strengthened cooperation .
Such intense dialogue should , of course , be encouraged with the greatest possible number of third countries in order to support economic development and emphasise the ecological values and democratic clauses of the European Union .
Furthermore , we feel this far-reaching agreement has taken place too quickly , in particular given the impact assessment unveiled at the same time .
It is a shame that the impact assessment did not really act as a basis for this association agreement .
The European Union negotiations , which are very strong with regard to trade and , in our opinion , excessive with regard to liberalisation , should now also be based , in a balanced manner , around human rights and the environment .
Following Chile 's dark history , all our vigilance should be focused on political rights , in particular the fate of the Mapuche Indians .
With regard to fisheries , the Union 's interests for Chile should be balanced and only have meaning and a future within the perspective of development and sustainable management of fisheries resources .
Let us spare the Chilean fishermen the overexploitation of their resources that has destroyed our own European marine resources .
In particular , let us spare Chile from being relegated to the role of ersatz fishmonger for our Community ports .
Lastly , we think the scope of this agreement should have given rise to a prior discussion of the same magnitude .
This agreement , which aspires to be a model for the twenty-first century , is being dealt with too cursorily .
Although the agreement is interesting because it integrates the human rights dimension and consultation of civil society , it nevertheless deserved a more extensive debate on its possible impact , both positive and negative .
We submitted an oral question in this regard to allow a debate worthy of the agreement , but the proposal was dismissed .
Far from constituting barriers to the implementation of the agreement under consideration , these observations - and we would emphasise this - are an attempt to increase its relevance and durability .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance would like this twenty-first century agreement to become a beacon for a new kind of trade based on fair trade , respect for the environment and human rights .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0019 / 2003 ) by Mr Caveri , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the establishment of an ecopoint system applicable to heavy goods vehicles travelling through Austria for the year 2004 [ COM ( 2001 ) 807 - C5-0699 / 2001 - 2001 / 0310 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this proposal was presented on 20 December 2001 in order to respond to the request of the European Council in Laeken .
However , the Commission does not believe that the system of ecopoints is a valid long-term system for resolving the problems of traffic associated with sensitive regions .
The text we will present contains certain significant elements , such as the removal of the 108 % clause , which imposes an annual limit on the number of transit journeys by Community lorries through Austria .
On the other hand , the proposal maintains the system in force throughout Austrian territory and also the number of ecopoints available for 2003 .
In fact , in 2003 the objective of the system will be achieved , which is to reduce pollution by 60 % over the last twelve years .
This proposal therefore responds to the desire of the Heads of State and Government and implies an extension for a limited period - one year renewable for two further consecutive years , that is up to a maximum of three years - but under no circumstances can it be the definitive proposal , but simply a transitional solution until we can implement other solutions .
Mr President , I would firstly like to thank Mr Caveri for the work he has done on an issue which - as we have seen here today - is very difficult and delicate .
There are a range of interests , all of them legitimate but entirely contradictory , which are in opposition to each other .
I would simply like to point out to certain Members that we need a quick resolution , because the current transitional situation ends on 31 December 2003 .
Secondly , the current situation is transitional .
In other words , what appears in the accession Treaty , the protocol on which the whole system of ecopoints is based , lays down a limited time period .
Thirdly , we must be aware that the other fourteen countries of the European Union are accepting the idea of making an effort and an exception in order to satisfy Austria with regard to what is one of the essential freedoms of European integration - initially of the Common Market and now of the European Union - which is freedom of transit for people .
On this basis , the Commission presented a proposal which suggested an extension for a maximum of three years - year by year - of the current system , in order to allow time to seek general rules which of course will not mean for Austria or anybody the maintenance of the ecopoints system or any similar system .
I say this because it is obvious that it is not now a question of seeking a system which is radically different to the ecopoints system , since it is going to have a restricted minimal period in force .
I would insist that we are seeking a transitional system so that Austria , which participates in the ecopoints system , may arrive , together with the other 14 countries - 24 within a few months - at a common system and a better assumption of the external costs of the different infrastructures throughout the European Union , without exceptions for anybody .
It is therefore a transitional exception which must be based , in principle , on the current system because for two or three years it would not make much sense .
In Mr Caveri 's proposal there are points which take the same approach as the principle for agreement proposed by the Danish Presidency on 31 December .
This represents a compromise and I am happy that there is agreement , for example , on the idea of banning the most polluting lorries ; on the idea of freeing the least polluting lorries from the ecopoints system ; on establishing an annual duration of a transitional system up to a maximum of three years .
However , there are provisions which we believe will make it difficult for the Commission to reach an agreement with the Council - I would make this very clear - and which would provide more problems than solutions .
This is the case with the reduction of the scope of the system to just the Austrian Alps , which are genuinely of the greatest sensitivity , because in the other areas of Austria the sensitivity - and many of the speakers were right - is identical to that of other areas of Europe .
However , while I understand this in principle , it would create enormous difficulties in terms of managing the project .
I would therefore ask that the general area of Austria be maintained .
Furthermore , in the Council we have debated whether or not to exclude the Hörbranz Pass , the Lindau-St .
Margarethen , which involves a stretch of road of less than 15 kilometres , a very short distance .
That would also raise problems .
I would therefore ask you not to retain this part , please .
The provisions of the system of contingents , which vary according to categories , would also raise difficulties .
Furthermore , the number of ecopoints set relates to the current Member States , and to apply the system now to the future countries would complicate matters even further .
Let us hope that before they join as full Members this problem has been resolved definitively .
Furthermore , we ask that you do not insist on the reintroduction of the 108 % clause , because we cannot maintain and represent something which - I can tell you - the Council would never accept and which the Commission also rejected .
Furthermore , that clause did not appear in the proposal .
Therefore , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we can accept six amendments , one of them a fundamental issue and , if necessary , with some modifications to the wording of the text , Amendments Nos 1 , 5 , 11 , 12 and the first sentence of No 15 and of No 18 .
I would like to say to you that the real solution is to build the Brenner , to build the Lyon-Turin , that intermodality truly be established .
Those are the solutions .
You must understand that we have to seek a compromise and that a solution is urgently required .
We do not have many months .
And the perfect is always the enemy of the good .
I say this to everyone .
I would ask you to cooperate so that , amongst all of us , we can resolve this problem , which is very sensitive in one of the countries of the Union .
We must seek a response and achieve a result which allows progress to be made , while we present proposals which serve to provide a more rational system of charging for infrastructures throughout the European Union .
I would once again like to congratulate Mr Caveri on the difficult work he has done in trying to seek a formula acceptable to everyone and , in any event , the Commission will , of course , take very good note of what Parliament says as always and will try to include these elements in the basis of an agreement acceptable to Parliament and to the Council .
Mr President , Commissioner , the White Paper on Transport is dated 12 September 2001 and it may appear that we have spent too much time analysing this important report sent to us by the Commission .
However , I must say that we have made good use of this time , thorough use I believe , to debate and bring together positions between the different groups in the House .
At the moment these approximations are still taking place , and I would urge that we reach a thorough consensus for the vote tomorrow .
We have used this time to inform the sectors and allow them to participate .
I am sure that the Commission has held many contacts with all the sectors before producing the White Paper , but I must say that Parliament has not been left behind and that practically all the European associations representing the different modes of transport have been heard by Parliament and that many of their proposals have been incorporated into the approach we have been working on .
This approach is characterised by a fundamental fact : Commissioner , in this case Parliament is not opposing the Commission .
On the contrary , it is demonstrating willingness and carrying out a positive analysis of the Commission 's proposal , of the proposals in the White Paper , and we believe that the enormous majority of its offers and analysis can be perfectly endorsed by this Parliament .
W are continuing this reflection , however , and providing certain constructive criticisms and specific proposals which should be analysed by the Commission as appropriate .
This is a crucial and decisive time for transport .
It is true that in 1992 , in the last White Paper on Transport , certain objectives were set which have been fulfilled practically in their entirety .
We could say that the liberalisation of transport was the strategic and fundamental objective of that White Paper : the incorporation of technologies , the reduction in transport costs , the increase in competitiveness , objective achieved , but in this war , we have lost the battle of sustainability , and I am glad that the Commission is the first to clearly acknowledge the seriousness of this problem , and the fact that we cannot afford to delay decision making if we want to be operative .
The problem of sustainability in the broad sense , environmental , naturally , with the grave consequences of the pollution created by transport , which cancel out the savings made in the rest of industry with a view to fulfilling the Kyoto commitments , and with the impact , not only on nature generally , but on the health of the citizens who , according to certain reports , reaches levels practically as serious as transport accident levels .
As well as the actual environmental aspect , congestion is worrying .
We used to have a functional operative transport system which was competitive , but now the main routes are seizing up , cities are becoming grid-locked , kilometres of rail and road , approaches to airports , are showing themselves to be structurally weak in terms of competitiveness .
And therefore competitiveness is being seriously harmed .
This is not the time to give figures , I refuse to do that , we do not have time , but I must say that we are also moving in that direction .
Charging is a rough diamond in the White Paper which we must be able to cut from now on and which is essential .
We must promote modes of transport which are respectful of the environment , create synergy between the different modes of transport by means of intermodality and the logistical platforms necessary for creating transport as efficiently as possible .
The essential role of roads must be respected and valued , the railways must be liberalised , short- and medium-distance cabotage must be strengthened , etc .
Safety cannot be conditional .
There is a proposal from Parliament on the creation of the European safety agency for roads - the only one missing from the White Paper on Transport - and I hope that it is received well , as well as other problems relating to safety at sea , on the railways , etc .
Commissioner , the time has come for us to say very clearly that the European Union 's transport policy cannot work without a consistent budgetary policy , and hence Parliament 's proposal on the European transport fund that we need and on the financial instrument for transport .
It is true that European asymmetry is not properly considered in the White Paper , that urban issues have not been dealt with since they are considered subsidiary and not to be subject to the Commission 's proposal , that public transport is not yet properly dealt with - and we are asking the Commission for complementary documents - that enlargement is not really taken into account in the White Paper , but if Europe wants to participate in the process of globalisation and not wait for others to implement it and , if it wants to be as viable as possible , it must have better transport .
You have cooperated in the White Paper in this respect and Parliament wishes to follow .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to thank Mr Izquierdo Collado for the work he has done over a long period .
I believe his work has allowed us to hold the sometimes passionate debates which have resulted from the White Paper .
We are talking about promoting a transport policy , taking account of new elements , as has been said , in a clear and precise way , such as the aspect of combining sustainable development and growth , in other words , the incorporation of quality of life and the protection of the environment as factors which are also essential when it comes to drawing up our policies .
In this regard , the almost sixty measures proposed between now and 2010 are geared towards rebalancing modes of transport , which does not mean running down road transport - let us make this very clear - or sea transport , which are the two most competitive modes of transport , but simply preventing the future deterioration of rail transport or inland waterways transport in the north of Europe , which are absolutely essential forms of transport which must play a fundamental role in absorbing the new transport demands , and this is also true of the development of sea transport .
It is therefore a question of rebalancing modes of transport , removing bottlenecks , having a policy of safe transport - safety is an essential point when it comes to serving the users - and also tackling the globalisation which is today being experienced by many modes of transport , in particular air and sea transport .
The analysis we have presented in the White Paper has been debated in depth , also by the industry and the sectors mostly affected .
Also by the Council .
In this regard , most of the measures proposed in the White Paper have been presented by the Commission to this Parliament and to the Council .
Some have made significant progress , such as Galileo , accession to Eurocontrol , the creation of air and sea safety agencies - I will talk later about road safety , which Mr Sr. Izquierdo Collado has mentioned - including initiatives on working time in the road transport sector or the recent agreement in the Council on the single European sky and the Marco Polo programme .
With regard to the second rail package , the negotiations are at a very advanced stage and this Parliament expressed its opinion very clearly just a couple of months ago .
However , other important proposals are still at a preparatory stage , such as the trans-European networks .
As you know , despite the fact that this Parliament had expressed its support for the partial reform proposed by the Commission , the Council preferred to delay it and simply to go ahead with a more general revision .
Alright . In this regard , I hope that the Van Miert Group , which is considering a global revision of the trans-European networks in view of enlargement , that is , a Europe of twenty-seven - because it includes the countries with which negotiations are either completed or at an advanced stage - will achieve a good result before the end of the Greek Presidency and that the document can therefore be presented during the Italian Presidency .
It should therefore also be discussed by this Parliament .

I would like to say that we are also at the final stage of the launch of the infrastructures package , which will contain three essential elements for the development of infrastructures : a methodology for charging - which Mr Izquierdo Collado mentioned a moment ago and which we discussed before the debate on the issue of ecopoints in Austria - as a preliminary stage before a directive on charging which will indicate how far the Council and this Parliament are willing to go on this issue and which lays down the forms , modes and limits .
Secondly , a system for incentivising public-private partnerships in the creation of infrastructures .
We need to incorporate private capital into the development of new infrastructures in order to speed up the implementation of these new infrastructures in a Europe of twenty-five - and soon of twenty-seven .
Thirdly , a European system of electronic pricing which furthermore will be accompanied by compatibility , in other words interoperability of practical , technical systems in the different countries of the European Union , with the medium-term aim of creating uniformity , establishing a single system based on the satellite control systems , that is , the Galileo system .
With regard to road safety , I am pleased to note that the honourable Members share the objective we have set of reducing the number of fatal road accidents by 50 % by 2010 .
The Commission has just adopted a proposal for a directive on the safety of tunnels and we will shortly present a global action plan in the field of road safety .
In this field , we will also present important proposals on the control of road transport in relation to the identification of motorway black spots .
I hope that these new measures will contribute to achieving this objective and they must be supplemented by measures established at national and local level , because here there is a very significant margin for subsidiarity .
In the field of maritime safety , ladies and gentlemen , we have held discussions for several years , following the tragic Erika accident , and again recently following the Prestige disaster .
However , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission can say that we have presented a coherent package of measures which enormously increase maritime safety in the European Union , which only need to be implemented , and that the remaining measures will be presented shortly .
Some of them have already been presented , such as the timetable for the departure of single-hull oil tankers and their replacement by double-hull oil tankers , the requirement for safer and more modern oil tankers for the transport of the more polluting hydrocarbons and we will soon present issues such as criminal responsibility in the event of serious negligence .
We must insist on the maximum level of compensation funds in the event of pollution or in the proposals to promote with the countries of the Union modifications in the field of international maritime law , which is based on completely obsolete principles from the nineteenth century rather than the twenty-first century .
With regard to air transport , in 2003 we will concentrate our action on external relations , including the mandates for renegotiation of open skies agreements , which is an extremely urgent matter , beginning with the agreements with the United States .
Ladies and gentlemen , I have seen the proposals made by the rapporteur , in general terms , though I will discuss the different points in more detail later .
I believe we are working in the same spirit .
I hope that the approval of this Parliament , with the amendments it considers appropriate in a report on the White Paper , will help to speed up the measures being discussed , both in Parliament and in the Council , and that those yet to come will clarify the possibilities , the margins and the limits and will above all allow the discussion with this Parliament within this same mandate to be speeded up .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the subject for debate here is not simply a report on the transport of the future .
This is , in fact , one of the last ways out following a generation of production and mobility that has burnt itself out .
Who would still dare to speak of disaster-mongering or ill omens of charlatan ecologists on the environmental state of our planet , in the face of WHO studies which estimate the number of deaths caused by automobile exhaust emissions at 800 000 each year .
There is nothing we can do now other than try to curb the existing phenomena of environmental crisis .
What was urgent in a Union of Fifteen now becomes an imperative before a Union of Twenty-five , and any transport policy that failed to include the sustainable development aspect would be entirely ineffective .
The threats to our lifestyle are forcing us to instigate a genuine revolution in transport culture .
We have certainly realised this rather late , but now we are , at last , able to separate increases in transport volume from economic growth .
Far from previous traditions , this new transport deal should include environmental requirements first and foremost in its studies , place the transport-using citizen at the heart of its definitions and liase with NGOs in all of its deliberations .
Increasing urbanisation must go hand in hand with improving public transport .
For each new project , opportunities for intermodal connections between networks that already exist or are planned should be prioritised .
Furthermore , we must not oppose this new deal on transport in 2010 with financial quibbling .
An ambitious Community research and development programme must be carried out to counter noise pollution and harmful emissions in the transport sector and achieve the objectives of the Kyoto protocol .
In its report , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy raised the issue of the impact of these kinds of pollution on human health .
Alarm bells are ringing everywhere , but that is no reason to simply announce that disaster is looming and cannot be averted .
We have progressed from realisation to warnings .
Now we must act .
Far from giving up , Commissioner , in the face of the ecological disaster that is forecast , the Union must change direction with regard to transport and require all agreements and programmes , and heaven knows there are many of them , to comply with environmental criteria .
Otherwise we are heading for a fall , with full knowledge of the facts .
Mr President , this is really a debate for the initiated and we are using the twelfth language of the Community , the budget .
Commissioner , the Copenhagen figures , as I understand it , are budget figures , while what we are discussing now , in relation to your presentation , are financial perspective figures .
In other words , the financial perspectives - the headings - may be greater than the budgetary sums approved in Copenhagen .
Is this correct ?
Is that what the Commission is going to say , that we should take the Copenhagen figures as a minimum and go further , in case the needs are greater than the Council 's estimates ?
Mr President , in Copenhagen categories 1 and 2 have been negotiated and in reality the internal and external policies have more or less been calculated .
Does this mean , following the explanations you have given , that the sums in categories 3 and 4 can be considered as indicative while the sums in categories 1 and 2 are established ?
The next item is Question Time ( B5-0010 / 2003 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Commission .
Part I
Question No 36 by Didier Rod ( H-0050 / 03 ) :
Subject : Implications of tobacco advertising for Community competition policy
Following the statements to the press by representatives of the International Automobile Federation ( FIA ) , it seems that the FIA is threatening not to allow any further Formula 1 races to take place at any track in the EU Member States because of the new European directive on tobacco advertising which the Member States are required to transpose in 2005 at the latest .
What conclusions does the Commission draw from this as regards competition law , particularly in the light of the agreements between the Commission and the FIA ?
From the point of view of competition law , what is the Commission 's view regarding the FIA 's decision to leave it to the teams to decide whether to race or refuse to take part in races at tracks in Member States because of a law banning tobacco advertising during sporting events , in the light of the case law of the Court of Justice and the positions of the European Council , Commission and Parliament on sport ?
Question No 37 by Anna Karamanou ( H-0031 / 03 ) :
Subject : Victim of sex abuse banned from leaving the United Arab Emirates
According to French press reports , on 15 October 2002 the authorities of the United Arab Emirates banned Touria Tiouli , a French citizen , from leaving the country .
The authorities of the Emirates have charged her with engaging in sexual intercourse outside marriage , which is punishable by a term of imprisonment of at least six months ; this occurred after Touria Tiouli had herself lodged a complaint with the police that she had been sexually abused by three UAE nationals .
Does the Commission intend to apply pressure on the Government of the United Arab Emirates , in parallel with the efforts made by the French Government , to have the detained woman released and the men who raped her punished , bearing in mind that the protection of women 's rights and the fight against sexual violence in particular are fundamental principles of the European Union ?
Commissioner , I am partly satisfied with your reply ; however , I was hoping that the Commission would use its authority to put pressure on the United Arab Emirates .
The good news is that the Emirates court has acquitted Mrs Tiouli of the accusations made against her by her rapists , but her troubles are not over yet because she still has to wait a fortnight from the date of the ruling .
The ruling was returned on 26 January ; unless I am mistaken , that was a fortnight ago today and we are waiting to see if her passport will be returned so that she can leave the country .
I should like to ask you , Commissioner , if you intend to collaborate with the French Government and the French embassy in the United Arab Emirates and exercise the authority and powers you have as Commissioner of the European Union to put an end to the nightmare this French woman has been put through .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the next questioner and the next Commissioner are not now in the Chamber and I am therefore going to stop the clock for 3 or 4 minutes so that Question Time can then continue .
Question No 38 by Rodi Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou ( H-0054 / 03 ) :
Subject : The MEDA Programme and women
In the context of Community funding for MEDA regional programmes and in the light of the conclusions of the Brussels Regional Forum held under the Belgian Presidency on 14 July 2001 on the role of women in economic development , the Commission was called upon to prepare the First Regional Programme for the participation of women in economic and social life and development .
Since then the Commission has not presented any specific proposals within the framework of this programme .
Can it give the reasons for such an unjustified delay ?
Does it have any specific timetable which it intends to implement in 2003 to initiate this programme ?
What are the principal orientations it wishes to give to this regional programme for women and what are the main needs it intends to meet ?
We will begin the second part of this Question Time , during which Commissioner Solbes will be replying .
Part II
Questions to Commissioner Solbes
Question No 39 by Alexandros Alavanos ( H-0024 / 03 ) :
Subject : Updated stability programme for Greece ( 2002 )
In its conclusions on Greece 's updated stability programme for 2002 ( 9 January 2003 ) , one of the points the Commission makes is that , in a period of strong growth for the Greek economy , the pace of reduction in the public debt indicator is slow .
How does the Commission view the slow pace of reduction in public debt in Greece , despite the high rate of growth in GNP , which is mainly due to the third CSF and the Olympic games ?
In the Commission 's opinion , what will be the trend in Greek public debt after 2004 , when it is probable that rates of growth in GNP will be lower ?
The ratio of debt in Greece is one of the highest in the Community .
It increased up until the middle of the 1990s , reaching a peak of over 110 % of GDP in 1996 .
This was the result of increasing budgetary imbalances and low growth in GDP .
The stabilisation efforts with a view to participation in Monetary Union and the improvement in the main macroeconomic indicators have contributed to reducing the ratio of debt , although at a very slow rate .
The debt still represents 107 % of GDP in 2001 .
Three factors have influenced this development : the level of primary balance , that is , excluding financial payments , the nominal rate of growth of GDP and other autonomous or residual factors .
Notable amongst those are the financial operations which do not affect the budgetary balance but the volume of debt .
In fact , the high rate of adjustment of the volume of debt , which reached 7.1 % of GDP in 2001 - and is estimated as 4 % of GDP in 2002 - meant that the evolution of the debt ratio does not entirely reflect the evolution of the budgetary situation of the public administrations , the achievement of increasingly high primary surpluses or the growth in GDP .
Furthermore , the evolution of public debt , as laid out in the Greek stability programme in 2002 , has been partially affected by the review of the statistical methods used in different financial operations .
That review was carried out in accordance with the system established by Eurostat in order to comply with the conditions set in the ESA 95 , in our European system of national accounts .
The statistical review which was carried out in 2002 led to an increase in Greece 's debt ratio in 2001 , which rose to 7 % of GDP higher than the figure previously estimated .
Bearing in mind the new budgetary perspective arising from this review , the updated stability programme foresees a reduction in the debt ratio equivalent to 1.7 % in 2002 , forecasting an acceleration of this reduction after 2003 , with a reduction of approximately 0.4 % until the end of 2006 .
In fact , from 2003 , the modification of the debt ratio will correspond better to the level of primary surplus .
In accordance with the Commission 's economic forecasts of last autumn , Greece 's ratio of debt should decrease until the end of 2004 , although at a slower rate than that forecast in the 2002 stability programme .
For the period following 2004 , when the updated stabilisation programme allows a certain decrease in real production growth , it will be necessary to apply a credible strategy of budgetary adjustment in order to be able to guarantee this reduction in the debt ratio laid down in the programme .
In this regard , the greater transparency of the public accounts achieved as a result of their recent review has increased their credibility and also that of the strategy of budgetary adjustment , laid out in general terms in Greece 's stability programme .
My reply will be very quick .
The strategy in the programme has clearly been drawn up without the assumption of a war in Iraq .
The strategy naturally anticipates an increase in the primary surplus and , to put it another way , using growth potential essentially in order to reduce taxes .
The problem of war is viewed in completely different terms .
It is not a scenario which I believe should be tackled at this point , but it is clear that the Stability and Growth Pact itself allows for the existence of exceptional circumstances and there is no question that war is one of these .
However , I believe it would be premature to consider at this point doing anything more in relation to this issue .
Question No 40 by Jonas Sjöstedt ( H-0045 / 03 ) :
Subject : Transfer of profits from Central Bank to State Treasury
On 17 May 2001 , the Swedish Parliament decided that the Central Bank should pay an extra SEK 20 billion to the Swedish Treasury this year in addition to its normal payment of SEK 8.2 billion from its profits , which naturally broadened the scope for reorganising the national budget .
A similar transfer was made the previous year .
Would this type of transfer from the Central Bank to the Treasury have been possible if Sweden had been taking part fully in the third stage of EMU at that time ?
Questions to Commissioner Lamy
The issue mentioned by the honourable Member was raised in the convergence report adopted by the Commission on 22 May 2002 and also in section 6.2 of the convergence report by the European Central Bank of 2002 .
It should be observed that the comments of the Commission contained in its report stress the absence of detailed legislation on the financial transfers of the Central Bank to the Swedish Treasury , particularly in relation to the allocation of extraordinary benefits and payments .
That legislation should establish the rules and conditions for the carrying out of such transfers and should guarantee that the Riksbank conserves the financial resources necessary to comply with its obligations within the framework of the European central banks system .
In the absence of such rules , there is no adequate guarantee of the independence of the Central Bank and particularly its financial independence .
It should also be observed that the relevant requirements within the framework of the Treaty appear in Article 108 - the independence of the Central Bank - and in Article 109 - the compatibility of national legislation with the Treaty . These articles apply both to the participating Member States and to the Member States with exceptions .
I believe that I have tried to be relatively clear in my reply .
The lack of precise rules on the way in which such transfers are carried out does not guarantee the independence of the Central Bank , a key element for participation in the Monetary Union .
That is my comment and that is the comment included in our report .
There is clearly time for implementation until participation in the Monetary Union , but this updating is essential for participation in it .
The essential point is to achieve financial independence , the key element for the independence of the institution .
Very briefly , as you know , the decisions relating to the use of resources fall to each of the national authorities .
The Commission is obliged to verify compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact and that means monitoring decisions affecting stability programmes , or , in this case , the convergence programme .
The problem you raise goes a step further .
It is the problem of public finances , where revenue should be used and what type of expenditure we should carry out .
We have obviously produced certain reports on this type of decision , but nevertheless they are not of a binding nature , but they are simply an approximation of how we believe certain decisions should be managed .
Mr President , I wish to thank Commissioner Lamy for his answer .
I shall convey this to the NGO Intermon-Oxfam in the terms in which the Commissioner has expressed it to Parliament .
Question No 42 by Glenys Kinnock ( H-0039 / 03 ) :
Subject : Economic Partnership Agreements ( EPAs )
Is the Commission aware that there is an ACP perception that , thus far , the EPA negotiations have an inadequate development focus ?
What practical measures can be implemented which would be likely to convince the ACP that the objective of the negotiations is about more than just trade liberalisation ?
Question No 44 by Richard Howitt ( H-0058 / 03 ) :
Subject : Request from Thailand and the Philippines for preferential access to the EU for their canned tuna
In response to requests from Thailand and the Philippines to be granted preferential access to the EU for their canned tuna , the WTO Deputy Director-General submitted recommendations in December 2002 .
If agreed and implemented by the EU , the recommendations will cause serious prejudice to the export of canned tuna of the ACP States and the Andean Pact countries .
Does the Commission agree that the provision of any preferential access to Thailand and the Philippines will displace ACP and Andean Pact countries ' imports into the EU , thereby threatening the livelihoods of poor fishermen and EU investments in the ACP States with whom the EU has concluded 16 bilateral fishing agreements to access fishing resources in their waters ?
Can the Commission confirm that it will not accede to the recommendations of the WTO mediator , but will instead examine the whole issue in the context of the ongoing WTO Doha round where a more balanced result can be achieved to the satisfaction of all the parties ?
Questions to Commissioner Diamantopoulou
First , may I say - and I imagine you will agree - that the real world exists in every country , not just Great Britain .
It is not true that Great Britain has more temporary workers than any other country .
It has 3.2 % , compared with 4.6 % in Holland , 2.5 % in France and far fewer in Germany .
This particular market , the agency work sector , is a law unto itself , but we can see from our analysis of each country that , in countries such as Holland which use exactly the same system as in the directive , not only are there no problems ; the sector is becoming more and more dynamic .
In the United States of America , it is highly profitable and attracts a great deal of investment .
So we have a model that does not increase payment costs .
There is no interference whatsoever on our part in workers ' take-home pay ; all we are doing is securing their minimum rights and we can see that , so far , this model has been a success in the two countries in Europe which have applied it .
This legislative intervention affects a very small number of workers at present - 1.5 % throughout Europe .
However , what is important is that it introduces a framework which secures minimum workers ' rights for the future development of this sector .
Our research shows that this sector has a very poor reputation in the labour market because often the workers used do not enjoy even basic rights ; they have no protection , they have no pension rights and they have no insurance rights .
If minimum rights - no more and no less - were protected , it would become a dynamic sector .
That is the view taken by Confederation itself .
As I said at the beginning , the CIETT has surveyed these agencies , which believe that a broad legislative framework will give better results and enlarge the market .
I can even quote figures to support this :
The most recent CIET ? study concluded that , with the right legislative framework and with basic insurance for workers , these agencies could be employing 6.5 million people by 2010 .
That represents an increase of 4 million people .
I repeat , I shall be using the assessment by the agencies themselves , not just the Commission 's assessment .
As you know Mr Bushill-Matthews , before the Commission made this particular proposal , this directive was the subject of discussion between the trades union and employers .
Neither the trades union nor employers are happy with the present directive , because it tries to strike a balance between creating a real incentive to employ temporary workers while abiding by the basic European principles and minimum protection for workers enshrined in the Treaty .
We have not added so much as a comma over and above the minimum protection for workers .
You said my evidence is based on what the CIETT has said to me .
I have not had any discussions with or received any verbal information from the CIETT ; we used their study and written documents but I would be more than happy to discuss anything at all with them .
I am open to any information they may have to give me .
In Holland , the fact is that I have spoken to these agencies , which are developing rapidly and which , apart from a brief recession two years ago , are doing good business .
You referred to a cost in Great Britain which , of course , I can neither corroborate nor assess at this point in time ; I imagine you are referring to the cost of insuring these people .
And , of course , I cannot argue , I cannot talk about no insurance , about no pension rights or any such contributions that have to be paid .
But apart from that , as far as payment is concerned , the directive does not interfere at all , it does not call for any sort of equivalence , except where the worker replacing the person off work has exactly the same qualifications , exactly the same seniority and exactly the same number of years ' experience .
Only then does it call for identical working conditions and this , of course , is highly complicated .
However , I am more than willing to discuss the individual elements with any agency at all .
Question No 46 by Lennart Sacrédeus ( H-0902 / 02 ) :
Subject : The demographic challenge , families and work
In Sweden , the number of people written off sick has soared in recent years and there are also signs of a disturbing trend in other Member States .
At the same time , the birth rate in Europe is at a record low .
Over the next 50 years , therefore , the population in Germany , Italy and France , for example , will decrease dramatically .
An ageing population creates a strain on the economy to provide pensions and a social safety net .
The EU summit held in Stockholm in March 2001 identified the demographic challenge as one of the Union 's priorities for the future .
What lessons can be drawn from this serious trend and what initiatives has the Commission taken to foster a more integrated view of family formation , childbirth , the demographic challenge , rising numbers of sick notes and sustainable pension schemes ?
Meeting the demographic challenge is one of the main problems facing the countries of Europe .
Naturally , any demographic policy has to be a combination of individual policies and economic and social incentives , most of which come under the Member States and their jurisdiction .
I should like to comment on European added value in this sector , given that the demographic problem is a problem which besets each individual country and Europe as a whole , where the population is both ageing and falling in numbers .
There are two parts to this problem .
First , the population is ageing and has a longer life expectancy ; that people are living longer is a good thing and is due to better living conditions and medical care , but it calls for special policies to manage this ageing population .
In this sector , the sector of the ageing population , the European Union has important policies on public spending and on how to improve public spending and link it to health care , pensions and , of course , employment policies .
I would remind you here that the open method of coordination on employment , on poverty and exclusion programmes and on pensions is geared towards older workers ; this is one of its basic lines of approach .
The second set of policies is designed to reinforce the family so that people can have more children , given that numerous countries have a very low birth rate .
It includes legislation , especially legislation to support parents with young children and basically help them reconcile working and family life , policies on gender equality and women 's access to the job market - remember families often have serious financial problems - and of course social policies , especially social infrastructures .
Social infrastructures are the responsibility of the Member States , but I would remind you that , first , they receive a great deal of funding under the Community Support Framework in connection with employment and , secondly , the first specific targets were set in Barcelona a year ago , when all the Member States undertook to provide 95 % of children between the age of 3 and 6 with a place in a state or private nursery by 2010 .
This will do a great deal to help families .
It was an oversight on my part in my first speech that I omitted to mention the fact that one of the Commission 's basic jobs is monitoring demographic developments and this is presented in the annual social report supported by the European Observatory on the Social Situation , Demography and Family , which funds important studies .
This report , which maps the situation in Europe in the form of highly detailed statistics , refers to the indicators you mentioned on the number of births in each country , the number of births in each region and the ratio between immigrants and the population in each country .
These are detailed , accurate statistics which map the situation in Europe from one year to the next .
I am afraid , Mr Fatuzzo , that if we link the number of new jobs to the number of births , we shall be in for some very unpleasant surprises .
All I need say is that , even if the birth rate increases significantly in Europe and even if the number of immigrants doubles , Europe 's population will still not stabilise and its numbers will continue to fall .
Consequently , the demographic problem really is a burning issue for governments ; as far as the labour market is concerned , a larger population obviously also makes for a more dynamic economy .
The example of the United States , where the population is expanding fast as immigrants integrate , is an important example .
So it is vital for us to realise that the situation as it is today will create serious problems on the existing job market , where we look set to have a shortage of workers under 30 from 2030 onwards .
Consequently , irrespective of how intensively we need to act on the problem of employment , and you are quite right that we need to create more and more jobs , we also need to act directly to increase the population of Europe .
I agree that , at the moment , we urgently need to integrate workers over 55 years old into the European labour market .
The figures are indeed worrying .
Only 37 % of people over 55 are still in work in Europe .
Early retirement has been used as a restructuring mechanism in most countries for years now .
It has put a large number of people out of work and of course , as the information society restructures , older workers are the first to go .
When we analyse pension systems and their problems , we generally talk of the need to increase the retirement age .
This is an economic approach which numerous countries need to take ; at the same time , however , we cannot increase the retirement age unless there are specific policies and incentives , as you said , for these people to enter the labour market , which is why , at European level at least , one of the main priorities in our Employment Strategy and in our recent review of this strategy has been the over-55s .
Under the Barcelona target , every country undertook to have 50 % of the over-55s in work by 2010 .
Every country also undertook to include a percentage of over-55s in training and in training and lifelong learning policy ; in other words , there will be incentives in the form of tax relief or subsidies to encourage these people to go back to work .
Of course , there is the major social sector you referred to , where you do not have full employment but you offer social services with certain specific incentives .
This is the active ageing policy we constantly support and which is included in our guidelines .
Question No 47 by María Izquierdo Rojo ( H-0014 / 03 ) :
Subject : Women 's access to the armed forces and sexual harassment
With reference to Directive 2002 / 73 / EC
Mr President , Commissioner , thank you very much for this reply , which is genuinely useful , and in view of it I do not know what action we can take to urge the Minster for Defence in Spain to deal with certain serious cases of rape and sexual assault , such as that of soldier Quiñoa in the army .
Because a year ago now the Minister promised in the Spanish Parliament to fulfil certain commitments to speed up these cases , but has not done so .
There is a serious legal vacuum , however , because these sexual assaults are dealt with within military jurisdiction as abuses of authority and not as violations of human rights , which is what they are .
Commissioner , what measures could we take to encourage the application of this directive ?
I would very much like some measure to be taken in this regard .
Perhaps a letter addressed to you which could be communicated to the Spanish Minister for Defence so that he may deal with this case of soldier Quiñoa could have an effect , because for more than two years the victim has had no posting , relegated within the armed forces , while her rapist , lieutenant Iván Moriano , is in the army , he is a persistent offender , and no measures have been taken .
This is a serious case of sexual assault within the army which is yet to be dealt with .
It is also a European issue , Commissioner , because I have investigated and there are other cases throughout Europe .
Therefore , if you will allow me , I would address a letter to the Commissioner which explains this issue , Mr President , and which you could communicate to the Minister for Defence , Mr Trillo , who should deal with this serious problem .
We cannot ask any more questions , Mr Moraes , unless you ask a supplementary question to the question by Mrs Izquierdo .
A supplementary question .
As the time allocated to Question Time to the Commission is at an end , Questions Nos 48 to 81 will be answered in writing
Mr President , I should first like to thank the rapporteur for his work and also for his efforts to reconcile diverse positions , about which we have heard today .
I think that the White Paper gives European transport policy a great opportunity to draw the right conclusions from the ruthless analysis that it contains .
This must not be to do nothing ; we cannot hide our heads in the sand , as this might well make a transport policy meltdown inevitable .
The analysis is harsh and cruel and , Mrs Peijs , we have to take it on board : every day there are 7 500 km of traffic jams on Europe 's roads ; between 1990 and 1998 , CO2 emissions increased by 15 % ; the amount of freight transported by rail has declined in recent years from 21 % to 8.5 % and between 1990 and 1996 alone , ten football fields ' worth of new motorways were constructed every day .
We simply cannot go on like this and a sea change in transport policy is the only answer .
That is why I say that the analysis in the White Paper no longer has anything to do with genuine mobility , which we want , or with a more environmentally friendly transport policy .
That is why we need a radical rethink , above all on freight transport , where we need a move to rail and waterways .
This is therefore about a shift to environmentally friendly modes of transport and about making sustainability our basis and our yardstick .
Economic growth and transport growth must not be taken as givens either , because as transport politicians we actually also need to consider whether it is also possible to cut some traffic out altogether .
In my view the White Paper tends to neglect this aspect .
I believe that the Commission has drawn the right conclusions from this analysis and that it has initiated many good measures .
We have made substantial progress in rail policy and we have also made progress on maritime safety , not least - unfortunately - thanks to the Erika and the Prestige .
One further very complicated area is still missing and that is internalising external costs .
Put into plain language , this means that not all of those who travel on the roads , by rail or on water pay the same price for what they actually use .
That is why I hope that a serious proposal will be forthcoming from the Commission very soon - that we will then discuss in detail - so that we can guarantee that all modes of transport bear a fair cost burden , based on true and transparent costs .
My final point , Commissioner , is one that you addressed in your speech earlier .
Enlargement is nearly upon us and I think that we need to do all we can to avoid repeating the same mistakes or again adopting the same unfortunate transport policies that we have seen implemented in the Member States over the last 30 or 40 years .
We must not repeat these mistakes with the new Member States .
That is why I believe that you have a very considerable responsibility to avoid these mistakes with the new Member States and also to work with them to put in place , at an early date , a good and fair European transport policy .
Mr President , my congratulations to Mrs de Palacio on the White Paper on transport before us in this debate .
This is a well-produced piece of work on the part of the Commission which allows us to look as far forward as 2010 .
May I also thank the rapporteur , Mr Izquierdo Collado , on his report .
I think all the political groups will more or less vote the same way tomorrow on a number of points which are vital to the future of transport in the European Union .
For me personally , our guiding principles for the immediate development of European transport are to complete the single market , promote competition , especially by liberalising transport wherever it has not yet been liberalised , ensure all forms of transport are safe and prioritise environmental protection .
I should like to qualify these principles by making a few comments on some of the individual issues .
First of all , the debate on trans-European networks must at some point stop being a debate and must be fleshed out , by which I mean that the trans-European networks will need to be promoted in practice and this will require political will on the part of the Member States on the one hand and both national and Community funding on the other .
We therefore need to increase funding under the Community budget specifically for trans-European networks .
Secondly , we need to open up the railway market .
The Council needs to push the second railways package through as quickly as possible on the basis of Parliament 's proposals , so that the European Union has something to show for itself in the railway sector .
Thirdly , we need to strengthen short sea shipping .
This is vital , especially in certain areas of the European Union , and of course helps to protect the environment .
Fourthly , our debate must include the special role which outlying regions of the European Union and island regions need to play if there is to be a balanced development of transport networks within the Union .
Fifthly , road safety .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats is not united on this issue .
I personally am in favour of a road safety agency , given that 40 000 people are killed on the roads of Europe every year and I think that , while respecting subsidiarity , we need to do something at European level .
Finally , two brief comments on measures to promote safety at sea and charging for infrastructures .
We need to look at this issue but we need to be very careful because it is a rather delicate issue and , although the Commission needs to act , it needs to take careful stock before it makes any proposals .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too wish to thank the rapporteur , Mr Izquierdo Collado , for a report prepared so well and thoroughly .
The rapporteur has introduced notable improvements to the Commission proposal .
The major objectives are the relief of congestion , the creation of hubs , improved safety and the promotion of sustainable transport .
These are targeted primarily at the Union 's central regions .
I would like to remind everyone of the transport needs in outlying and remote districts and regions , and geographically problematic areas .
Good and viable transport links are vital for these areas , which have thin traffic flows .
These needs are virtually ignored in the Commission White Paper .
Account has to be taken of the special needs of sparsely populated island and mountain areas in any development of a common transport policy .
Good transport links will ensure that the whole of the area of the Union remains within the scope of a functional single market and that all Union resources are spent .
I would like to mention one final detail .
A harsh winter has exposed a new type of safety risk in sea transportation .
Consignments of oil in the Baltic Sea from Russia 's new oil port have increased in number .
At the same time the risk of oil disasters in exceptionally icy conditions in winter has grown .
The EU , like the International Maritime Organisation , has no agreement regarding how fit a ship carrying oil is to travel through ice .
This breach in safety arrangements should be swiftly put right .
Mr President , I would firstly like to thank and congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Izquierdo , on his excellent work .
Secondly , I would like to apologise to the Commissioner , because this is the first time in this legislature that this Member will refer expressly to his region , Andalusia .
Andalusia - as you know - is one of the most extensive territories of the European Union , with almost 8 million inhabitants and in 2002 it received 21 million visitors who generated EUR 13 200 million .
As you know , it is one of the Union 's Objective 1 regions , with one of the lowest levels of income , but it survives thanks to agriculture and tourism .
The report itself talks of the substantial impact of transport on European tourism and the need to create north-south corridors in order to facilitate the free trade area between Europe and the Mediterranean , as well as the development of the outermost regions .
Well , what do you make , ladies and gentlemen , of the fact that Algeciras , which is the European Union 's largest Mediterranean container port , has just one connection , by rail , with the interior , which follows a route which is more than a century old and which allows an average of no greater than 17 km / h ?
Did you know that the only Mediterranean coastal area in the whole of the European Union which does not have a motorway is between the provinces of Malaga and Almeria ?
Well , between them is located the province of Granada , which has the lowest income in Spain and in Europe .
If infrastructures do not get there , how are we going to develop ?
These are examples of the infrastructure deficit of the peripheral regions of the Union .
While the different Community policies allow these bottlenecks , there is little or nothing we can do to create cohesive transport and intermodality from social and environmental points of view .
I am glad that this report has not forgotten users of two-wheeled vehicles , who are extremely important in terms of individual transport and its sustainability in cities , which , thanks to them , are more human places to be .
We must continue to work to increase safety standards in transport and its infrastructures , pinpointing black spots and protecting them .
Ladies and gentlemen , if only for money , let us work , let us invest more in safety .
One death costs us EUR 1 million and we have 40 000 deaths a year on the roads .
The report does not mention non-transport .
We must work on an innovative aspect , which is the pedestrianisation of the cities .
Mr President , Mr Izquierdo Collado is quite right to recall the obligation of transport policy to contribute to balanced development and to economic and social cohesion .
In fact , when thinking about and outlining a transport policy it must be realised that this is a sector of strategic importance and a service of public interest that must serve basic objectives .
No less importantly , account must be taken of people 's right to mobility that is safe , affordable and of high quality .
Giving priority to modes of transport that are compatible with the environment also warrants our agreement although we must immediately highlight the contradiction between this statement of principle and the way in which the report favours roads .
Nevertheless , I also wish to state that on some fundamental aspects , we are moving far away from the Commission White Paper and also from the report by Mr Izquierdo Collado because the report does not distance itself sufficiently from the White Paper on these aspects .
In particular , we do not agree with and even reject the leap forwards represented by the constant support for liberalisation , for opening up the markets in the transport sector , as if this were a panacea that could resolve all the difficult situations that have been building up over the years and which have led to the subordination of public transport to private transport and to the degradation of that service .
To date no study has been produced and no one has been able to prove that opening up transport to competition can resolve the sector 's problems .
On the contrary , where liberalisation has taken place , the results prove that exactly the opposite is true .
This is why we have these railway and aviation accidents , which are basically caused by the lack of investment in equipment and in safety , or because of redundancies and the deterioration of employees ' social conditions .
Furthermore , the idea that guaranteeing the existence of various operators of these lines or routes leads to an initial situation of apparent openness systematically ends up creating real monopolies .
The current discussion with regard to the air transport sector is enlightening on this matter .
Finally , I do not think it is acceptable , in the aim of ensuring high-quality and safe transport , for States only to have infra-structures in which they have to invest heavily and that the same States still subsidise - using money from the public purse - companies that will provide services and that these ultimately collect the profits from operating these services .
This is certainly a profitable business for these companies .
The same is not true , however , for public operators .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , please allow me firstly to pay tribute to a person connected to the world of transport , the head of local police recently murdered by the terrorist group ETA .
Secondly , and turning more specifically to the report , I would like to make a series of comments .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his work and Karla Peijs , our shadow rapporteur , since she has made enormous contributions to this document .
I will move on to the issues in the report .
Firstly , there is concern amongst a series of delegations , a series of groups , because we believe the report does not reflect , or reflects very little , the situation of certain countries whose infrastructures have not yet been established , as opposed to other countries in which infrastructures , investments in infrastructures , essentially roads , are completely finished and which only need to be improved .
That is one of our group 's concerns .
Secondly , I would like to express our support for the creation of a road safety agency .
The number of fatal accidents currently occurring on European Roads requires not just a message but an effective and active European policy , and we believe that the road safety agency can be a good instrument .
Finally , we also support the creation of the transport fund , with objectives and considerations other than the trans-European networks and the Structural Funds in the field of transport .
We will support these two ideas which we consider to be positive .
Mr President , Mrs de Palacio , it is gratifying that the Commission is addressing Europe 's transport problems seriously .
Reducing deaths on the road by 50 % is in particular an aim that deserves all our support .
There is no good reason why anyone at all should die on the roads .
Congestion in Central Europe is also a big problem , while in the peripheral regions the worry is safeguarding links with the European markets .
As well as the many good proposals , the White Paper unfortunately contains seriously mistaken evaluations .
The Commission wants to break the link between economic growth and transport growth .
That will not be possible , although we can certainly bring economic growth to a halt .
By easing transport problems we can , without anxiety , allow traffic to increase .
New vehicles will produce up to 90 % fewer emissions than those manufactured before 1970 .
This is not realised if you only take a blinkered view of the matter .
By abolishing all car registration taxes in Europe and lowering car tax for clean cars we will be able to improve the state of the environment radically .
Another odd proposal is that of freezing the share of the market enjoyed by the different transport modes at 1998 levels .
This is something we might expect from the old Soviet Union 's Politburo , but it weakens the Commission 's authority very much indeed .
It would be nonsensical to set out to forcibly steer the market share balance in the direction of targets that have been decided in an ivory tower .
We should instead create an equitable situation for competition for all modes of transport .
Let the market itself then decide the natural balance for transport modes .
The third error relates to the harmonisation of labour and social legislation .
Only when it is a question of transport safety is the harmonisation of maximum transportation times appropriate , and then it will be on the condition that the costs and benefits have been closely looked at .
If we make these three mistakes we will be further than ever away from a dynamic Europe .
The disintegration of the Soviet Union was the result of its own impossible situation , but our splendid European project deserves better .
Our rigid economy is in need of care , and our self-inflicted sickness is actually not just an imaginary one .
Unfortunately , the Commissioner 's medicine seems as if , dare I say so , it had been bought in a bazaar .
Would it not be about time we stopped talking about the European model and sought recipes for success among those who are getting along best ?
Mr President , Commissioner , thank you for attending this debate .
Behind each of the speeches there is what I believe to be a fundamental concept .
This fundamental concept is the single European transport area , a European area of transport which is not only compatible with European asymmetry but which must actually incorporate it .
Europe is not equal - as Mr Sudre has just said - Europe has certain areas of infrastructure , certain peripheral regions , certain areas of cohesion , certain nuclei - more now , with enlargement - which require extremely considerable promotion , but this is not incompatible with the single European transport area .
A few months ago , Commissioner , this House and the Council approved the sixth framework research programme .
This programme established the single European area of research .
The Commissioner said to European researchers : we have passed the stage of you meeting to tell each other what you are doing and even to cooperate on friendly terms .
It is necessary to create a single European area of research so that all research capacity and effort is focussed on the same projects , has the same objectives and the same territory so that we are not therefore inventing the wheel fifteen times .
Therefore , the European research area is the key to understanding all the speeches which this afternoon may have sounded like a rainbow of views which would be difficult to unite .
But I can assure you that the vote tomorrow will not produce a blurred picture , as may be assumed on the basis of tonight 's debate , but a clearly defined one .
You are fortunate , Commissioner , since this Parliament is saying : go ahead , you have the support of Parliament to formulate into directives the issues you have presented to us in the report on the White Paper , and you have certain additional contributions from the European Parliament which may be useful .
Many doors are therefore being opened , and the Council cannot turn a deaf ear to the fundamental demands and the appeal represented by the Transport White Paper that the time has come to take decisions , to create a genuinely European policy , because , in view of this European policy , the effect will be a synergy which will respond to the reticence of those who say that the European Safety Agency will cost money , that the European Transport Fund will not be well used , of those who do not believe that intermodality in one port will benefit the whole of Europe , that investments and corridors , in any area , will benefit around 400 million Europeans once the Union has been enlarged .
Therefore , Commissioner , although there is apparently a rainbow of diversity in this House , I can guarantee that we are very close together .
I will end by thanking all the Members who have participated in this report , because they have offered me many ideas and entirely constructive cooperation .
Mr President , I would first of all like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Izquierdo , for the work he has done , all the members of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism on the quality of the report as a whole , and the various speakers who have spoken on behalf of the different committees during this debate .
I would also like to thank all the Members who have spoken , including those who were highly critical , because I believe they provide colour and variety and above all they communicate feelings and opinions which must be taken into account when we talk about offering solutions in an area which , as Mr Izquierdo said , is so large and diverse and at times so asymmetric as the European area .
I would like to point out that I agree with the honourable Members , and this is clearly spelt out in Mr Izquierdo 's report - which I consider to be very balanced - that we are talking about sustainable transport and this requires , to begin with , a competitive transport system .
If we do not create a competitive transport system in Europe , the whole of our industrial fabric , the whole of our productive sector , will suffer .
We must therefore create competitive transport , but at the same time we must take account of society 's demands , which are linked to quality of life and respect for the environment .
And this is the not always an easy task we must respond to through our proposals .
I have taken good note of the clear support offered by Mr Izquierdo and Parliament 's proposed report .
You have taken your time , but , ladies and gentlemen , the Council is not moving any more quickly - let me make this very clear - in expressing its support for modal change , for the opening up of the railways , for the creation of the single sky , for the launch of the Galileo programme , on which it is really urgent that decisions and actions are taken .
Like us , your priorities include safety and the need to respond to the investment needs of the trans-European networks , in particular through charging , where necessary , for the use of infrastructures .
I am also glad that the report insists on the aspects relating to connection with outermost regions , on the economic importance of roads , on the need to reduce traffic - when I talk about the outermost regions I am talking about islands situated several thousand kilometres from continental Europe .
I believe that all these points are very interesting and worthy of our attention and they deserve to be highlighted in this report .
However , I would like to make a few comments with regard to the important points which have been raised here and in the report .
Firstly , the road safety agency .
I fully understand this idea , because it stems from the need to create means of promoting responsibility at all levels to react against the lack of safety on the roads while respecting the principle of subsidiarity and the Commission 's right of initiative .
I believe we should consider the steps to be taken in order to achieve this objective .
I hope to be able to provide more detail in the communication on road safety which I will present to you in the near future , but there is little difference between an observatory and an agency .
At the end of the day , they are the same idea .
I would like - in relation the text we are discussing - to make a few comments on competitiveness , respect for the environment and the incorporation of quality of services , safety and quality of life .
Paragraph 9 states that the transfer of goods transport by road to other modes of transport should be promoted by improving the quality of service of these other modes of transport which are more respectful and under no circumstances having a negative impact on the competitiveness of road transport .
I believe that this sentence is fundamental .
Europe cannot afford to make road transport less competitive , since it forms the basis of its economic development , its growth and its international competitiveness .
It is a question of making , for example , the railways as competitive as road transport .
To those who entirely reject the liberalisation of the railways - who are a minority in this Parliament - or the introduction of competition - we are talking more of introducing competition than liberalisation , since this is a highly regulated form of liberalisation - I would say that we know what maintaining the current situation would lead to : to our having railways in museums but not in reality .
I believe we should try to take other routes which have provided good results in other sectors of transport , but I would like to stress this phrase : it is not a question of penalising but of improving the quality of other systems .
The honourable Members also propose the creation of great axes ( east-west , north-south ) of roads and railways , as laid out in paragraph 36 and others .
I would like to point out that it is a question of incorporating enlargement in terms of the trans-European networks and of exchanges and of this European area in which it is transport that guarantees the reality of a market and the capacity for goods and people to move around throughout this European area .
We must insist on strengthening the railways .
This is a fundamental point and we cannot ignore it .
Paragraph 36 and others refer to this aspect .
I am aware that it also involves promoting inland waterways , the maritime sector , but in some cases we cannot avoid building new roads because there are areas which still lack road infrastructures .
We must therefore not be dogmatic , but we must have a practical appreciation of the reality of European transport needs .
With regard to the great Fund for financing transport , of course I fully agree with Mr Izquierdo Collado that we need greater European funds in order to provide the support and promotion for the creation of infrastructures , in particular rail infrastructures , and for curing bottle necks in order to improve the use of European infrastructures .
Can it be approached in the way Mr Izquierdo Collado proposes ?
I believe , rather , that what we have to do is , within the context of the new financial perspectives whose principle elements will be discussed shortly , raise the need to channel more funds to the trans-European networks .
I believe it is there that we must seek these greater funds , these greater resources , because what is clear is that we need to speed up the process of creating infrastructures .
The funds currently allocated to the trans-European networks are insufficient and we must make progress in this field , because these networks are of benefit and interest to Europe as a whole , regardless of the specific countries they link or cross .
They are of interest at European level because they promote - I would insist - the creation of the internal markets and the integration of the European area itself .
This issue of the EIB : other formulae to bring us closer , of course , and we must also promote public-private participation in funding .
I will shortly present all these issues in that infrastructures package , including charging .
Mr Costa has mentioned this , but I would like to say that charging is discussed in paragraphs 75 and 76 which speak of the simultaneous introduction of a system for setting prices in all modes of transport , both for infrastructures and for the related external costs , and which say that under no circumstances must anybody be penalised but that we must promote a balance and allow cross funding .
Ladies and gentlemen , I fully agree with this approach , with one exception , and that is that cross funding must be restricted to exceptional cases in alternative routes and under no circumstances must cross funding or tolls or charging become a form of generating income from the geographical situation of a country within the European area .
Otherwise we would be returning to medieval times , when , for example , controlling a bridge over a river provided sufficient income to live in luxury and become a member of the gentry .
That is what we must do , establish charging which covers costs , which is destined for infrastructures , the improvement of infrastructures , improvements in road safety , the improvement of the locations where they are collected , and that in certain cases cross funding may be allowed , since it is clearly a good instrument and has led to good results , as for example in the case of the Swiss system .
Before 2004 , the Commission will draw up a communication on the transport situation in the candidate countries .
We do not believe that a specific communication is necessary in 2003 because we are going to produce two reports .
Firstly , a complete follow-up report , six months prior to the date of accession , that is , more or less in November 2003 , which will examine the degree of preparedness of the candidate countries in all sectors , including transport , and a communication in 2003 on cooperation with the candidate countries and neighbouring countries in the field of trans-European transport networks .
All of this in addition to the report by the van Miert group , which draws up the networks within the context of twenty-seven countries : the pan-European network .
Ladies and gentlemen , the mid-term assessment report in 2005 , laid down in the White Paper , will be the perfect opportunity to deal with these concerns and integrate all this information .
Mr President , I will end this long and extremely important debate by once again thanking Mr Izquierdo Collado for this work , which has been serious , balanced and difficult , since it is not easy to unite positions .
In the end , I hope that tomorrow , following what I have heard throughout today 's debates , it is clearly established that the key guidelines for transport policy in the European Union for the next ten years is fully reflected in the vote in Parliament .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would in fact like to thank all the rapporteurs for their excellent levels of cooperation .
We are now giving the Council a clear message , and , hopefully , an impetus no longer to dally in this area .
I would like to speak more about the report drawn up by my colleague , Mr Van Velzen .
It is a very important start and represents a crucial change in the development of the information society .
It is perhaps a good idea to have confidence in the words he spoke , which were truly appropriate .
The information society sector is a major employer and a factor which unites us all in Europe as a whole in a completely new way .
Its development will bring with it significant economic , political and cultural opportunities .
Confidence in the sector , however , has plummeted and we know the reason why , as we have spoken about it so many times .
It is the result of auctions and general uncertainty .
Although digitalisation and networking offer a wide variety of opportunities for development , they have also led to a worldwide gulf between the people of prosperous countries and developing countries .
Furthermore , the gender divide , for example with regard to students , is huge and is particularly pronounced in the rural areas of the Union and in the developing countries .
In addition the introduction of information technology has led to the restructuring of job descriptions : many jobs have gone and some middle-aged people have had to give up work .
Furthermore , those groups which are in a weaker position are at risk of becoming doubly discriminated against .
They are being left outside the information society .
I do not see any easy alternatives here : it is our biggest challenge .
The network has also become a political implement .
It increases opportunities for civil action and hopefully also opportunities for influence .
I am pleased with the Commission 's eEurope 2005 Action Plan , as with it we will increase investment , aim to create jobs , and give everyone the opportunity to participate in the information society .
I also urge the Commission to speed up the introduction of third generation mobile communications and eliminate the technical and administrative barriers there are in the sector .
The Member States themselves should adhere to a flexible approach to the purchase of frequencies and the costs incurred in creating the necessary infrastructure , and do so speedily in a new way .
The Member States should offer their citizens sufficient Internet time , which is to say participation in the information society .
The Commission should research the possibilities of developing voice-controlled services .
These will shortly be available and will make it easier for all of us to use the Internet .
I would also ask the Commission to investigate the possibilities of adult education in the sector and whether a general diploma might also be required to move on to the next stages of the technology .
Likewise , Member States should support SMEs and help them get online , as they represent major potential for increased employment .
Perhaps there would be a need too for funds to be established in the Member States to help socially excluded groups to become integrated into the networked society .
In my opinion it is good that the Commission has now established a cybersecurity task force .
It is now three years since the Lisbon strategy was created and it has met with political and economic uncertainty .
We are seeing developments , but they are not fast enough or adequately coordinated .
In the last six years we have seen around a million new jobs created a year , although last year the figure was only around half a million .
What sort of economic know-how can be achieved when training , education and research are neglected as much as they are today and many Member States do not observe agreed rules or implement agreed projects ?
Commissioner , what could you do so that certain Member States do not slow down development in this sector ?
It might turn out that a number of Member States will establish their own sort of ' Information Society Europe ' among themselves unless we involve all Member States in this development .
Finally I would say that the transference of social information and knowledge to the network in digitised form , which Mr Van Velzen 's report highlighted , will create a completely new stage in the development of the information society .
It will create work and opportunities , but problems too .
The protection of privacy is not the least of these , but when society 's functions are online we will be in a situation where we can say that the information society has come about insofar as we are all in it together .
. Mr President , I am happy to see everyone with an interest in this field here tonight .
I dream of a day when we can discuss this issue in the daytime - it may come .
Information and communication technologies are a powerful source of growth and productivity gains , which contribute to improving our living standards .
That is why the recovery of the sector is so important at this point in time .
The five reports which the House will deal with today and tomorrow give us the opportunity to keep the political momentum towards the achievement of the Lisbon agenda , as many honourable Members have said today .
These reports also contribute to the process of building confidence in the ICT sector .

Allow me first of all to thank all the rapporteurs , Mr Van Velzen , Mrs Auroi , Mr Paasilinna , Mr Khanbhai and Mrs Read , as well as the shadow rapporteurs and political groups for their thorough work on these Commission communications and proposals .
I am also pleased to have the opportunity to inform you that the Commission adopted four important documents today .
These are : a communication on the situation in the telecoms sector ; a draft regulation establishing a European Network and Information Security Agency , as has been mentioned here ; the final report on eEurope 2002 and the Recommendation on Relevant Markets .
I hope you find them in your computers when you return to your offices .
Let me reiterate our common commitment to an efficient and timely implementation of the new regulatory framework .
The framework will stimulate investment and thus promote facility-based competition , which is , in the medium to long-term , the best guarantee for sustained consumer benefits , innovation , and investment .
With the recommendation on relevant markets we aim to give legal certainty and to help restore confidence to the sector .
Let me come back to the themes of tonight and say a few words first on the report on 3G .
Mrs Auroi 's report , as adopted by the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , sends an important signal at a time when the first 3G services are about to be launched .
At this juncture , 3G deployment is clearly a priority .
We need to encourage solutions which favour a quick deployment of networks while also accommodating environmental needs .
In today 's communication on the situation in the telecoms sector , the Commission calls for a series of actions to overcome barriers to 3G deployment .
Amongst these is the clarification of network infrastructure sharing , the importance of which was also emphasised in the report .
Information to the citizens on the health aspects related to mobile communications and continued research are important .
Scientific findings need to be made broadly available .
The Commission will promote the diffusion of information , for example through a specific web site .
The World Health Organisation is the leading authority in this area , and we are working closely with it .
Finally , I would like to stress the importance of 3G in the context of access to open and interoperable platforms .
This is to increase consumers ' choice and thus to contribute to the establishment of an information society for all .
Inclusiveness is an overriding principle in eEurope 2005 .
The Commission is committed to pursuing action toward openness and interoperability of platforms , as so clearly requested by Parliament .
Let me briefly reiterate the main objectives of the eEurope 2005 action plan. eEurope sets out to stimulate the demand-supply cycle by , on the demand side , promoting content , services and applications , where there is a crucial role for online public services - eGovernment , eHealth and eLearning - as well as for eBusiness .
This will stimulate and is stimulated by the supply side , by enabling the widespread availability and use of multi-platform and secure broadband .
It is vital to ensure an inclusive information society .
Therefore we are promoting multi-platform access which includes digital television , 3G mobile , PCs , kiosks and whatever terminals are available .
I am pleased to see that Mr Paasilinna 's report gives such strong support to the main ideas of the eEurope Action Plan .
We fully share the view that guaranteeing broadband connections at an affordable price , which is essential for a competitive and dynamic economy , requires decisive actions from Member State governments .
Mr Paasilinna asked how we could accelerate access for the Member States .
We continue to carry out rigorous reporting and benchmarking of the activities .
At the same time , we have launched two presentations of European best practice in eGovernment and eHealth .
We will nominate these best practices and ensure they are widely diffused among the public authorities in all Member States .
In our recently adopted communication on the situation in the telecoms sector we call upon Member States to commit to putting their national broadband strategy in place by the end of this year .
As Mr Khanbhai 's report on the impact of eEconomy notes , SMEs are key drivers of economic growth and should be encouraged actively to engage in the eEconomy .
I broadly share the views presented in Mr Khanbhai 's report , for example , the need for SMEs to have easy access to legal advice on applicable law and on ICT and eBusiness skills .
We agree that European businesses , and especially SMEs , need support in ' going digital ' .
The Commission is currently working together with the Member States to set a new policy framework for eBusiness policies for SMEs , including potential quantitative targets .
Network security has become a major policy concern and therefore a central issue in the eEurope 2005 action plan .
Parliament 's position on this matter of October last year was very much appreciated .
As I mentioned earlier , the Commission today adopted a draft regulation on the Agency .
The Commission is also committed , through eEurope 2005 , to promote a wider access to and greater participation in the benefits of the information society , particularly for disadvantaged groups .
In addition to the specific measures foreseen by the MODINIS programme itself , the Commission intends to promote and sustain several initiatives which will be organised in the context of the European Year for Disabled and which will follow from its earlier communication on website accessibility .
eEurope 2005 will be implemented in part through MODINIS and , though it is not part of our debate today , I would like also to thank Parliament for the support given to the Commission proposal , in particular as far as the budget is concerned .
Let me now turn to the piece of legislation which we now have on the table : the directive on the re-use of public sector information .
As Mr Van Velzen said today and as he underlines in his report , the content is essential for further development of the information society .
The message here is clear and it comes at a time when the financial constraints in the sector bring attention to the fact that public sector information is a key content resource throughout information society services .
The key elements are transparency of procedures and of conditions for re-use , non-discrimination and fair competition .
The directive will stimulate the creation of information services based upon , or incorporating , public sector information .
It is important for the content industries and also for the telecoms sector , which needs to find ways to generate content for 3G services .
I fully share the opinion of Mr Van Velzen that the operators should work together to create a marketplace .
We need cooperation and interoperability to create a market which can convince the consumers .
Mr President , I wish to thank all the Members for this important debate and for their contribution to the whole process since we started work on the telecoms framework .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would firstly like to highlight that the amendments presented by the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms have been accepted by the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy and , in particular , the demand in Articles 41 and 42 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights for good administration and access to the texts of the institutions ( this corresponds to Amendment No 1 of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms ) .
The promotion of free computer programs is an option increasingly used by public administrations and which democratises access to and the use of public documents and data .
In fact , if we make the documents available in a format not linked to the use of specific computer programs involving payment , we reduce the discrimination relating to the wealth of the users .
It is important to promote the use of the information by people with diminished sensory capacity , for example through a textual description of the graphs and pictures contained in the documents .
Furthermore , the advertising of all generally accessible documents , including those relating to judicial and administrative procedures , must reach the public sector .
This is a fundamental instrument for the development of the right of citizens to knowledge and a fundamental principle of democracy .
This objective is applicable to institutions at all levels , local , national and international , and furthermore it is necessary for the public administrations , whatever their institutional level , to promote and support the reuse of the information provided .
I would end by stressing that we naturally believe that all these principles should also apply to the European institutions .
Mr President , Commissioner , first I shall look for and I intend to find those responsible for the third generation mobile communications recession .
The guilty parties are the governments of those countries that organised radio spectrum auctions and transferred the money companies in the sector had invested to themselves .
The action taken by the public authorities to alleviate this slump in investment has not been sufficiently effective .
Authorisation has been granted for installations of equipment to coexist side by side for common use , but that is all .
Consequently , the slump in investment in third generation mobile communications continues , and the pious hopes for the ambitious targets set in Feira , Lisbon , Barcelona and Seville are not realised .
More realistic targets should be set .
Now I have made my protests I would like to say thank you .
Mr Paasilinna 's report has focused attention on an information society for all , and on the important reason for the Action Plan : the information society must be brought within the reach of everyone , and I mean everyone .
That is democracy .
This democracy must be promoted through public investment .
In addition to the technical tools and fast connections we have to give attention to user instructions and guidance , because equipment is no use if the information society actors cannot use it .
I would like to remind Mr Van Velzen of something in the explanatory statement of his report , which mentions that for the work of public institutions to continue it is essential that they can also calculate a charge for information provided , to offset the investment needed to produce certain databases .
Basic information services must be free of charge or at least inexpensive , but historical investment must also be taken into account in the production costs involved in the re-use of , for example , land register , museum , university and research institute databases .
Our group supports the amendment tabled by the Group of the Party of European Socialists which takes this matter into consideration , and we hope than Mr Van Velzen can show his support for preserving general use services with user charges without them having to be financed out of taxes .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as I have already observed on other occasions , issues involving the information society must be at the forefront of the concerns and the actions of the European Union and the Community bodies .
This is one of the great issues of the future and one that offers the greatest opportunities , multiplied by our common efforts .
It is not by chance that following the action plan eEurope 2002 , we are already looking towards eEurope 2005 , specifically in order to fulfil the Lisbon and Feira European Councils , held under the presidency of my country and later on , those of Barcelona and Seville .
What we want , it should be remembered , is to make the European Union the most competitive society in the world and it is also for this reason that the action plan eEurope 2005 was drawn up , with the purpose of providing an environment that favours private investment and job creation , of boosting productivity , modernising public services and giving everyone the opportunity to participate in the global information society .
In this joint debate , I wish to begin by congratulating Mr Paasilinna on his magnificent work , which is clearly reflected in the consensus with which this report has been received here in plenary .
In particular I appreciated his approach to providing the technical means necessary to implement these aims , for example extending bandwidth and multichannel distribution , and on the delicate problem of security of information .
Moving onto the issue of the re-use and commercial exploitation of public sector documents , I understand and share the vision proposed by Mr Van Velzen , who recommends a broadly streamlining approach .
I also think that everything concerned with basic information , related to the democratic rule of law , must be available free of charge and the remaining information should be available at a marginal cost that would not exceed the aggregate costs of their reproduction and dissemination , without prejudice to the specific system to be defined by the public cultural sector for obvious reasons of intellectual and artistic copyright .
To conclude , I should like to refer briefly to the report by Mr Khanbhai , in order to congratulate him too on his work and to express the wish that the Commission enjoys full success in the actions it is recommending to ensure that EU businesses can harness the potential benefits of the eEconomy .
Speeding up the construction of a clear and predictable framework for ecommerce , promoting the full participation of small and medium-sized enterprises in the economy , improving the availability of venture capital and market finance , etc . , are several actions intended to make the aim of an information society for all a reality and to ensure that in this crucial field too , the ambitious aims of the Lisbon strategy are pursued and achieved .
Mr President , Commissioner , when speaking of the information society we should remember that a large-scale reform of communications market law has just been undertaken with new legislative norms being created for the telecommunications and other network business .
The Member States are just now putting the package into effect .
This debate cannot be allowed to distort the picture of telecommunications legislation , which would only cause uncertainty for investment in third generation mobile communications .
We must help the troubled third generation mobile communications business , not restrain it .
The GSM communications business , which has grown considerably in five years , is the cornerstone of our competitiveness and virtually the only thing driving the Lisbon strategy along .
Following the disaster over the financial exploitation of third generation mobile communications we have to show we are jointly responsible .
The mobile phone industry is a major employer representing the cutting edge of innovation .
There has to be a new upswing in the sector ; otherwise , the Japanese will leave us behind once and for all .
I made a point of investigating the claim regarding an increase in brain cancers in Finland since the 1990s .
Whilst the base station network has grown phenomenally , the figures for cancer in Finland have fallen radically .
It is hard to sell dull facts to the public .
In the EU we have prescribed exact limits for radiation which are lower than WHO standards .
There is more radiation from microwave ovens than there is from base stations .
The values for Spanish operators are as little as one two-hundredth of the safe limit values .
However , it is easier to claim that mobile phones melt our brains .
Public documents must be made available in electronic form .
Basic information must be free of charge .
An authority may make a charge to cover its costs , but it is unnecessary to ask for additional payment .
The Member States must be responsible for seeing to it that the public institutions have sufficient resources available to them .
Finally , I would like to express my sincerest thanks to the rapporteurs .
Mr President , there is no need to insist on the importance today of the information society for everybody , both for the public sector and for companies and citizens .
I will focus on just two of the reports under discussion today .
With regard to the Commission 's initiative on the reuse of public sector documents , there are more and more companies in Europe who make use of information from the public sector and who reuse it .
We must guarantee that the conditions for access to this information are the same throughout Europe .
The price for this information must be proportional - without question - to the cost of production , but on the other hand we cannot oblige the administration - as the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs has said - to produce all that information if it is not relevant or necessary .
With regard to the Council 's proposed decision on the monitoring of eEurope and the dissemination of good practices and security on the networks , I would like to highlight two aspects .
The Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , which produced the opinion for the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , which produced the main report , has also stated that it is necessary not just to promote all exchanges of good practices between public and private professionals , but that the Commission should also fund information and awareness campaigns on the issue of the security of networks .
I would like to congratulate the Commission on its initiative today to present a single system for security of the networks .
It is clear that our work and our economies are increasingly based on the information society and it is therefore important to reduce the risk of insecurity on networks .
We must guarantee both safe access and the protection of the privacy of the data of those who access the public sector and the networks in general .
In order to promote an electronic economy in the field of enterprises , it is also essential to promote a culture based on the entrepreneurial spirit and to stimulate greater participation by companies in the information society .
While in Lisbon , as other Members have said , the strategic objective was set on turning the knowledge-based economy into the most competitive and dynamic economy in the world , the objective of the information society is undoubtedly an important and essential driving force .
Mr President , it has been a broad and very interesting debate .
I would like to thank Mr Van Velzen for his work on public sector information .
We all very much agree that quality is one of the essential factors for the development of the new information society services and particularly 3G services .
I would prefer to submit the Commission position on the amendments in writing because the safety at work directive starts with the limits on our working hours !
That is a very wise decision .
Thank you Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place today , Wednesday , at 12 noon .
I congratulate Mrs Terrón i Cusí on her work .
The Commission 's proposal for a directive on the entry and residence of third-country nationals again places the emphasis on legal or illegal immigration and raises the issue of employment as a prior sine qua non condition for granting stable status .
I welcome the improvements contributed by the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs to the proposal for a directive , but I would also like to stress that the rapporteur has shown great lucidity and has dealt with the issue without demagoguery .
There are some interesting proposals and advances , in particular increased transparency , a simplification of the procedures and taking more account of the interests of third countries .
In general the rapporteur moves in the direction of improving the rights of holders of residence and work permits and stresses the need for all foreigners to be given equal access to education , training and housing assistance .
I regret that these proposals have not been backed up with real figures and that the report has not placed more emphasis on access to citizenship .
We must all work to guarantee the principle of free movement , to increase the opportunities for workers to find work and enrich their professional experience and to promote mobility with a view to creating a closer union between peoples .
( Written statement abbreviated in accordance with Rule 120 ( 7 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
Preparation for the 2003 Spring summit ( Brussels , 21-22 March 2003 )
I should like to take the opportunity to welcome to the diplomatic tribune this morning the chairman and his deputies of the delegation of the Russian National Assembly to the EU-Russia Parliamentary Cooperation Committee who are here for a Bureau meeting .
I welcome Mr Vladimir Lukin and his colleagues .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , we have of course listened with enormous interest to the speech by the President-in-Office of the Council , and , if I may summarise , it was concerned with two issues . Firstly , how to restore confidence in the Lisbon strategy and how to improve the efficiency of its implementation .
Mr President , that is at the very heart of the matter .
I also think that now is a good time to make this analysis , because the realisation of the Lisbon objectives is under very great strain .
In addition , the circumstances have become much more difficult , the economic climate is unfavourable , uncertainties have increased and , as the President of the Commission rightly says , entrepreneurship is extraordinarily difficult at this time .
My group therefore welcomes the evaluation report from the Commission .
The report offers insight into the achievements of the Member States over the last couple of years with regard to implementing the Lisbon objectives .
I must say , however , that the picture is disconcerting .
We see extraordinarily sluggish implementation by the Member States and vast disparities in implementation .
That also means that the credibility of the Council with regard to the implementation of Lisbon has taken a tremendous blow .
You were not wrong when you said that it is necessary to restore confidence .
Confidence can only be restored , however , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , if we put an end to the fine words and magnificent plans and actually concentrate on implementation .
Therein lies the main problem .
And so we say in our resolution : it is time for the Council and the Commission to come up with a roadmap : a roadmap setting out precisely what tangible aims have to be achieved over which period of time ; stating that the Council imposes an obligation to make an effort to actually do that , that EU legislation will be implemented and that this is then very carefully maintained , and that there is a coherent , consistent division of tasks between the European Council and the relevant national ministers , because that is generally lacking .
The Lisbon document raises a large number of issues , some of which do , but most of which do not , fall within the jurisdiction of the European Union , and for these we have the fine term ' open coordination ' .
It would be good , however , if we could have much more clear-cut agreement on how to proceed with this open coordination .
As my group sees it , the emphasis would have to be placed on cooperation , on the exchange of best practices , on benchmarking , and also on respecting the role of the national parliaments and of the European Parliament .
Lisbon is not a one-man show involving only the European Council , particularly if one were to now lay its achievements on the table .
Mr President , the economic and budgetary reform process indicated by the Ecofin Council must be continued .
We must then have the courage to take daring decisions .
Then we must also get the debate on the revision of the pension system under way .
We would call for the three-pillar system to be looked at , under which , of course , the solidarity of the state is maintained , along with the solidarity on the part of trade and industry , and of course individual responsibility .
A three-pillar system may , in future , put us in a better position to tackle the problem of an ageing population .
It is true that a large number of obstacles would then have to be removed .
If we argue in favour of more entrepreneurship , we make it possible to achieve that aim of a 25 % reduction .
Let us then get down to enacting the European Charter for SMEs , too .
Let us also ensure that something is done about the obstacles to the recognition of educational qualifications .
If we say 3 % R & D , where is the timetable enabling us to ensure that that 3 % can be achieved by 2010 ?
It is lacking , so it must be put in place .
We have been discussing patents for such a long time now .
The intellectual elite , says the President of the Commission , must not leave .
Indeed so , but how long will it be before a European patent finally appears ?
The credibility of the Council rests on this , and at some stage we must take up a position on it .
It should not be the case that it is constantly being blocked by a number of the national ministers .
Mr President , the knowledge-based economy is key .
However , we no longer have any inkling that a significant part of software development , and all the research in the field of the knowledge-based economy , is currently on its way over to Japan because we in Europe have been consistently unable to establish the 3G sector .
We are already three years behind Japan and , by the time we do bring it in , we will be five years behind .
That is disastrous in a sector like this .
I am therefore making an urgent plea to the Council : do not go on discussing the French proposal to give another six or nine billion back to one operator , but instead give some thought to devising a programme that will enable you to actually make 3G a reality in Europe .
We need it .
To sum up , what is important is not fine words , but deeds , and sending out a strong signal that the Council must actually get down to the business of implementation .
What is important is getting a roadmap , so that we can see , in practical terms , who is going to do what and when .
What is important is having a good working relationship between the different parts of the Council , and between the European Council and the relevant national ministers , because otherwise we will keep muddling along , and then the intellectual elite really will go to the United States and Europe will remain on the sidelines .
Our Europe does not deserve that .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Europe has always been successful when it has been ambitious .
The euro was one of those ambitions , which is providing increasing benefits for citizens .
After thirteen months in actual physical existence , the euro has become the equal of the dollar , and is already the second reserve currency in the world .
Since the European Central Bank has been managing monetary policy , the rate of inflation in the euro zone has remained lower than the American and British rates of inflation .
Long term interest rates are at an historic low in Europe and lower than in the United States .
By pointing out these facts , I am standing against the prevailing euro-scepticism and against the tendency for self-punishment among many of our colleagues .
It is true that Europe has problems : growth has slowed down , some large Member States have mounting deficits and unemployment is rising again .
However , which region in the world does not have problems ?
We are told that Europe is suffering as a result of its lack of flexibility and structural deficiencies due to social overprotection .
We are given the example of an American economy which is reportedly more productive and which , thanks to a more flexible labour market , is said to create more jobs .
So what do we see ?
American unemployment is higher than in the vast majority of European Member States .
What is more , the American unemployment rate does not count the two million Americans of working age who are in prison .
However there is something more important : productivity per hour is greater in Europe than in the United States , which is evidence of greater efficiency of production and services in Europe .
This efficiency is reflected in international trade , in which the Union is selling nearly twice the volume of American exports .
The United States are accumulating other deficits .
Currently , if the federal budget deficit were evaluated according to the criteria of the Stability and Growth Pact , it would be between 5 % and 6 % of the United States GDP .
The reason that I am pointing out these figures is not in order to gloat about them , as the United States are an essential driving force in the world economy .
Europe could take over , as long as it equips itself with the resources to support its ambitions .
The Lisbon Strategy is an ambition that will incite action , but the Member States will have to finally get behind implementing this joint strategy defined in Lisbon and Gothenburg .
The Commission should ensure that all the Member States keep to this strategy as a whole , and not only to a few structural reforms , which are necessary but not sufficient to create the most competitive knowledge and ' well-being ' based society in the world .
In this context , Europe needs to rethink its investment strategy .
In 1970 , Europe used 4.2 % of its GDP for public investments .
Now we have dropped that figure to 2.3 % .
I am of the opinion that stability is essential for fighting inflation and public deficits .
It also helps towards defending the purchasing power of the poorest in our societies .
However , in order to have greater growth , we need to invest in infrastructures , research and the knowledge-based society .
We also need to distinguish between investment expenditure and operation expenditure .
Mr President , I will conclude by saying that I have tried to give an optimistic message .
However , if war were necessary , we would all have to take another look .
One of the first victims of this war will certainly be the Stability and Growth Pact , unless Europe refuses to sacrifice growth and employment on the altar of the gods of war .
We therefore need to work to prevent this war in order to preserve growth and employment .
Mr President , I congratulate the President-in-Office on his speech and wish him well with his agenda .
Mr Prodi has outlined the scale of the challenges we face and the measures that are needed ; yet it seems to me that if the Union 's backbone were as strong as its wishbone this debate might not be necessary .
The list of unresolved economic reform issues on the agenda for the Spring Council makes depressingly familiar reading .
A year ago , ahead of the Barcelona European Council , which one government dubbed the ' make or break summit ' for economic reform , the Union was deadlocked over fundamental issues such as the Community Patent , the Take-over Bids Directive and the Pensions Directive .
Ministers were at sixes and sevens over the Stability Pact , having failed to issue early warnings to Germany and Portugal .
Resolving these issues was proclaimed to be the foremost objective of the heads of state and government .
So how much progress have we made , one year on ?
On the Community Patent , which Mr Prodi mentioned - no progress .
The best gloss that you can put on the new Take-over Bids Directive is that it is ' a work in progress ' .
Far from improving the situation , the Pensions Directive could actually represent a step backwards if adopted in the form currently advocated by Parliament 's rapporteur .
And Germany and Portugal have since been joined by France in the rogues ' gallery of countries which are falling foul of the Stability Pact .



In the midst of this litany of failure , in step Messrs Blair , Chirac and Schröder with another depressing example of letterbox diplomacy .
After highlighting Europe 's divisions on Iraq with the ' gang of 8 ' letter , the UK 's Prime Minister has now formed a terrible trio of leaders with Mr Chirac and Mr Schröder , who presume to tell other leaders how to reform their economies while blocking economic progress themselves .
To hear a clarion call for economic reform from a British Prime Minister whose continued indecision over joining the euro is hitting jobs , growth and investment , is more than a little galling .
For the President of France to put his name to a letter calling for the rapid completion of the internal market , when France tops the charts for failure to implement single market legislation , is little short of breathtaking .
And to be lectured on the need for Europe to reform labour markets and increase employment by a Chancellor who has presided over record levels of unemployment in Germany , really takes the biscuit .
Perhaps a little humility from those three leaders is called for when it comes to economic reform .
We are in the third year of the ten-year Lisbon plan to improve competitiveness .
The truth is that progress has been disappointing .
The keys to higher employment levels and sustainable growth lie in sound public finances , a dynamic private sector , the completion of the single market , a real European research area and incentives for work , skill and innovation .
My group would emphasise in particular the importance of completing the financial services action plan , fostering entrepreneurship and promoting flexibility and adaptability in the labour market .
We must also increase the participation of women , immigrants , older workers and disabled people in the labour market , and adapt tax and benefit systems to make work pay .
These are the challenges we face and we have only seven years left it we are to achieve our goal of making Europe the most competitive , dynamic , knowledge-based economy in the world .
Instead of setting new bold targets , the heads of state and government should get on with the job of closing the existing ' delivery gap ' between their words and their actions .
Mr President , we are a long way off from fulfilling the euphoric proclamations of the Lisbon Summit of March 2000 on full employment and on making the Union the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world by 2010 .
The slowdown in economic growth , the relocation and closure of companies accompanied by further redundancies , higher employment and increased social difficulties demonstrate the danger of the approach that has been pursued . This approach involves speeding up liberalisation and privatisation , the insistence on the primacy of monetary policies and of competition , the deregulation of the labour market and of labour legislation and making these more flexible .
These factors clearly demonstrate the need for a sea-change in the neo-liberal guidelines and policies currently practised , which will not happen as a result of the proposals that have been presented to us .
The Commission acknowledges , however , that the lack of up-to-date data still hampers the detailed study of what is happening in the field of poverty and social exclusion . Furthermore , little progress has been made in preventing early school leaving and in reducing gender inequality and the guidelines that have been presented , specifically in the field of social security , structural reforms of the labour market of work based on making work more flexible and more precarious and on wage moderation , and for pursuing the process of liberalisation in an increasing number of sectors , tend to aggravate the current situation .
By accentuating the unilateral approach to the liberalisation and greater flexibility of the goods , services , capital and labour force markets , ignoring economic and social cohesion , the Commission and the Council are contributing to increasingly significant social problems and to hampering economic recovery .
Consequently , as we highlighted in the resolution tabled by my group , it is crucial that the objectives of full employment , the harmonisation of social conditions in order to achieve progress , economic and social cohesion and development are defined as priorities for the Spring Summit .
Social and employment policies cannot remain subordinated to strict compliance with the criteria of nominal convergence and make it urgent to redefine the mandate and powers of the European Central Bank .
Sustainable development with a view to achieving social and ecological conversion must be founded on a thorough overhaul of the irrational criteria of the stability pact , given the diversity of the economic and social situation of the various countries . It also requires a more equitable distribution of wealth , an overhaul of social protection systems in a way that demonstrates solidarity , and requires public and social investment , particularly in education , research and in the knowledge-based economy .
Consequently , as demanded by workers and citizens almost everywhere , including in Portugal last weekend , for example , at the impressive demonstration in Lisbon , it is time to heed the calls of the citizens and the workers .
Mr President , and I should add , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , we are talking about the Spring Summit , and Lisbon , about strategies for economic , social and environmental renewal .
In fact , I have barely heard mention of those last two words .
The question , therefore , is whether Lisbon is on the right track that is the question in the Commission notice and whether we , the EU , are still on the right track , and are travelling at the right speed .
As far as the right track is concerned , I think that the report is based on a number of presuppositions - in regard to which I should like to delve a little deeper than Mr van Velzen and a number of analyses that are incorrect .
I think that what we are dealing with is not a new economy but a cyclical one , and we have to take account of this .
I think that we are also over-emphasising the knowledge-based economy , as we also need jobs at the bottom of the labour market - but I do not hear anyone talking about this .
We are overestimating the potential of liberalisation and underestimating the Member States ' capacity to implement directives and legislation .
We are not seeking the causes of the failure to implement them .
Is the EU still on the right track , and travelling at the right speed ?
I think that Mr van Velzen puts it well , and several people have mentioned it .
The answer is no .
Let us look at employment : there are too few new jobs .
With our twelve million , we can consider ourselves well off , but these jobs are not the result of our policies alone .
The number of women , older people and people with disabilities in employment is too low .
The path to better jobs is still long , and we have done far too little in the way of the modernisation of the organisation of work .
I hope , therefore , that the review of the employment strategy that we are now going to work on and the improvement of the social agenda will bring about an adjustment in that field .
If we look at the environment , we see that nothing has come of the horizontal integration in this policy .
I am saying it simply but in the strongest terms .
I have also just said that little progress has been made in the transport sector , and likewise in energy policy , in agricultural policy and in the field of public health .
Who is discussing energy tax reforms ?
And so on , and so on .
If we look at the general approach , too , talking of Kyoto or Johannesburg , we see very little progress .
However , we need better indicators , et cetera .
I have already said it : the policy is too one-sided with regard to knowledge and innovation .
As an engineer , I am all for the intellectual elite , but we should also look at other developments .
We need other jobs , too , and that means that we also have to think of the bottom end of the labour market , that we have to tackle the informal economy , and so on .
The streamlining of economic and social policy is very important , but that means that we have to draw conclusions both for the Stability and Growth Pact and for the orientation of the broad economic guidelines towards social and environmental policy .
We must continue with Lisbon , but incorporating great adjustments , not only in the Member States , who have all kinds of things to implement , but also strategic adjustments and adjustments to its content .
In my opinion , we need a thorough evaluation of what we are doing .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , the EU Summit is to meet ' His Imperial Highness ' Giscard d 'Estaing , who is in the process of preparing a draft democratic constitution behind closed doors in a Praesidium in which four of Parliament 's seven political groups are not represented .
We have sent a complaint to President Giscard d 'Estaing and asked to be given the right of access to the documents being used in the course of the Praesidium 's work .
We have still not received a reply .
President Giscard d 'Estaing has refused another request to scrutinise documentation on the grounds that EU rules on transparency do not apply to him .
I should like to call upon the Presidency to inform him politely but firmly that the Praesidium too is funded by EU taxpayers and must of course act in accordance with the judgments of the Court of Justice and the principle of transparency , which now appears in Article 255 of the Treaty .
There is no exemption for President Giscard d 'Estaing and no legal base for representatives of the Commission , Parliament and the Council being able to depart from the principle of transparency unless they are provided with a special legal base by the regulation on transparency or decline to make a document available after making a practical assessment of it .
In the case of every single document in the Praesidium 's possession , President Giscard d 'Estaing must weigh up its significance in the negotiations against the public 's interest in knowing about it and , like everyone else in the EU , he must ensure that the principle of equality is practised .
The situation must not arise in which three political groups have documents from the Praesidium available to them that are not available to the other four groups , or in which Convention documents circulate among foreign ministry interns that have not also been made available to members of the Convention .
We demand equality - neither more , nor less .
The word ' constitution ' appears 32 times in the first 16 articles .
It must now be clear even to those least quick on the uptake that a constitution , and not merely a constitutional treaty , is being worked on .
I should like to call for the Praesidium to be reconstituted and made more representative of EU citizens .
All the political groups should be represented .
Women , who constitute half the electorate , cannot be satisfied with two places ; the 13 candidate countries cannot be satisfied with one observer ; and there cannot continue to be no representatives of that half of the electorate who voted no in the referendums on the EU held in the few countries that allow people to vote .
Thank you , Mr President , even though there is not very much to say thank you for .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to return to the Spring Summit .
The final Lisbon Objective - to make the European economy the most competitive knowledge-based economy in ten years - appeared to many , right from the start , to be an optimistic , consolatory slogan .
In actual fact , it seems increasingly less consolatory seeing as , three years later , very little headway has been made towards attaining that objective .
The European economy is still at the starting-post , the necessary reforms are postponed or watered-down at each summit and the hopes of unemployed Europeans of finding work thanks to growth are still closely associated with the revival of the economy of that driving force : the United States .
During the Spring Summit , the Heads of State and Government will probably confirm their commitment to the Lisbon Objectives , even though as things stand , we cannot be sure of this .
A letter addressed to the Greek Presidency is already doing the rounds , reaffirming the need and desire to revitalise the European economy through ambitious structural reforms .
Good - very good , we will say - but we Radicals nevertheless believe that instead of setting or reintroducing impressive objectives , we should do useful and fair things right now : welfare systems are in urgent need of immediate reform , and for many States constitute , in addition to a serious injustice for future generations , a real time bomb for the sustainability of public finances ; we need to liberalise the markets in key sectors such as energy , transport , postal services and the professions ; we need to create a truly integrated European financial market ; there must be drastic cuts in the burdens weighing down , in particular , small and medium-sized businesses in Europe - tax burdens and bureaucratic burdens in terms of employment regulations - and which are one of the reasons for which a substantial number of European entrepreneurs and microentrepreneurs - I am referring mainly , but not exclusively , to Italy - are driven into the underground economy , a type of economy which evades regulation , which evades legality precisely because of the excessive burdens which are imposed .
This is what should be done , if we want to avoid fooling ourselves with slogans , with magic formulae - formulae put to much use in this Chamber - such as ' European social model ' or ' social market economy ' .
We would do well to ask ourselves whether these models are , today , really capable of protecting society 's most vulnerable , society 's ' outsiders ' .
We now move to the ' Catch the Eye ' procedure .
Colleagues , I remind you that you have two minutes ' speaking time .
If you stick to your time we can maximise the number of participants .
Mr President , I welcome the remarks of President Prodi with regard to the current political tensions in the world and his emphasis on the role of the United Nations in resolving those tensions .
I also wish the current Presidency-in-Office well at the extraordinary summit next Monday .
I hope that it can establish a common position for the European Union in the present very fraught situation .
I want to put it to the Commission and the Council that one of the most important things we can do at the summit is insist that Member States comply with the agreements they make in the Council .
By this I mean both the targets they agree to under the Lisbon Process and the implementation of those targets because there is a clear gap in the implementation process .
I should like to re-emphasise a point made by a number of Members .
The Lisbon Process is not simply a liberalisation process - important as that is .
The whole idea of the Lisbon Process was to have a coordinated and well-balanced social and economic approach to modernising the European social model .
If we are to retain the uniqueness of the European Union , then we must ensure that social equity is not sacrificed in pursuit of the goal of liberalisation and competitiveness .
That is also essential - not just from the point of view of social justice but also for creating a more productive Union .
We have to ensure that those who are engaged in production feel it is worthwhile for them and for their children .
Therefore , the crucial role of public services has to be defended .
At the summit , the Commission and the Council have to seek to guarantee that services of general interest are enabled to grow and develop and are protected - and I use that word cautiously - from the ravages of the free market .
My final point is that we must set targets for youth employment , in particular for disadvantaged youth .
They are the long-term unemployed of tomorrow .
Mr President , implementation of Internal Market legislation at national level is an absolute prerequisite for achieving the Lisbon objectives .
The increase in the implementation deficit is causing EU markets to splinter and is eroding the benefits of the Internal Market .
Unless the directives on telecommunications , for example , are implemented in the Member States , that sector 's development will be become more disharmonious than ever .
In order to maintain our competitiveness it is vital that we increase resources for research and training .
We will not succeed in the future with just bulk products and a poorly trained workforce .
Tax on earnings and employers ' indirect costs must be cut to boost employment in Europe and to make it easier for SMEs and growth companies in particular to employ staff .
Lower taxation would , for its own part , stimulate European entrepreneurship , one of the pillars of competitiveness .
Let taxation in future fall within the competence of the Member States .
I would also encourage Member States to lighten the tax burden in parallel with the Lisbon objectives so that they take account of fair and positive tax competition .
The EU 's task in this area will be to compile comparable data and propagate best practices .
Mr President , the commitments entered into in 2000 for what is known as the Lisbon process were very ambitions , but they did of course constitute a heavy responsibility for the Heads of Government , and three years on we can see that this was all talk and that , up to now , it has not been transformed into any action to speak of .
It is very ironic , however , to state that the European Union is going to be the most dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world by 2010 and then do absolutely nothing dynamic about living up to this .
In so doing , the European Union makes itself look ridiculous and the Council is not meeting its responsibilities .
The most important reason is that we , as a Union , tolerate the failure of the Member States to honour the commitments they have entered into .
Over recent years , it has emerged that France , for example , does not , in general , want to have anything to do with the commitments it entered into in 2000 .
For example , the monopoly of the largest energy supplier remains in place , and , what is more , that subsidised energy is being exported to those Member States who have indeed opened up their borders .
In so doing , we have achieved the opposite of what we intended .
The countries that have carried out liberalisation are being punished for their good behaviour .
We have to see to it that countries honour the commitments they have entered into .
This means commitments that are honoured instead of more targets .
If we do not want to let the Lisbon process become a gigantic flop , definite action will have to be taken , and the Commission will have to draw up a clear timetable stating how the aims are to be achieved , setting end dates so that the Member States can be called to account on their responsibilities .
The emphasis will have to be placed on financial soundness , on full liberalisation of the services sector , the creation of a knowledge-based economy by investment in research and development , and radical simplification of the regulatory environment .
This means less detailed legislation and more framework legislation , so that people are not hampered in their activities by unnecessary red tape .
It is not just the Lisbon process but the credibility of the whole Union that is at stake .
Finally , I was struck by the speech by Mr Bouwman on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , but I should like to add one thing to it .
He says that jobs should be created at the bottom of the market , and not only for the intellectual elite , and I agree with that , but we have to realise that one is a precondition for the other , and for this we need a competitive Europe .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , what makes the forthcoming Spring Summit so crucial in terms of political psychology is the fact that the times in which we live are not at all rosy .
The message from this summit must be one of confidence , because Europe 's economy and hence growth and employment , will not be got moving if such confidence in the EU Member States ' political leadership is not created or , where it exists , improved .
I do think , however , that it is not just confidence in governments that matters , but that it is also significant that European business is at last affirming its responsibility for contributing towards growth , investment , and employment .
The state alone cannot create the jobs that Europe needs in order to really develop its productivity and also in order to become the region of the world best able to face the future .
So it is to the Greek Presidency of the Council that I am appealing for a continued campaign against unfair fiscal competition and for us to be enabled at last to blockade all the tax havens and not let matters rest with the first breakthrough we achieve on the fiscal package , so that everyone can help put the Member States in a better position as regards the receipts on which their ability to make investments depends .
It is at this point that I would like , again , to appeal to the private business sector to step up private investment .
Not only is there too little public investment , but the private sector also invests too little , and it is only partnership between the two that will enable Europe to evade the self-fulfilling prophecy that our weak growth - or , in certain states , stagflation - will be followed by recession , which is something Europe can do without .
It is because our periods of growth are far too weak that this appeal is addressed to the Greek Presidency of the Council , along with the appeal to the Commission and the Council for improved cooperation between the institutions .
The European Parliament , as co-legislator , is prompt in doing its work , and it would be a good thing if the Council could keep up with us .
Mr President , the Greek President-in-Office gave us a seductive list of all the things he was working on . It would make a great change - and I say this to him with due humility - if Presidents of the Economic Council would come here with a shortlist of things they were actually going to deliver .
One hundred priorities on a list means there are no priorities at all !
I want to echo what Mrs Randzio-Plath just said .
It would be refreshing - in fact essential - for the Economic Summit , when it meets on 21 March , to set down what its real priorities are .
I would suggest - and I think all colleagues would agree with this - your priorities are to inject confidence and dynamism and a sense that the Prime Ministers of the European Union are determined to create a dynamic single market in which we will create jobs and accelerate economic growth .
If we do not get investors behind that , President-in-Office , how are we to deliver all the other promises on your long list ?
That is what we must do .
It would also be refreshing - and , as you said , innovative - to find ways to activate the European Charter for small enterprises .
It would not take much innovation to talk about it for once and actually implement it .
It has taken three years of inaction to demonstrate that making business start-ups easier and cheaper across the Union - something the Prime Minister is committed to doing - simply has not happened .
Again , I echo what Members have said : it is about time the Member State governments started to deliver on their promises on the patent , completing the internal market , clearing their transposition deficit and moving forward on the internal market for services .
President-in-Office , we are witnessing an absurd situation where a simple mutual recognition measure of sales promotion is blocked in your Council .
Show us the message , take away the clutter , get down to business and priorities , come back here and then we will feel you have delivered something .
Let us have an end to the laundry list economic summit !
Mr President , the executive difficulties , together with the potential of the Lisbon Strategy , lie principally in its comprehensive , integrated nature .
Despite some timid progress , the basic idea of integrating economic , social and environmental policies has not seen any significant , coherent progress at either Member State or Community level .
If we totally accept the view that social and environmental quality is not incidental , but an element of growth and an essential factor of competitiveness , then I believe that the open cooperation method must be strengthened .
I therefore applaud the fact that , in the Convention , the possibility of granting it constitutional status seems to be gaining support .
Experience teaches us that objectives as ambitious as those involved in the concept of sustainable development cannot be attained without a strong , common lead from all social and institutional quarters .
Regarding environmental policies in particular , without the adoption of plans and incentives at all levels , it is hard to imagine that more eco-compatible production and consumption models will really take off , models to which we are also committed under the Johannesburg Summit conclusions .
We therefore need to ensure that all interested parties are persuaded to adopt innovative and responsible practices , by including them in medium and long-term outlooks .
In this connection , I consider it a grave limitation that Parliament has not yet managed to formulate organisational and procedural methods in order to monitor , appraise and guide sustainable development policies in a truly effective - that is , multidisciplinary - way .
It is right to call for Parliament 's effective participation in the formulation of the broad guidelines to be guaranteed in the Interinstitutional Agreement , but we too must make better preparations to achieve our goal .
Mr President , I am sure that it is clear to everyone that the Lisbon process is not yet finished .
I think that there are two reasons for this .
The first is to do with Lisbon itself .
Back then , we took - as we , particularly , do now - as our starting point scenarios based on excessively high growth rates .
I think that too many people think that growth is something that you can simply write in a book and it just happens .
It does not .
Instead , as Mr van Velzen pointed out , you then have to take hundreds of measures to promote this growth , and that cannot be done by means of rhetoric alone .
Secondly , of course , all kinds of promises were made , and they have not been kept .
This has also been pointed out enough times .
What , however , can we do about it now ?
One of the things you spoke about , Mr Prodi , was the takeover bids directive .
That is one example that I would like to give .
There is a great deal of talk about employment effects .
In the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , we have been looking into the probable employment effects of this takeover bids directive .
They are negative . The Commission itself did not look into that .
I would also like to see some more employment impact assessment , therefore , not only in the field of social measures - which is logical - but also with regard to other measures , in particular financial measures .
Things often do not turn out as one would think .
Another point I would draw attention to is the figures .
In the Commission 's answer to a question I asked , it admitted that the European growth figures cannot be compared favourably with those for the United States , presumably because the US growth figures should always be taken with a pinch of salt .
It makes sense to me that we not only look at the US or China , but that we at all events use good figures and not go by incorrect data .
Finally , a good deal has been said about cooperation in the field of universities .
I think that that is very important .
I think that a lot more can be done without us encroaching on the sovereignty of the Member States in this respect .
I should like to put one question to the Presidency , however .
How is it possible , if we are busy working on the universities , that , in Greece , the state universities still enjoy a monopoly , so that thousands of Greek students are studying in the USA and not in other European countries ?
Can an end not be put to this ?
I know that this is a Greek responsibility , but perhaps some thought could be given to it during your Presidency .
Mr President , Mr Yiannitsis , Mr Prodi , spurred on by today 's debate in Parliament and the vote on the Commission 's position on the WTO , I would ask the Greek Presidency : how should we deal with the Mediterranean products disaster given the desire for the gradual dismantling of aid and support for agricultural produce ?
The desire to end support and to promote the free market is certainly positive , but how can we pursue this objective gradually , taking into account on the one hand , the needs of developing countries , and on the other , the needs of Mediterranean countries which would surely suffer severe , inestimable damage , owing to sudden and excessive liberalisation and the withdrawal of support ?
This is a subject which I think the Presidency of a Mediterranean country should address , and should be of particular importance to it , not least because 2010 is not far off and the free market area is an appointment we cannot miss , but one for which we are making inadequate preparations .
We should initiate a major debate and large awareness campaign throughout the Union on this subject .
A final remark on the European research area , which greatly concerns me : our economy is indissolubly linked to our ability to intensify research , but many small-sized , very small businesses remain outside the Sixth Framework Programme , not because the Programme itself requires it , but because they cannot manage to take advantage of this opportunity by themselves .
I would call for an incentive to be considered for small-sized business combinations , especially in circumstances where there is little inclination to plan and make arrangements together .
I should like to thank President Prodi for again emphasising research and education , as is his wont , and their importance within the Lisbon process .
I should also like to congratulate him for raising the problem of war with Iraq , which is clouding the atmosphere and will have a direct impact on the political and economic future of Europe .
We started out with great expectations of the Lisbon process .
However , in education , research , lifelong learning and training , it does not appear to be delivering the goods .
3 % in research was an important target and the Commission deserves our praise for managing to push it through , but we come at it as if our hands were tied behind our back and we fail to make the necessary progress every year .
We talk a great deal about training , but the private sector only invests 2.3 % in training and progress with investments in lifelong learning , school-leavers and immigrant groups does not , unfortunately , give us cause for optimism .
All this is taking place in a climate which discourages university researchers and teachers because decisions are not followed up with the practical policies needed .
Education and training are not , unfortunately , at the top of the agenda , not even the Lisbon agenda .
But we still believe they must remain at the heart of the policies , as they were formulated when the Lisbon process was first designed .
Sustainable development and the environment are just as important as the economy and social performance .
The Spring Summit must therefore pay just as much attention to these , and not spend hours on the economy , minutes on social aspects and only seconds on environmental policy .
The European Commission should prepare a sustainability report each year , and the joint resolution requests that the European Commission do just that .
One example is fuel cell cars : the car of the future .
Citizens of the United States and Japan are already driving them : they are already available ; but not in Europe .
We are lagging behind in this field .
The widespread use of fuel cell cars , powered by biomass , will also mean that wars over oil will be a thing of the past .
Environment , social aspects and economy are each of equal importance .
It is a great shame that by no means all Heads of Government have taken this to heart .
Mr President , we are living not only in a knowledge-based economy but also in a post-Kyoto carbon economy .
Those who are able to produce goods whilst producing the least emissions will be the winners in this new economy .
They will therefore be able to gain advantages in terms of employment and in economic and environmental terms .
I therefore think it is extremely important that the European Union should have developed an emissions-trading system that will enable us to lower emissions in industry and in the energy sector , which accounts for fifty thousand companies and for 46 % of carbon dioxide emissions .
This is particularly important because it will lower the financial cost to Europe of complying with Kyoto by 35 % .
We cannot , however , resolve Kyoto merely through industry and energy .
The Commission needs to come up with initiatives for the transport , farming and energy sectors .
Despite the fact , however , that we in Europe are living in a carbon economy , we are still dependent on Russia 's agreement for the Kyoto protocol to enter into force .
We also know that the United States are currently waging a campaign in Russia against the Kyoto protocol .
I would ask the Council and the Commission , what measures are being worked on at European level to ensure that we can convince our Russian friends to ratify the Kyoto protocol ?
It is crucial that the protocol enters into force so that European businesses can accept the forthcoming measures , some of which are more difficult , to reduce carbon dioxide emissions in Europe .
Mr President , I would like to concentrate on research and the creation of the European research area , both through the framework programme and through coordination of national policies .
A 3 % target for investment in research was set in Barcelona , but it is beginning to look like my New Year 's resolution - to eat less and take more exercise - in that it has not been kept and really needs a bit more effort !
I attended an interesting benchmarking conference in Greece on research and technology .
Let me tell you about some of the areas where people looked in detail at the performance of different Member States .
Regarding women in science for example , countries like Spain , Portugal and Italy are turning out excellent women scientists and engineers , but other countries are doing very badly .
When it comes to persuading young people to enter science and engineering , Nordic countries are doing well , as they do in a lot of categories .
Others are doing poorly .
This is a crisis across Europe .
In terms of linking research with regional policy , again Finland is doing well , and Ireland exceptionally well but other countries are not .
Representing Cambridge , I am pleased that some prestigious Cambridge institutions are now looking to South Yorkshire as a suitable location for research infrastructure .
Some countries do well in clustering .
The more we do of this comparison and the more we learn the lessons of the comparison , the more likely we are to keep our New Year 's resolution .
I will try harder on mine if Member States try harder on theirs !
Mr President , clearly the crisis currently plaguing the European Union and the capitalist system as a whole will not be remedied with the measures proposed for the spring Council .
If anything , they will make it worse .
The USA appears to be determined , with the direct or indirect connivance of the European Union , to go through with its threat of war ; against Iraq today , tomorrow against who knows ?
The objective is to redistribute the markets and control energy resources as part of the USA 's master plan to rule the world .
However hard the communications policy of the European Union and the governments of the Member States tries to nourish vain hopes for the future , the working classes feel the brunt of the system and its anti-worker , anti-grass roots measures on a daily basis .
Even the European Union and other international economic organisations admit that their liberal policies have been a total failure .
Underlying stagnation and falling production and development can no longer be turned around by stability pacts .
It is fast becoming apparent that the much trumpeted social policy of the European Union , as it reduces labour costs and curtails or abolishes the workers ' rights , is not fostering development and is not resolving the crisis inherent in the capitalist system , even on its own terms .
The failure to achieve the Lisbon and Stockholm targets on employment proves how right we were when we said that they were designed , not to deal with unemployment , but to step up the attack on workers ' rights and grant big business new privileges .
The reason for insisting on privatisation and liberalisation , even in sectors such as health and education , and for handing over insurance funds to big business is so that it can increase its profits even during a recession .
The only way forward is to galvanise the workers at both national and international level into a bigger , more massive and more dynamic anti-monopoly , anti-imperialist movement and so create a new force field that will get the economy out of the doldrums and pave the way for another , diametrically opposed policy for our people .
Mr President , the fact that my seat is directly opposite yours has not helped me to attract your attention from the start , but never mind .
The European Union is in need of structural reform , as we have heard , and reform of the labour market is a structural reform that will be included in the Spring Summit , preceded by Thessaloniki .
However , Mr President , the labour market and welfare systems are two sides of the same coin : if one goes well - the labour market - then so does the other - welfare systems - given that the labour market finances welfare systems and vice versa : if the labour market does not go well , then neither do welfare systems , and Commissioner Solbes starts to have problems .
If , on the other hand , the labour market changes - owing to either regulatory reasons or market reasons , or both - then the welfare systems must also change , because they must reflect the changes occurring in the labour market .
This is why , Mr President , Mr Yiannitsis , we also need to launch a strategy for welfare systems , similar to the one we applied , some years back , to the labour market under the Luxembourg Process : national plans , consensus on common objectives , transparency , the so-called three pillars , what was not yet called open coordination but which is now referred to in this way , and so on .
We have to synchronise the two systems , we have to synchronise the two reforms , we have to synchronise the labour market and welfare systems .
Therefore , open coordination , obligations and evaluation of the Stability Pact are all aspects that must be clearly defined and quantified at the Spring Summit , if we want to meet the Lisbon Objectives .
Mr President , it was agreed when the Lisbon strategy was being decided that the EU could not become the world 's most competitive knowledge-based economy unless there was sufficient investment in human resources .
That is why the decision to place skills and innovation in the frontline of the strategy at the Spring Summit is a welcome one indeed .
The Commission communication is urging Member States to increase investment in skills and innovation over the next twelve months .
This is a good start , but there has to be long-term investment in training .
A solid skills base will not be built in a year .
Public expenditure for training and education has remained virtually unchanged in all Member States in recent years .
With an ageing population and as the need for labour grows we must view training and education , not just as a necessary evil , but as an investment in the future .
Societies which try to make use of the whole nation 's resources , based on a policy of equality , achieve great things .
Public services alone are not enough in making use of resources : the public sector must also do its share , especially by offering its employees the opportunity to receive training alongside their work .
Training is the most important factor when it comes to employing people .
The share of the population that works has increased in the last ten years .
Since 1996 , for example , 12 million jobs have been created .
Most of these have been in sectors that require further or higher education .
Education and training policy is the responsibility of the Member States , but we can enhance it though cooperation at EU level .
The ministers for education have agreed on some common targets for education and training systems .
By 2010 the number of those who leave school early should be halved and the proportion of those receiving vocational education and training among 25-64 year olds should be increased to 80 % .
The imbalance between men and women in the areas of mathematics , technology and science must be corrected .
Mr President , Mr Yiannitsis , Mr Prodi , I have been unable to sleep for several nights ; by not sleeping I cannot dream and this makes it difficult for me to give the explanations of vote which I normally give in this Chamber .
Therefore , I turn to you for reassurance , in particular President Prodi , not just because he has a persuasive , calm , reassuring , almost paternal voice , but also and above all , because of the statements made so far .
Why am I worried ?
Because many pensioners are worried and cannot sleep either .
They know , as I do , that the Presidents-in-Office of the Council try to balance the accounts , for economic reasons , in any way they can , even by cutting expenditure intended for pensioners .
Pensioners agree with having accounts that balance - and what well-balanced accounts they are - but some of them only have their pension to live off .
The approximate number of people living exclusively off a pension does not exceed one hundred million in Europe , without taking into account the candidate countries , and they say : ' We are all for balancing the accounts , but why not cut expenditure other than that intended for pensions ? '
In some States , for example in Italy , there are laws , adopted by previous governments but still in force under the current government , according to which a 99 % disabled person who has worked for a few years is given a pension of EUR 30 a month and widows of young men who have died are given pensions of EUR 18 .
Can we be reassured - and therefore sleep peacefully - that cuts will be made , as is only right , but that this will be done wisely ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too get the feeling that sustainability , in the context of preparations for this year 's Spring Summit , is seen only as an appendix to general policy development .
This is indeed regrettable , as - or so I believe -the future development of our society is to a very large degree dependent on how we manage to fashion the elements of our lives in an ecological way that will also be able to enable future generations to live decently .
In so far as that is the case , we need to step up our efforts in the area of sustainable development ; it is here that I address my remarks particularly to the Council , as we in this House , as well as the Commission , have specified in precise terms what shape sustainable development should take .
President Prodi , when the Gothenburg Summit was in preparation , laid out before this Parliament very clear indicators and objectives for sustainable development , and these I can wholeheartedly endorse .
What I believe hampers our discussion is the Council 's failure to take these objectives on board , so that , whilst we are drawing up projected goals for many policy areas , sustainable development is not one of them .
This means that it is not possible for us to impose any binding obligations , nor can we monitor what is done .
I do not at this point want to draw up a long wish list , as one does at Christmas , but we have to focus our considerations on one or two core elements , and in that respect , strategy for dealing with climate change is certainly one important area , and transport another .
What matters is that there should be binding targets , which the Member States have to achieve .
I might add that this encourages renewed investment and creates jobs .
Let me remind you only of the way in which the promotion of forms of energy such as wind energy has created tens of thousands of jobs in the European Union .
What we need , then , is definite goals , goals that we must achieve , rather than only - as Winston Churchill put it - planning great things but taking small steps !
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , the letter sent to you by the prime ministers of Europe 's big three economies , Mr Chirac , Mr Blair and Mr Schröder , makes the spring Council far more important than a merely routine Council following the standard procedure .

It makes it a symbol of the unity of Europe , at a time when this unity is being severely tested ; perhaps even a symbol of hope .

This letter is commendably realistic because it puts the emphasis where it is needed : on industry which , apart from the fact that it generates 25 % of total European domestic product , also employs 45 million people ; at a time when there is a great deal of talk about services , knowledge and so on , it is worth remembering that the economy has a far more material and palpable basis .
It also puts the question of public utility services on the right footing .
These services are a necessary basis and a necessary infrastructure for the economy and they must be maintained in the European way , not in ways which could lead to their being broken up , as is the case in certain sectors in the United States .
Then there is the whole issue of modernising the markets and not tying companies down in more red tape .
That is quite right .
And of course , one issue which is extremely important when it comes to unifying the markets is the unification of the financial markets .
From this point of view , 2003 is a milestone in the Lisbon programme .
We also need to complete the legislation unifying the transport markets ; perhaps the Commission could tell us if it is optimistic about at least keeping to this deadline .
The prime ministers also emphasise the need for high levels of employment .
It is worth remembering that Lisbon talks of full employment , not high levels of employment , and we should stick to our original ambition .
Then , of course , there is the question of investments .
Where the money is going to come from now that the stock exchanges are falling is a question which needs to be addressed and I hope , Mr President , that the skills of the Greek Government , which has a very distinguished economic staff , will create the optimistic climate without which confidence will crumble and the economy - and hence the Lisbon process - will not progress .
This optimism is sorely needed .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have all stressed how especially important the Spring Summit is in view of flagging growth , the internal market not yet being complete and the Lisbon objectives becoming ever more nebulous and people having less and less confidence in them .
I see the Lisbon strategy as being Europe 's response to globalisation .
The Lisbon strategy is our regulatory framework , because it links the market to social responsibility and the sustainability of the environment , which is how this regulatory model distinguishes us from the United States and from other continents .
What is known as the eco-social market economy is the European regulatory model .
We must stop apportioning blame .
We must make it clear where responsibilities lie - who is responsible for meeting what target and by when .
We need definite targets rather than woolly statements .
In which areas do we want to be Number One and by what date ?
Who has to achieve what subsidiary goal and by when so that the jointly determined European objectives might be fulfilled ?
What the Spring Summit should do is specify how the Lisbon objectives are to be broken down country by country , and have these objectives incorporated in every statement made by governments and every labour convention entered into by them .
There is no contradiction between the Stability and Growth Pact and the Lisbon strategy ; on the contrary , without the Pact , the Lisbon strategy could not be fulfilled .
This means that we have to keep on ensuring that the internal market becomes a true internal market and that sufficient account is taken of small and medium-sized businesses ' potential as the foundation of Europe 's economic structure and a source of new employment .
I would like to speak about the letter that three Heads of Government - Tony Blair , Gerhard Schröder and Jacques Chirac - have drawn up ahead of this Spring Summit .
It represents an attempt to demonstrate their unity once more and to set the tone for the debate at the summit .
There is nothing wrong with this in principle , because I think that it is good that some broad lines are set out amid the multitude of documents that crop up around this kind of summit , but I think that the epistle that these three have drawn up really plunges to new depths .
It is an insult to the equilibrium and depth that characterise the Lisbon process , which we have now been working on for three years .
In addition , I think that it clumsily upsets the careful balance in the Lisbon objectives , because - and a number of points have already been mentioned in the debate - it leaves out a number of objectives completely , and it only places the emphasis on the interests of trade and industry .
It does indeed seem as though the letter has been copied from the Confederation of British Industry ( CBI ) , the Federation of German Industries ( BDI ) and the French Enterprises Association ( MEDEF ) , the employers ' lobby organisations in the respective countries .
I took particular exception to a passage concerning the Hartz Commission .
A kind of commission is proposed at European level based on the German model , but evidently the governments in London , Berlin and Paris do not realise that a European directive on temporary employment , the cornerstone of the Hartz Commission , is already under discussion in Brussels .
An extraordinary deal has been struck between London and Berlin concerning that very directive , to block any decisions being taken on it ; a deal which has to do with another dossier , the takeover bids directive , which is also being discussed at the moment .
It is absolutely absurd that , in the self same letter that has now been drawn up ahead of the Spring Summit , it is proposed to set up a kind of Hartz Commission that reinvents the wheel , instead of now working constructively on that directive and a decision being taken on it in March , within the Economic and Social Council .
That brings to a close the ' Catch the Eye ' part of this debate .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the European Commission , the Lisbon strategy , the vital tool needed to make the European Union the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world , is perhaps more topical today than ever before .
The social repercussions of possible military intervention in Iraq and its impact on the European economy are giving great cause for concern .
Just what is it within the Union that ties it to outside developments ?
According to the snapshot presented by the Commission , things are not so rosy when it comes to the open method of coordination between the Member States at all levels within the Union .
For example , there has been too little progress towards the objective of sustainable economic development , more and better jobs and greater social cohesion which we set in 2000 .
Some Member States have completely failed to meet targets for employment and competitiveness , with the result that the word now is that we shall not achieve the target set by the Union in the Lisbon strategy .
We therefore need to review what has been done and examine everything left on the to-do list , especially in the Member States which have fallen short .
Again on the subject of sustainable development , we need to plug the gap between the announcements we make and the legislative tools we provide for protecting the environment and public health and we need to mainstream the environmental dimension in all Union policies .
With pressure from both the Lisbon process and the process of reviewing the Union Treaties and , of course , globalisation , we urgently need to apply sustainable development within the context of European integration .
However , what I want to focus on and highlight once again is this : I think , no I believe that the European Union is lagging behind in science and technology , especially biotechnology .
Without scientific and technological progress and innovation we shall be unable to meet the challenges - the nutritional , medical , environmental and socio-economic challenges .
Science and technology are the key to dealing with the major problems that beset human society .
This has always been a basic element in the history of man and it still is today .
Scientific , technological and related research , education and training are therefore non-negotiable .
And in my opinion , Mr President-in-Office , you should take decisive action to promote research in science and technology , as the President of the Commission said , because it will , I think , turn out to be the most important tool in achieving the Lisbon policy , strategy and programme .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I am indeed very well aware of the backdrop against which the Greek Presidency of the Council is obliged to make preparations for the Spring Summit .
What makes it certainly the most difficult Spring Summit since Lisbon , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , is the global economic situation and the prospect of an imminent war , which we hope yet to be able to prevent .
In a situation such as this , a great deal of responsibility rests upon your shoulders , but there is only one mistake you can make , a very serious one , and that would be if you were to allow your courage to fail you - the courage to , for once , push to one side the declarations prepared by the many bureaucracies ; the courage to distance yourself to some degree from the anaemic statements , all couched in the same language ; the courage to engage in real discussion among yourselves of the real conditions under which the people of the European Union live .
We know from former Presidents of the Council that finding the courage to break with ritual is perhaps the hardest thing of all .
It is not simple .
Let me give two reasons why I think it essential that you summon up the courage to do this .
What we learn from an unvarnished depiction of the situation is that investment , both private and public , in Europe is at a low point .
We have to take especial note of the fact that public-sector investment is collapsing in those economies on which a major part of our economic development depends .
This is where ritual invocation of the Stability and Growth Pact is not enough .
When will we at last affirm our belief in the golden rule and put fresh wind and impetus behind increased investment in Europe ?
I , for one , want to hear no more from Members of this House who ritually affirm the importance of small and medium-sized enterprises without at the same time stressing the link with public investment .
This question demands an answer , and soon .
You are in a position to do this , and you can get it done .
There is a second aspect that seems to me to be of great importance .
Wonderful papers are produced on active ageing .
I know about the demographic situation , and about how important it is to keep people active as they get older , but if you ask the European public , what you come up against is the great difficulty you have in persuading someone who has worked in a factory for forty years , perhaps working shifts , to carry on doing that job .
You will find it even more difficult to convince a businessman that this worker has to keep on working longer , and , in particular , even more difficult than that when people out there know that these papers are written by people who reckon on going in their fifties or early fifties with a golden handshake .
If you really want to do something , do some work on health programmes in the workplace , do something about enabling people to have an early-retirement part-time pension , and then , above all , ask yourself how it is that nearly 20 % of our young people still end up on the labour market without proper training ?
These people are the future of Europe , and we force them into unemployment .
This is an urgent problem , and I do not find anything like enough about it in our papers .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , much has been said during this debate and it is obviously difficult at this point to add anything new . I will therefore insist on the aspects which the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party considers to be most important in this preparation for the Spring Summit .
Firstly , on assessing the results so far since Lisbon , we observe that , rather than making progress - at least in relative terms - we have moved backwards .
If we compare the levels of productivity in the European Union and in the United States we see that the European Union comes out worse .
We believe that this is because we have not been able to make sufficient progress on a framework favourable to business initiative for investment .
This is because , despite the declarations made at the successive Councils in Lisbon , Gothenburg and Barcelona , there has not been adequate action on the part of the Member States , which have committed themselves to making a series of reforms , of which the really important ones are reforms to make the labour market more flexible , to promote an environment more favourable for the creation of companies , at a time when growth forecasts within the European Union are low .
Small and medium-sized enterprises are key , but it has been demonstrated that the bureaucratic obstacles to creating a new business are infinitely greater in the European Union than in the United States .
This is not a favourable environment either for the creation of companies or for small and medium-sized businesses or , above all , for those companies which are taking a new direction by applying new technologies .
Therefore , the twin objective of creating companies and applying and developing new technologies has also been significantly delayed and clearly , despite the successive commitments and solemn declarations , which were repeated in Barcelona , on the process of liberalisation of sectors which are still protected , in energy and telecommunications we see once again that they have not been fulfilled .
I therefore hope that rather than making great declarations , the Brussels Summit will fulfil its commitments .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , it is , I think , obvious - and here I disagree with many of my honourable friends - that , if nothing else , the Lisbon process , the Lisbon strategy , is not a total failure .
At worst , it has not made any headway .
Clearly , it is developing and progressing too slowly .
The recession which has hit the economy , especially the sectors of the new economy on which we have - to put it one way - somewhat over-optimistically pinned our hopes for the Lisbon strategy , cannot be left out of the equation .
As far as sustainable development is concerned , there has been a huge delay .
We should already be fully monitoring and developing the outcomes of Johannesburg .
I think that both the word and the town have been forgotten .
Then there is the letter from the three leaders , which a previous speaker quite rightly referred to and which really does upset the balance which the Lisbon strategy tries to strike .
This letter calls for reform , but reform in the wrong direction .
The letter ditches the term full employment and talks of high levels of employment .
It says - and this is outrageous , Mr President-in-Office and I should like you to respond to this - that we need to prevent new restrictions on companies and that , whenever the Commission proposes new policies , we need to listen to the opinion of companies and the business world first .
I have nothing against consultation , but what will you do about the legislation on chemicals ?
What will you do about the new legislation on environmental responsibility ?
In one sense , these laws are restrictions which come within the context of sustainable development and so on .
Will they too be left out of the equation ?
I think an answer is required .
If not now , then during the discussions at summit level .
In all events , a clear answer is required .
Obviously the war , or rather , let us not deceive ourselves , the invasion of Iraq may exacerbate all this and does , of course , make it hard to get down to brass tacks and discuss the follow-on strategy for Lisbon .
However , a number of questions need answering , Mr President .
Have you thought about re-tabling a general reduction in working times in order to create more jobs ?
About funding the development of the so-called third sector ?
About updating the ideas in the White Paper , which was when we last thought about this in a specific , integrated manner in the European Union , for example on trans-European networks and tax changes , in order to shift taxes off employment and on to the use of natural resources .
Have you thought about re-tabling all this in the light of the failures so far ?
Or has all this now been forgotten ?
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , in my opinion , the tone of this discussion is too pessimistic .
I think that now , of all times , we need to testify in strong support of the value of the European model , not only as a market , but especially as a model for well-being , sustainability , development , and the prosperity which is tied up with well-being .
That is why we have made a conscious decision to support integration in place of confrontation , unity in diversity , and world development in place of dominance .
And so we have brought about the upcoming enlargement of the Union , but , at the same time , we are confronted with the growth of unemployment .
At this time , therefore , we need leadership from the Commission , the Council , Parliament , the EU institutions and the Member States .
Member States , regions , local authorities and heads of businesses alike fail to deliver the goods , however .
They all sit on top of their heaps of gold , exercising caution and not doing what needs to be done in order to combat this unemployment .
Believe me , if we carry out enlargement of Europe with unemployment still hanging over our heads , we will be heading for an utter fiasco .
You talk of research - we have failed to bring about a real European policy for this .
Our doctores honoris causa still come to our universities to collect their honorary doctorates , before returning to the USA to work in very high-performance laboratories .
Why are we doing so little ; why are so many countries lagging behind in terms of research ?
If sustainable development is to be possible , each country must do more than it is currently doing , and together we must do more than we are currently doing .
For we must admit that when times were good - times are not so good now , but we must turn the tide - we did actually see , to our regret , that regions with high unemployment also remained regions of high unemployment when they were part of the Union .
On top of that there is also cyclical unemployment .
At the same time , we can see that , across the board , there are still semi- and unskilled workers who are out of work , still too few women in the labour force , too few people in work , and businesses that systematically show their staff the door when they reach 52 ; and there are still too many countries that endorse this behaviour and even give government money for it .
Have we not been fobbed off in that regard with nice summits and fine words for long enough now ?
I hope that now , some action will be the result .
That was very difficult .
Ladies and gentlemen in the galleries , I warmly welcome you to Parliament , but I must firmly ask you not to attempt to join in the debates or to applaud .
Mr President of the Commission , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you can see what great expectations are placed in you at a time when Europe is in a really difficult economic situation , and I am therefore glad to be able to invite the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Yiannitsis , to address us .
Mr President , I should like to thank all the speakers for their comments , views and thoughts , which will be passed on to the Member States and will help both them and the Council to make a success of the Spring Summit .
It seems to me that the entire debate can be summarised in three key words , three key messages .
The first is confidence , the second is action and the third is balance , the European model .
Let me explain myself .
Public opinion , what the citizens of the European Union want to come out of a Council such as the Spring Summit , which has an agenda of important and extensive issues , is confidence , not just in the abstract sense , but based on a realisation that the European Union is in a position to take decisions on growth , on employment in these difficult times and on a series of other issues of real concern to our citizens in their everyday life , such as social issues , pensions , health , education and quality of life .
This is an aspect that , I think , mainly has to do with economic and social affairs .
However , I think that , especially in today 's circumstances , questions of confidence do not arise solely from decisions relating specifically to Lisbon matters .
We are in a period , to paraphrase Tolstoy , of ' War or Peace ' and Europe 's confidence in the European Union will also depend on the decisions it takes on political issues .
Everyone is waiting to see what decisions we , as the European Union , are in a position to take .
The Greek Presidency , in agreement with its partners , has convened a special summit on political issues next Monday , in order to consider how we can make sure Europe is in the thick of things and how we can gain the confidence of the citizens of Europe on this front and prove that Europe can progress , that it can progress in an organised fashion and that it can take decisions .
President Prodi mentioned the importance of this sort of image under present circumstances and I shall have an opportunity to say more on this during this afternoon 's debate on Iraq .
This confidence , to come back to Lisbon , touches on a series of issues for which , as a number of speakers quite rightly mentioned , there is no institutional basis for progressing as one might perhaps wish .
However , they are issues on which progress must be made and the open method of coordination , which has proven its worth over recent years post Lisbon , has injected flexibility into the Community system and allowed us to make some headway .
I think the debate under way in the Convention may give us a more efficient institutional system , which could allow us to make decisions which are important to the citizens of Europe rather than getting entrenched in specific remits which prevent Europe from moving forward on a series of day-to-day issues .
Greece , not as the presidency but as a Member State , is one of the countries that wants us to move in this direction .
The second point I noted from the debate and want to highlight is the real need for action .
We do not need new objectives , we need to implement much that has already been decided .
Everyone realises this , the presidency realises this , the Council also realises this and we are working in this direction .
However , I should like to point out that , whatever you may say about Lisbon 's progress to date , it is also worth remembering and highlighting the positive developments .
I should just like to mention employment , because that was one of the main points of Lisbon , and remind you that , during these difficult years , with a recession in 2002 , Europe managed to create 600 000 new jobs and that between 1999 , the year before Lisbon , and 2003 , an estimated 7 000 000 new jobs have been created in Europe .
I know we also have the problem of unemployment , but mentioning this does not play down existing problems ; I just want to point out that we have to see not just where we have failed to hit target ; we also have to look at what has been achieved in relation to the targets set .
I should like to comment on another basic Lisbon issue , to do with balanced policies .
I really do believe that Lisbon is one of Europe 's many responses , and a very serious response , to the issue of globalisation .
And that is very , very important .
The whole core idea of Lisbon revolves around the key word of balance , balanced policies .
What we have to decide , of course , is how we can strike a balance between policies to strengthen competitiveness and policies to strengthen the social dimension .
It seems to me that you have to decide how to answer this .
How to answer the need to strengthen and remove all limits on the market system and , at the same time , strengthen issues to do with employment , the social model or the concept of growth and the concept of sustainable development .
The success of post-war Europe has been built on its ability to find a satisfactory answer to the question of balanced policies .
We cannot compare Europe with other models without thinking about it very carefully and setting certain limits .
We can use benchmarking in each country to see where we were before and where we are now .
We can even use it between Member States of the European Union ; but benchmarking between the European Union and other countries is another matter , because no country anywhere in the world has developed the elements that typify and constitute the post-war European development and social model .
No country has fast rates of growth and social protection and sustainable development and environmental protection all at once , meaning that any benchmarking is flawed .
Useful yes , as long as you are aware of its very narrow limitations .
We know what the price will be if we ignore the demands of competitiveness .
So we are forced to proceed in the direction of key factors that currently strengthen the competitive potential of our economy .
Otherwise we shall achieve nothing .
However , we also know what the repercussions may be if competitiveness is our only criterion or if employment , or social protection or environmental protection are our only criteria .
I think that all our concerns centre around how we can safeguard the Europe we know , by which I do not mean safeguarding old inflexible structures , I mean safeguarding old values and achievements , taking account of the fact that times have changed and that we need to move with the times if we are to have the sort of success we had in the past .
Numerous speakers rightly raised issues to do with employment and employment arrangements .
One of the hardest problems is how to tread the fine line between the need for flexibility and the need to strengthen competitiveness and job standards and protect workers .
These are the values we have always known in Europe and these are the values we want to safeguard .
No one objective takes precedence .
There is a very fine balance between all of them and therein lies the rub , therein lies the concern ; Europe has acted on this concern for years and has managed to find its own answer .
We believe that it will be able to find a new answer to these issues in this new , difficult phase .
One speaker pointed out or , if you like , criticised the fact there is no specific emphasis on sustainable development or the environment .
I should like to start by reminding you that it is Europe as a whole that has put the emphasis on environmental issues .
We in Europe have done this , which is why we are critical of other countries which have not signed the Kyoto agreement and so on .
Of course , we still have a great deal to do in this direction .
We , the presidency , want to focus over the next few months on removing obstacles to environmental technologies , strengthening procedures to promote renewable sources of energy , promoting approaches which allow transport infrastructures to be properly costed and polluting sources of energy to be taxed and examining the report on the environment which will be submitted at the spring Council .
We also agree that the question of investments and trans-European networks are important issues in the current phase of low manufacturing output in Europe , and it is vital that we find new , innovative ways of funding and boosting investments in both the private and public sectors .
Issues arising from enlargement are important in relation to the Lisbon strategy . The Lisbon strategy basically summarises the European development and social model and , if we want to make enlargement a real success rather than just a decision to enlarge the European Union , we need to see how we can extend the main elements of this model to the new countries , how we can set up social , economic and political structures in most of the new Member States , which still have quite a long way to go to meet current European standards , and how we can transplant these standards and promote unification .
This is a new challenge for everyone and , of course , for several presidencies , not just the Greek Presidency or this spring Council .
I shall close with the letter received by the presidency from the three leaders already referred to .
This is one contribution and we want to examine it .
We have had contributions from other Member States which have not perhaps received as much publicity .
They raise a series of issues which the spring Council will be examining and I agree with the Member who said that the European Union will need to demonstrate in March - the presidency does not of course have magic powers and cannot decide on behalf of the Fifteen - the Fifteen will need to demonstrate that , despite the climate in which we are operating , we have managed to take decisions which will open up prospects , build confidence and work for the future good of the European Union .
Thank you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council .
I am looking in the direction of Mr Prodi , the President of the Commission .
I had been told that you would not be speaking today .
Is that still the case , or do you want to say something after all , Mr President ?
Just a brief thank you because Mr Yiannitsis has already replied in such a thorough manner and we are in complete agreement .
I would just like to emphasise the tone of this debate which has been , I would say , characterised by considerable pessimism .
It is clear that this is not the best of times , in both political and economic terms .
Nevertheless , we have a doctrine and rules which all of us here have endorsed .
I can assure you that if we persevere in forging ahead with this doctrine , with these rules , we will not fail to see results .
We have created the largest , and I would say , potentially the most efficient market structure in the world .
We have established rules , and know where we want to go ; progress , obviously , is slow because this entails transfers of power and transfers of competence which are always difficult to carry out .
Some States are pushing ahead , others are dragging their heels , but remember that it is our duty - the duty of Parliament and the Commission - to lead everyone back to the course that must be followed and the journey that must be completed .
And you will see that results will not fail to arrive soon .
Thank you , President Prodi , for your encouraging and optimistic message .
We all hope that what you expect will indeed come to pass .
I notify the House that I have received six motions for a resolution in accordance with Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
Yesterday , in the course of the debate , the arguments put forward by Mr Mayol i Raynal and Mrs McKenna persuaded me not to endorse the report by Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra in the end .
It is not only about a neutral agreement with Chile , a country where the same language is spoken as in Spain and which deserves support after shaking off dictatorship .
It seems to be yet another fisheries agreement in disguise .
In addition , the present Chilean government is taking little account of the minority which is descended from the indigenous American Indian population , and , as a result of opposition from its Senate , Chile will not for the time being be ratifying the Statute of the International Criminal Court in the Hague .
Under those circumstances , I think that an agreement of this kind is premature , to say the very least .
. ( PT ) I agree with this report because I feel that it makes a valuable contribution to improving the effectiveness of the decisions adopted in the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources ( CCAMLR ) , to whose Convention the European Union is a contracting party .
The rapporteur 's suggestions make the process of documenting catches of this type of fish more rigorous , thereby further enabling us in situ to meet the objectives proposed by the Conservation Commission , by detailing the responsibilities of fishing-vessel captains as regards their declarations concerning fishing areas , quantities caught , the nature of the products in question and information regarding their vessel .
This measure will in fact provide a response to the considerable increase in declared amounts of catches landed outside the Convention zone , but which are thought to be the result of illegal fishing practised in the zone covered by the agreement .
This measure , combined with others already adopted by the Commission such as setting catch limits for Dissostichus spp. in waters covered by the Convention , the mandatory use of an on-board satellite-linked vessel monitoring system ( VMS ) , inspections in ports in which catches are landed and transhipped , and the issue by the flag state of licences or authorisations in respect of Dissostichus spp. fishing , encourages closer monitoring of the fight against the scourge that is the unregulated and undeclared illegal fishing of these species , which have considerable commercial value .
. ( PT ) I support this report - basically a technical document - which , in conjunction with the proposal for a Council regulation introducing a Community system of statistical documentation for bluefin tuna , swordfish and bigeye tuna , is the next logical step following the adoption of various programmes , by Regional Fisheries Organisations ( RFOs ) in which the European Union participates , to combat illegal , unregulated and undeclared fishing operations for these species of fish .
I am referring to the decisions taken within the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas ( ICCAT ) and the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission ( IOTC ) .
Apart from this somewhat involved reason , I agree with the report because I believe that it represents a step closer to achieving greater transparency in this market , contributing to the greatest possible rigour and helping to ensure more effective monitoring of illegal , undeclared and unregulated fishing .
Achieving this objective is all the more important because , according to FAO estimates , 30 % of fish landed come from such sources , which has disastrous results for the Union and specifically leads to horrendous falls in fish prices .
. ( PT ) The eEurope programme forms part of the key aim of the Lisbon Strategy and of promoting the opportunities created by the new information and communication technologies ( ICT ) , or what is known as the ' new ' economy .
This joint debate on the information society , of which this report is one component , seeks to give a new boost to this ' new ' economy , pursuing the idea of a new model and that the ICTs are a type of panacea for economic growth , for job creation and for increasing productivity .
Furthermore , the concept of innovation and the new technologies create new problems , specifically the commercialisation of knowledge and the creation of a two-fold exclusion / marginalisation , in particular for society 's most disadvantaged groups and for the regions that are geographically most remote or which have specific problems .
The digital divide will therefore be between those who have and those who do not have access to the benefits provided by the new technologies , including small and medium-sized enterprises , which find it difficult to take full advantage of the new opportunities , because of shortcomings in investment and qualifications , despite greater pressure of competition .
This attempt to provide a new boost , to be decided on at the Spring Council and which has come about in response to the failure of this model , proves that there is no such thing as a new or old economy ; there is only economic rationality .
. ( PT ) I have supported this report , which is closely linked to the Paasilinna and Van Velzen reports , and I welcome the results of the soundings carried out by the European Commission amongst European economic actors and the follow-up given to these soundings .
In fact , material and political investment in the new Information and Communication Technologies ( ICT ) is becoming an increasing priority .
This investment should encompass society as a whole and I am therefore pleased to see that the European Commission is now adopting a method for assessing and consulting all stakeholders and is launching practical actions to encourage the widespread use of the new technologies , in particular by small and medium-sized enterprises .
I also believe that the Council 's request to the Member States to formulate and develop EU standards and codes of conduct for practical application in encouraging the establishment of open e-marketplaces , secure e-business solutions , e-signatures and electronic payment systems is extremely important .
It is becoming increasingly clear to everyone how the widespread use of the new ICTs depends entirely on the degree of confidence stakeholders have towards the security of their transactions and their interoperability . It is therefore crucial to look more closely at this sensitive field and to invest in it more appropriately .
Mr President , on behalf of our group , I wish to make a declaration of vote on the Caveri report .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats regrets the fact that , eight years after Austria 's accession to the European Union , no solution satisfactory to all parties - on economic as much as on ecological grounds - has yet been found to the problem of goods transport through the Austrian Alps .
In the hope of a speedy solution and of greater planning security , acknowledging the positive efforts of the Danish and Greek Council presidencies , we call upon the Council to act upon the mandate of the Laeken and Copenhagen European Councils by promptly presenting a Common Position that will speed up the decision-making process involved in the joint enactment by the Council and Parliament of a solution accepted by all the parties involved .
I wish to thank the interpreters for their excellent translation of what was far from being a straightforward text .
Mr President , whilst I otherwise hold Mr Caveri in high esteem , I wish to make it known that I have voted against his report .
I believe that it would , in this case , have been better for Parliament to have taken the Danish compromise into account and not gone beyond it .
It is not , in my view , very helpful to tie oneself down to a new line .
I trust that the Council will again do as Mr Poettering , the leader of our group , has just suggested , and get to work on finding a common solution .
The fact of the matter is that even the rule on category 4 HGVs is not entirely without its problematic aspects , as it means that the environment in the affected areas will be subjected to new nuisances .
We have to provide help here as a matter of urgency , and there needs to be greater understanding of this area , which is such a sensitive one .
Mr President , while I was on the aeroplane taking me from Bergamo to Strasbourg , I was reading this report in order to decide how to vote , and I read that the ecopoint system is being extended .
I fell asleep again and in my dream , I saw Austria winning the football world cup in 2006 .
Why ?
Because it had the most points .
So points are helpful to Austria !
Points which mean it will win the football world championship in 2006 , if my dream comes true - and I think it is also the Austrians ' dream - but also points in the Caveri report which will enable Austria 's citizens to have less pollution , even if the problem has , however , not yet been resolved .
This is why I voted for the report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too would like to inform the House that my group and I have rejected the report , and explain why we have done so .
As I said yesterday , Austria does not want to keep its ecopoint system for ever ; what we want is a fair and sustainable solution to Europe 's transport problems .
For as long as such a thing is not in sight - and , above all else , for as long as the new transport infrastructure directive is not adopted - the transit issue needs to be dealt with by acceptable transitional rules .
It is for this reason that we have not approved today 's Caveri report .
We have supported Amendments Nos 19 , 20 and 21 , as they call for the retention of the ecopoint system and an upper limit for the number of journeys by HGVs until such time as a sustainable solution to the problems of the whole of the Alpine region enters into force .
I see the failure to even vote on Amendment No 18 , which is based on the Danish compromise , as sending a very poor message to the people of Austria .
. In the plenary debate on this issue , which took place yesterday , I gave as my opinion that any kind of redistributing road-transport capacity throughout Austria has to be distrusted .
The reason is the heavy pressure of road transport companies in Germany and Italy on Austria to accept heavy trucks which are not allowed to enter neighbouring Switzerland to cross the Alp mountains .
Nevertheless , I announced on behalf of my GUE / NGL Group that a majority of us should accept the proposal for the year 2004 only , because it continues to limit transport .
After I had given my contribution to the debate , the Austrian representatives of all different parties and the Group of the Greens / EFA introduced one very strong argument not only to amend the Caveri-proposals but to reject them as a whole .
This argument is that they become a part of a system to phase out the actual restrictions within a few years .
They have convinced me finally .
As a defender of environment and national self-determination I cannot accept what is happening now , although I respect the contribution of Mr Caveri to find a solution which will be more or less equal to the situation in other parts of the Alps .
So I cannot vote in favour of the Caveri report .
Mr President , Mr Van Velzen has presented us with the Commission 's proposal for a directive on the commercial exploitation of public sector documents , chiefly those of the European Parliament .
In that case , I thought , explanations of vote can also be used for commercial exploitation , and I still think so .
Therefore firstly , I cannot fail to vote for this report , in the hope , secondly , that I too will manage to commercially exploit the explanations of vote over these five years at the European Parliament .
Naturally , the profits , if there are any , will go to pensioners who will certainly not snub extremely modest support from the European Parliament , even in this form .
. ( PT ) The current situation of publicly accessible re-use of public-sector information varies enormously from Member State to Member State , both in terms of conditions and also of the costs of this re-use .
This field needs to be simplified : everything related to basic information - concerning the democratic rule of law - should be made available free of charge , and other information should be made available at a marginal cost , except in what is known as the ' cultural ' sector , for obvious reasons of intellectual and artistic copyright .
This is not a simple issue and divides the supporters of a certain degree of freedom of decision-making in this field by the Member States and their public services from those who advocate a single harmonised market being imposed on these States for the dissemination and re-use of their information .
I have abstained because I am sensitive to these problems , to which I would add the current state of discussions on this matter in my own country .
. ( PT ) I have voted in favour of the report on the eEurope 2002 action plan .
These reports formalise the principles laid down at successive European Councils for ' an information society for all ' .
The current potential for telematic transfer and access provided by the Internet , forces us to march in step with progress .
The same applies to consolidating democracy and the principles of the rule of law .
I agree with the rapporteur when he suggests that public authorities should act as a driving force in developing new content services , encouraging the re-use of the information they have and making marginal charges for this .
The profusion of information held by States should be accessible to everyone , with the proper safeguards for information that is of strategic importance or in the national interest and in line with the rules of the prevailing culture .
This directive does not seek to harmonise the Member States ' systems , or access criteria that vary from country to country with regard to information that is universally accessible and information that is not .
This matter should remain within the sphere of each Member State because it is dependent on the specific context of that country .
What seems obvious to even the simplest mind , however , is that we must promote the sharing of information at European level and the establishment of conditions of access to this information as well as rules on charging .
Mr President , this report expresses an opinion on the entry and residence of third country nationals for the purpose of paid employment and self-employed economic activities .
At the airport , I met some beautiful retired ladies and some retired men who were still youthful , who said to me : ' Why is it that you at the European Parliament only concern yourselves with the movement and residence of workers and citizens in general ?
Are you not going to do something for pensioners as well ?
We too would like to travel throughout Europe , even if we are from third countries and are not workers , just pensioners .
Will there be a directive in the future which will facilitate the entry into the European Union and movement and residence therein of pensioners too ? '
' I am sure there will ' , I replied .
Therefore , in the meantime , I voted for this report too .
- ( DA ) The June Movement has , as far as possible , voted in favour of the highest minimum requirements , but voted against whenever there has been a risk of undermining the Danish tax-funded welfare model with its social and civil liberties for all .
We have abstained from voting in this vote because of the above-mentioned conflict .
- ( DA ) We have today voted in favour of Mrs Terrón i Cusí 's report ( A5-0010 / 2003 ) on the entry and residence of third-country nationals for the purpose of paid employment and self-employed economic activities .
The proposal contains quite a few constructive elements for improving and simplifying application procedures , as well as for ensuring uniform rights for the persons concerned .
We are , however , aware of the fact that this area has to do with circumstances covered by Title IV of the EC Treaty and does not therefore apply to Denmark , cf. the Protocol on Denmark 's Position .
Europe is becoming less and less open to refugees who have had to leave their countries because their lives and freedom were threatened .
Even those who have become well-established are being deported after years of residence because they are not recognised as refugees , and run the risk of being in serious trouble again when they return to their country of origin .
On the other hand , there is an ever-increasing need for people pursuing occupations in which there are shortages in Europe . Examples are nursing staff from South Africa , the Philippines and South America , and highly trained chemists , physicists and mathematicians from India .
Those people are not naturalised in Europe and are badly needed in their country of origin , which , despite the low standard of living , has often made a considerable contribution to funding their training .
This proposal extends the permits of those people we , in Europe , consider necessary .
Instead , we should be looking a bit more at those who have already become established here , and who hope to be able to stay .
Apart from that , it should not be the case that only the most highly trained people have the right to stay , because that only increases the negative brain-drain effect in their countries of origin .
. ( PT ) The philosophy of Community immigration policy is quite clear in the proposal for a directive we are currently examining : we will continue to receive immigrants from third countries only if and when these serve the economic interests of the European Union .
Consequently , the proposed conditions of entry and residence for third-country nationals for the purpose of paid employment are so restrictive and tough that very few candidates for immigration will be able to meet them .
Such an approach is all the more unacceptable because it is backed by a Community budget that is cutting funds intended for developing countries , because in Monterrey , the EU produced nothing more than a grotesque commitment to allocate only 0.39 % of its GDP to public development aid until 2006 - instead of the 0.7 % set internationally a considerable time ago ; because the policies established at the WTO are not benefiting the poorest countries . This has led to the gap between the richest and poorest countries growing , to encompass a further 100 million poor people .
It is true that the European Union cannot receive all of the world 's poor onto its territory . On the other hand , this cannot be its response to the problems of poverty in the world and to the racist and xenophobic discourse that has recently been flourishing in some Member States , in total contrast to the humanist values that should be guiding it .
.
( PT ) I fully subscribe to the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market 's interpretation of Article 63 ( 3 ) ( a ) of the EC Treaty presented in the opinion appended to this report .
I believe that by seeking to harmonise all regulatory material concerning immigration for the purpose of employment , the Commission 's proposal far exceeds any possible grammatical , logical , systematic or teleological interpretation of these rules , in flagrant breach of the principle of subsidiarity .
Similarly , both the Commission proposal and this report claim that the need for legislation to be harmonised - which would justify this interpretation that goes beyond the Treaties but which contravenes these same Treaties - is based on certain factors , which are invoked , despite the fact that no real evidence for them is presented .
In fact , it is impractical ' to take account of the European Union 's labour needs ' .
I believe that the differences between national legislation are quite acceptable and not damaging ; any attempt to artificially standardise this field will be counterproductive and I think that the way in which it is blithely claimed that access will be opened both to external borders and to intra-Community movement is dangerous , because this overlooks the fact that the lack of security is one of the issues of greatest concern to the Union 's citizens .
I therefore voted against the report .
It is clear both from the debate and from most of the motions for resolutions that the idea is to draw parallels between Porto Alegre and the economic forum in Davos , on the grounds that both are looking for a better method of global governance .
The facts of the matter are very different .
Although some people tried to play it down and others tried to gear it towards system management or turn it into a meaningless debating club , the movement against capitalist globalisation raised its voice loud and clear against the imperialist war and global social injustice in Porto Alegre .
This movement did not come out of nowhere ; it is linked to the struggle by the workers and the working classes and it draws on their experience and messages .
It does not by any stretch of the imagination qualify as cross-class collaboration , as the Social Democrats would have us believe , on the grounds that the basic socialist / capitalist divide no longer exists .
Nor can it confine itself to defending the rights of the developing world , now that the plutocracy has its sights set more firmly than ever on people in the developed world .
The galloping escalation in the divisions within capitalist society will inevitably result in further radicalisation of the grass-roots masses , who are and always will be the force behind social change .
. ( EL ) The spread of illnesses such as HIV / AIDS and epidemics in the developing world has taken on genocidal proportions .
Unfortunately , the international community is still addressing this issue with one eye on the interests of the big pharmaceutical multinationals .
The European Union has recently taken a number of positive initiatives within the World Trade Organisation to allow underdeveloped countries to use so-called generic drugs to treat these all-out attacks on the health of their people .
The European Parliament 's resolution is an acceptable contribution in this direction .
.
( PT ) The Commission 's proposals on the WTO negotiations on agriculture , which were given unanimous approval by the Council , are a further step towards a substantial liberalisation of farm trade , which maintains the current model , based on promoting exports and insists on the idea that liberalising trade will help developing countries . This overlooks the fact that this approach accentuates food dependency and specialisation based on monoculture for export dominated by the developed countries ' food multinationals .
Instead of further liberalisations , these proposals should take account of the injustices of the international trade system and call for the right to food sovereignty and security to be recognised , in other words , the right of all peoples to define their own agricultural and food policies . They should also advocate the right of all countries to ban the trade in GMOs .
The proposal exceeds the framework of Agenda 2000 , which had already made excessive concessions to the detriment of small and medium-sized family holdings .
Hence our opposition to any agricultural negotiations within the WTO , which has been giving a further boost to the concentration , intensification and verticalisation of production and in this way , to the elimination of thousands of small and medium-sized holdings , in particular in Portugal .
It should be noted that from the outset this proposal makes the interim review of the CAP a precondition , which demonstrates the hypocrisy of some delegations within the Council .
Mr President , item 66 of the document on European transport policy seeks to improve road safety .
That is all well and good , very good , but when will we manage to beat the fog ?
In other words , when will we succeed in seeing through the fog and having fewer road accidents ?
Today , thanks to the progress of technology , we can even see in the dark , with special infrared glasses .
Why do we not spend Europe 's money on better research so that , at last , all motorists have fog glasses ?
Let us spend our money on this research too , which I am sure will yield positive results , making our roads safer and giving us a European transport policy which is truly the envy of the whole world .
Mr President , I have voted in favour of this report .
In my own country , the issue of the White Paper on Transport is a matter for vigorous debate .
The White Paper on European transport policy points in the right direction , towards the opening-up of the railway market , the revision of the guidelines and of the TENs , and towards taking enlargement - which is almost upon us - into account in the area of transport .
One of the White Paper 's proposals is of enormous importance in view of something currently under discussion - the extension of the Austrian ecopoint system .
A proposal for a framework directive to lay down the principles on which charges for the use of the infrastructure were to be imposed on all cross-border carriers was to have been presented as recently as 2002 , yet , even today , we wait in vain for this directive on transport infrastructure costs , which is intended to at last facilitate a cross-subsidy , along Swiss lines , for the benefit of environmentally friendly means of transport and to pave the way for the transfer of traffic from road to rail .
Such a transport infrastructure costs directive will be a criterion against which our credibility and the much-invoked European transport policy can be judged .
We need it urgently !
- ( FR ) I heard a Member talking about a ' revolution in transport culture ' , and I say yes to that .
Yes , we should encourage the development of clean transport systems , yes we should limit road traffic , and yes we should have a European transport policy which contributes to economic and social cohesion .
However , there is one thing that we must not forget : there are real geographical and cultural differences between States , which explain the history of the transport systems of each one of them , and Europe should not seek to erase these differences .
For example , in France there is great diversity between the various landscapes , especially in mountain regions and rural areas .
If we want to treat our citizens fairly , wherever they happen to be in France , or in Europe for that matter , we cannot think dogmatically , as the Commission has done in its proposal .
This proposal is lacking in pragmatism and does not take sufficient account of disparities in treatment at local level .
When I see the flagrant lack of infrastructures in certain geographical areas , when they are already isolated , depopulated and abandoned , I cannot accept the guidelines set out in this White Paper , which continues to address only liberal concerns .
( Explanation of vote abbreviated pursuant to Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
- ( FR ) I voted in favour of the report .
Transport policy is essential , both for economic development and for the preservation of the environment and of our living conditions , and this means that we have to take the long-term view .
Improving the quality of transport means increasing the alternatives to road transport , in particular by giving support to rail transport and effectively implementing north-south links ( Rhine-Rhone-Mediterranean via the Frankfurt / Lyons / Perpignan / Barcelona axis ) and European interconnections ( Lyons-Turin , ? ) .
In this field , political willingness on the part of governments is sometimes lacking .
Improving the efficiency of transport also means paying special attention to trans-European navigable waterway networks .
All too often these projects are prevented from being implemented .
Improving transport safety also means preventing foreseeable bad weather conditions from blocking roads and airports , leaving people to fall back on their own resources owing to the lack of sufficient capacity to react to such situations , and the lack of equipment or of efficient warning systems , even when the appropriate technology exists .
Finally , I am not in favour of the creation of a European road safety agency .
I do not think that we can solve the problems we are currently encountering by multiplying structures of this type .
( Explanation of vote abbreviated pursuant to Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
- ( DA ) The members of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party in the European Parliament voted neither in favour of , nor against , the first part of Amendment No 19 .
The ELDR Group is in favour of an environmentally friendly plan for traffic through the Alps , but such a plan must support the development of environmentally sound transport .
That is not emphasised in the proposal .
. ( EL ) The Commission proposal and the report follow up and flesh out the policy set out in the White Paper on competitiveness , advocating the full liberalisation of the transport market .
The ultimate aim is to increase the return on capital .
Proclamations about safe transport and environmental protection are cancelled out by the philosophy of all-out , unaccountable competitiveness .
The report welcomes the fact that a good deal of progress has been made with regard to liberalisation and competitiveness in transport .
Using demand as its criterion , it highlights the advantages of road transport and focuses on the creation of high capacity north-south and east-west corridors .
At the same time , it insists on the need to privatise the railways as a precondition for making them profitable .
It also supports market access to port services and stresses the need for a uniform taxation and costing policy for transport .
The Commission and the report are indifferent to the impact this policy has and will have on the standard , safety and cost of transport to the general public .
It supports the single European sky , the abolition of national FIRs and flexible civil and military use of airspace ; in conjunction with the general border changes taking place in the area as a whole , this spells danger for the security and national independence of countries such as Greece .
.
( PT ) I congratulate Mr Izquierdo Collado on the excellent report he has drawn up on the Commission White Paper entitled ' European transport policy for 2010 : time to decide ' , which I fully support , in particular his call for the issue of the growing liberalisation of the transport sector to be accompanied by guarantees , investment , mobility , subsidies , price support and maintenance of services for remote and island regions .
In this context I should like to emphasise that , due to the importance of transport for the development of the outermost regions , the European Parliament must , within this process , defend the commitments given to the outermost regions in the Treaty of Amsterdam , thereby contributing to economic and social cohesion in Europe .
I should also like to point out that the safety of transport cannot be made conditional on its profitability and that , where the safety of road transport is concerned , I fully share the aim laid down by the Commission to achieve a 50 % reduction in the number of road deaths by 2010 , ( totalling 20 000 ) and I support the proposal for the Community-level implementation of evidence-based measures that will enable this target to be achieved .
. ( PT ) The increasing attention paid to road safety represents added value for Portuguese interests .
In fact , the adoption of this report will enable many problems experienced on Portuguese roads , and in particular on some roads in the Algarve , to be solved .
Creating a European Road Safety Agency , as proposed in this report , seems , in my opinion , to be of enormous importance , particularly to ' speeding up developments in road safety and providing access to road safety data and best practice information across the EU . '
Furthermore , I think that the European Transport Fund , another of the measures proposed , is an important pillar for the proper development of infrastructures for roads , railways , maritime routes , river and sea ports and airports , in the aim of creating a European network of balanced and sustainable infrastructures .
For all of these reasons I am persuaded to vote in favour on this matter .
This report is based on a premise that is good for my country , since it seeks to launch new initiatives to improve access in the outermost regions .
. ( PT ) It is absolutely crucial that we adopt a realistic approach to this matter .
Firstly because of the distant horizon of 2010 , the deadline set by the Commission White Paper is directed and secondly , in light of the practical difficulties of implementing a very broad range of measures with meagre resources .
This will be a good way of giving the Transport Policy the solvency and credibility that it needs .
With regard specifically to freight transport , I have for a long time maintained that priority must be given to restoring rail transport and to developing short-sea and inland waterway shipping , rather than to the excessively overcrowded roads .
Many of the problems of concern to the rapporteur , such as road safety , the prevention of bottlenecks , mobility and environmental protection , will be significantly alleviated by action designed to achieve this new balance , favouring the modes of transport that are most heavily penalised today .
Internalising external costs , such as environmental costs , can also play a major role in this correction , obviously most heavily penalising the most polluting and most redundant forms of transport , which are also those most likely to cause bottlenecks .
These are my reasons for voting in favour of the report .
. ( PT ) Transport is an essential sector of undeniable strategic importance for sustainable development and for economic and social cohesion throughout the Union because it transcends the economic and union interests of the sector and its quality affects the entire Community .
We fully support the railways within the Union 's transport system and call for top priority to be given to urgent changes to the terms governing its expansion , nature and adjustment to market conditions .
We advocate the responsible liberalisation of European railway management .
We support the institutionalisation of a European Transport Fund .
Mr President , I am starting to feel the pangs of hunger so I will not deliver an explanation of vote this time .
. ( PT ) The potential delay in implementing third-generation mobile communications networks and services is today a major risk factor for a sector that has been considerably weakened by the bursting of the speculative bubble in the USA , which could have a knock-on effect on the communications and information technology sector and hence on the economy in general , given this sector 's influence on telecommunications , and particularly on mobile communications , in some Member States .
This situation is largely due to the great expectations raised for the sector 's development and to the enormous financial sums obtained by some Member States by auctioning UMTS licences . Consequently , these States are now considering adopting unilateral aid to ' rescue ' this sector from a situation of considerable debt .
In addition to this risk factor , we must consider the issues of equal access for citizens to third-generation mobile communications , content-related issues , specifically in terms of public service provision , the consequences of the further liberalisation of the sector and the effects of radiation from the electromagnetic fields created by mobile phones , making it crucial to extend scientific research in this field .
Mr President , I cannot refrain from delivering this explanation of vote .
The document is entitled : ' eEurope 2005 : An information society for all ' . For all ?
For absolutely everybody ?
Mr Silvio Berlusconi has issued a letter giving money to students to buy computers .
What about pensioners ?
I would like pensioners not to be overlooked in this information society .
I propose that , when pensioners draw their first pension payment , together with this first pension payment they should be given - and I stress , given - a computer , so that they too can enjoy the benefits , the marvels and the joys of information technology .
. We are all aware that for the European Union to remain competitive we must take full advantage of the new information technologies that are coming on stream .
That is the core of the Action Plan for eEurope 2005 guaranteeing widespread availability of broadband networks throughout the EU . It also seeks to ensure the widespread use of the Internet through eGovernment , eLearning , eHealth and eBusiness initiatives .
I represent a peripheral part of the European Union - both the western and border county regions in Ireland .
It must remain a central European policy that the benefits of new technologies extend equally to all urban and rural parts of Europe .
If access to these new technologies is not available , investors will locate their companies where the best available technology is .
On issues such as information technology , there is the principle known as universal access .
The cost of access to the internet must be the same whether the user is living in a rural part of Ireland or in a capital city in the European Union .
We must do more to promote a dynamic e-business environment , and ensure that small and medium sized companies take full advantage of the new evolving technologies to meet that objective .
. ( PT ) I welcome the fact that the European Parliament has dedicated itself to a plan as important as eEurope 2005 , in the aim of enabling the Member States to develop their online skills in the sectors of public administration , by modernising public services in order to guarantee universal accessibility ; education , specifically the aim of guaranteeing broadband access for all educational establishments ; health , by providing online health services to the population , and broadband data networks between the various points of healthcare provision , such as hospitals , laboratories and homes ; and ' business ' , obviously not forgetting issues involving the technical means necessary to achieving these aims - extending bandwidth and multiplying channels - and the sensitive issue of the security of information .
Despite the fact that there is generally consensus amongst Members on this issue , I think it important to register my vote in favour of this report .
. ( PT ) I have voted in favour of this report , and I agree , therefore , with the conclusions reached by the competent parliamentary committee on its content .
I felt I should give my unequivocal support to promoting the skills - especially the technical and logistical skills - of the Member States , in order to achieve the aim proclaimed at the Lisbon and Santa Maria da Feira European Councils and later at the Barcelona and Seville Councils , to make the European Union the most competitive society in the world and in this respect at the forefront of the ' world information society ' .
This report must also be seen as forming a link with the Van Velzen and Khanbhai reports , because , as it states , a new era of high-quality content must be promoted , in which the Member States must have a special say and their own contribution to make .
I therefore consider establishing priority action frameworks to promote online skills , as the report suggests , to be of the utmost strategic importance , especially in public administration , by modernising public services in order to guarantee universal accessibility ; education , specifically the aim of guaranteeing broadband access for all educational establishments and health , by providing online health services to the population , and broadband data networks between the various points of healthcare provision , such as hospitals , laboratories and homes .
. ( EL ) The prospects and expectations of Lisbon are , unfortunately , a far cry from the situation on the ground in Europe .
Europe has not only failed to take the lead in the most important technologies ; it is still as far behind the USA as it was before , growth has slowed , unemployment has risen , new sciences are finding it hard to break into the market and regional disparities persist .
Unfortunately , the summit Council does not appear to have a cohesive programme or proposals and the proposals by the leaders of France , Germany and Great Britain are confined to the industrial sector .
The Spring Summit will need to set out new priorities , tailored to the current climate of economic recession and international tension , which include relaxing the Stability Pact criteria , tax incentives to boost labour intensive activities , special incentives to help regions lagging behind in the new technologies , joined-up interventions to upgrade the education system and monitoring the implementation of eEurope objectives in each Member State .
. ( FR ) When I spoke this morning I asked that this summit should not turn out to be a mere catalogue of good intentions and that the objective of full employment , with all the consequences that that implies , should become more or less the sole objective from which all the rest are derived .
The resolution which was voted for and signed by Members on the Right and belonging to the PSE , was not acceptable , particularly since the votes had ' liberalised ' it even more .
I therefore voted against it .
. ( IT ) We would like to express our satisfaction at the proposals and at the commitment of the Presidency to the events ahead of us , and point out that a rapidly developing society brings cases of social exclusion as well as general prosperity .
A policy which caters for the weakest is the hallmark of a civilised human community which has to meet the needs of the weakest too .
We must preserve the family and the right to a dignified life as basic values , activating instruments to ensure equal access to education and work and preventing the spread of child pornography and all physical and moral violence .
We must be more mindful of the environment , food security and animal rights , for these are issues related to quality of life .
We need to prevent practices such as female genital mutilation which damage physical integrity and personal dignity .
We need framework rules requiring each country to establish basic salaries and pension , health and welfare systems which reflect the true cost of living , and we need to bring about the effective participation of employees in enterprise profits and gain .
Ladies and gentlemen , that concludes the votes .
The sitting is suspended
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union and the North Atlantic Alliance face the prospect of their unity being shattered .
Even though Europe is a sad sight to behold , there is an opportunity in every crisis , and so we should not be saying that a common European foreign and security policy makes no sense , or that it has failed ; rather , we have to redouble our efforts in order that our foreign and security policy may indeed be shared by all of us .
Any such policy must be founded on clear analysis , that analysis being that it is Saddam Hussein who is the problem , at the head of a regime of terror founded upon crime , terror and murder .
Commissioner , Iraq is in fact a rich country , but its dictator has plundered it .
So anyone who sees the USA as the problem is confusing cause and effect .
It is the Iraqi dictator who is the problem .
Our group is of the very decided opinion that weapons of mass destruction in the hands of Saddam Hussein are a menace to the region and imperil the peace of the world .
It is under the UN 's aegis that disarmament must take place ; it must be peaceful if at all possible , and , if that proves impossible , military means must be employed .
Responsibility for whether it happens peacefully or by military force lies solely with the Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein .
( Applause )
Let us just remind ourselves of the chronology of events .
At the heart of disunity within Europe and across the Atlantic is the self-isolation of the Federal Republic of Germany , for which its present Chancellor must bear responsibility .
( Applause from the right , heckling )
The German Federal Chancellor , by isolating Germany - whatever reasons he may have had for doing so - during a federal election campaign , in which he said , ' No matter what the UN does , we will never take part in it ! ' , took the pressure off Saddam Hussein ; he acted in an anti-European way , for one needs to speak first to the Europeans before coming out with utterances with such implications at public election rallies .
He gave a complete repeat performance in the elections to provincial assemblies , but it brought him no success in terms of votes .
We then come to the second chronological element , the Franco-German declaration at the celebrations of the Elysée Treaty .
Speaking in terms of political psychology - and I do so for the benefit of our French friends in particular - this gave the false impression of the French position now being identical to the German one .
The French were always much more sophisticated , but that was the political impression that was given .
Then came the statement by the eight states .
I am speaking for our group when I tell you that we regret this way of going about things , which bypasses the Community process , and that we cannot endorse it .
In essence , the statement does meet with our approval , however .
It was also necessary in order that we might send out a signal of friendship to our American partners .
( Applause from the centre and from the right )
We are now faced with the question of what is to happen next .
I recommend that we give thought to how we understand our relationship with America .
If we understand European unity in terms of opposition to the United States of America , then we are building Europe upon sand .
Rather than that , we want a partnership between the European Union and the United States of America , a partnership founded on cooperation between equals and on multilateral partnership .
There are also , of course , things that we demand of our American partners .
We do not think it right that the American administration under President Bush tends to see the USA 's relationship with Europe in bilateral terms , in other words , Washington and Paris , Washington and London , Washington and Rome , Washington and Madrid , Washington and Berlin and so on .
We have to define the relationship between the USA and Europe in such a way that Europeans can take common action and also in such a way that the European institutions are the American administration 's partner in negotiations .
( Applause )
For if we do not build this partnership of equals with America , that also goes against America 's interests , as we now see , as European disunity has consequences for the North Atlantic Alliance .
The American administration and President Bush should also recognise the value of European unity , which is also in the interests of the United States of America .
If we in Europe were to revert to forming axes as we once did , then both our group and I would consider this a perilous road to go down .
Just imagine - and I will not use the word ' axis ' - that there were to be , as seems at present to be taking shape , something like two common positions , with Paris , Berlin and Moscow on the one side and London , Rome , Madrid and Washington on the other .
If Europe were to present itself thus to the world , it would be a nightmarish sight .
That is why we have to act within the framework of the Community .
All the things we are doing now have to be done on a Community basis .
That , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , is why our group supports your decision to call a summit meeting of the Heads of State and of Government .
Let me say just a word or two on the subject of Turkey .
If our Turkish partners ask us to involve them in planning and to supply them with weapons for their defence , I do not believe that we can refuse such a request , such an entreaty .
I hope that we will also achieve a result on this issue .
( Applause )
My wish for the Presidency of the Council next Monday is for three things to be achieved : a European common position , the bridging of the deep gulf between us and the United States , and the sending of a signal to the Iraqi dictator that he must disarm .
It is to be hoped he will be brought to do this by peaceful means and under the guidance of the United Nations !
( Loud applause )
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the greatest achievement of European construction is the fact that for half a century we have broken the pattern of war , replacing it with peace and a shared destiny .
The European peoples do not just co-exist in the Union , but we share a destiny in brotherhood and mutual tolerance .
And we are still constructing Europe , with difficulties , but the united Europe is not the old Europe of endemic civil wars between us nor the new Europe which was preached by fascism and Nazism .
At this time much more unites us than divides us .
We all want peace , we are all against bloodthirsty dictators and we all want to see the disappearance of weapons of mass destruction .
In families - and in the Union - there can be moments of tension , but we must be able to overcome them through solidarity and mutual compromise .
The approach which can unite Europe is the mandate of the United Nations , respect for international law and the continuation of the inspectors ' work .
We are not condemned to war ; we must work to give peace a chance .
In this context , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we in the Group of the European Socialist Party support and welcome the correct and timely initiative of President Simitis : we must do everything possible to find a common position and overcome the disagreements within the Council and also with the candidate countries , who are already members of our Union .
I would like to correct Mr Poettering on a point relating to the isolation of the current German government .
I would like to remind him that the first government of the German Federal Republic since the war to fully assume its responsibilities in the international field was the Socialist / Green coalition of Chancellor Schröder .
Before that there was nothing more than passivity .
Therefore the Schröder government is not isolated , it is in good company .
From the point of view of our responsibilities as the European Parliament , we were significantly united in the resolution approved in January by a large majority - from which , curiously , the Group of the European Peoples ' Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats withdrew at the last moment , after having negotiated it .
My Group would ask the President to use the resolution as a guide for his speech on Monday , in which we urge him to make a solemn appeal and to insist on the need for the United Nations Security Council resolutions to be fully applied and complied with , to express opposition to any unilateral action and to consider that a preventive attack does not conform to the United Nations Charter , and that he also urge the Council and the Member States to take the initiative of proposing to the International Criminal Court that the Iraqi leader is responsible for war crimes and crimes against humanity .
In this regard , it is important to point out that at this time we must not anticipate events .
The military machine must not be allowed to take on its own dynamic , leading us into war , the war is still avoidable and the United Nations Organisation is still necessary .
The geopolitical effects of action adopted unilaterally outside the framework of the Security Council would be catastrophic not only for Iraq but for the whole of the Middle East , with unpredictable consequences .
We must not forget that Iraq , despite everything , is still a secular and religiously pluralist regime , which is important in view of the situation of increasing fundamentalism .
We have heard the Commission 's report on the humanitarian issue - and I thank Commissioner Nielson - which also points out the risks involved in this .
We must therefore carry on supporting the inspectors , insisting that Iraq comply with the resolutions of the Security Council without allowing it to make any excuse or evasive response .
In this context , the inspection chiefs have noted that it is a positive step that Iraq has agreed to allow surveillance flights and is cooperating .
At the moment , the international community has put is faith in the inspectors .
They must continue their work and we must support them .
Finally , Mr President , since 11 September we have insisted on the need to coordinate efforts with the United States and we have expressed our solidarity with this great country in the fight against the threat of international terrorism .
This is not only a result of our historic gratitude and friendship , arising from the role of the United States in favour of European democracy in the two world wars .
The issue today is not the extent to which we are friends on paper with the United States .
We are in disagreement - and this must be said - over the doctrine of preventive war .
We are even more in disagreement and we totally reject the unfortunate comments of the Secretary of State , Mr Rumsfeld , in Munich last week , insulting a European country and not explaining the thing he should explain : why , as Secretary of the Reagan administration , he went to Baghdad to give weapons of mass destruction to his then ally , Saddam Hussein .
This must be explained .
( Applause )
Mr President , I will end by saying that we are friends and allies who behave like genuine friends : we say what we think .
We are allies of the United States as a result of shared historical responsibilities and principles .
We must fight to give peace and hope a chance . We are not condemned to the disaster of war and mass destruction , and we call on President-in-Office Simitis to speak on behalf of a Europe with one harmonious voice next Monday .
( Applause )
Mr President , it seems hard to believe that the disunity of the world community as a whole , and the European Union in particular , could reach a lower point than when the ' gang of 8 ' prime ministers signed their ill-judged letter backing the USA on Iraq .
But we are now plumbing new depths of public bickering , with the splits spreading from the UN and the EU to include Nato .
Anarchy reigns in our international institutions , and that only provides comfort to Saddam Hussein .
If we are to prevent these fissures becoming a chasm , our governments must draw back from their quarrels , return to first principles and move forward on the basis of what unites them .
The United Nations , Nato , the European Communities - these institutions have served us well , and they are too valuable to be abandoned in the face of current differences of approach .
And if that requires America to show a little patience , that is no bad thing .
Public opinion in the US is less united than President Bush pretends - over a third still want a new UN vote to authorise any conflict , and almost a quarter do not want US troops to be sent to Iraq at all .
When a former president pleads for patience , and leading Democrat Senator John Kerry hopes for an America : ' where military might is not clouded by our need for oil ' , is there really bipartisan backing for President Bush , to give him the credibility he needs ?
Democracy can be difficult , and building support for a position often takes time and good arguments .
But it is better to take the time to do it and get it right than to launch into a course of action , half cock .
Liberals therefore congratulate the Greek Presidency on convening next Monday 's meeting .
We trust that all governments will attend .
They should come prepared to listen and to seek common ground , not simply to repeat their well-known positions .
Europe 's leaders too should take care not to overplay their hand .
The United Nations High Commission for Refugees is rightly following the maxim that they should prepare for the worst while continuing to hope for the best , by making contingency plans for a possible refugee crisis .
As a collective defence organisation , Nato should be guided by the same principle , and it is the responsibility of every Nato country to support Turkey 's request for assistance under Article 4 of the North Atlantic Treaty .
Given the reservations he expressed last time , Dr Hans Blix 's report on Friday will carry particular significance .
Those who call for more inspectors should heed his remark that : ' the principal problem is not the number of inspectors but rather the active cooperation of the Iraqi side ' .
At the same time , if he reports progress towards active cooperation , the US and Britain should give the UN process the space to work .
Amid all this gloom , perhaps we can take comfort from one ray of hope .
When the inspectors report again on Friday , the eyes of the world will again be focused on the UN Security Council .
It will be the body which represents the ultimate authority of the international community and considers Iraq 's fate .
We should welcome the fact that the UN , established to preserve world peace , is at the heart of the process .
Let us keep it there .
Mr President , the European Union is facing a test of truth .
The attitude which it will shortly be taking towards the prospect of a new Gulf War will be crucial in defining our vision of Europe and our conception of the world .
It will have to shoulder its responsibilities in circumstances which will leave no room for one of those woolly consensuses to which , all too often , we have become accustomed thanks to the common foreign and security policy .
Hemmed in by the pressure from the Bush administration 's call to arms on one side and the demands of European public opinion , which is massively opposed to it , on the other , there can be no middle way : we shall have to choose .
In these circumstances , what message should Parliament be sending to the European Council ?
Its resolution of 30 January was clear on the essential points , and is still entirely in line with our current view .
Allow me to add a few points drawn from the moving experiences of the delegation of over thirty Members of the European Parliament , drawn from eleven countries and four political groups , which has just returned from Iraq .
First of all I should like to brush aside the insidious remarks of those who have tried to portray us as being under an obligation to Saddam Hussein .
On the contrary , even in the opinion of the journalists who were present , ours was the most independent delegation of any in recent times .
After all , our links with the democratic opposition to the Baghdad regime and our absolute rejection of Saddam Hussein are sufficiently well known to enable me not to waste any more time on this unfounded , petty accusation .
I hope , in this respect , that the European Parliament 's ad hoc delegation to Iraq will not stop in New York but will continue to its final destination , Baghdad .
Our delegation , by contrast , will proceed rapidly to New York and Washington , where the anti-war movement is growing day by day , reaching right to the heart of Congress .
Well then , what did we see and hear in Iraq , and what collective conclusions have we drawn ?
First of all there are the accumulated impressions and observations of the life of the population , from Baghdad and its most deprived suburbs to Basra , in the south , and Mosul , in the north , with its enormous camp for Turkish Kurd refugees .
Everywhere , poverty is on a massive scale , and there has been spectacular social regression according to those who knew Iraq before the Gulf War , and even more so compared with what the country was like before the war with Iran .
There is no longer an economy , apart from oil , exports of which have fallen by half due to lack of investment .
In rural areas , all activities have collapsed , desertification is progressing and the population exodus is speeding up .
UN agents are sounding the alarm : one third of the population is suffering from chronic malnutrition , and one third of children are seriously underweight .
Infant mortality has exploded in the last ten years .
More than eight thousand schools are in ruins and need repairs that would now be too costly .
Students have no books , and teachers earn the equivalent of a few euros per month .
In Iraq today , people do not live , they try to survive thanks to the meagre assistance provided by the ' oil for food ' programme , which is financed using revenue from hydrocarbons and is managed directly by the government .
This is the result of twelve years of embargo , and it is absolutely essential to put an end to this unbearable collective punishment .
It is possible to get an idea of the memories left in people 's minds by the war , by going , as we did , to the so-called demilitarised zone in the south of the country .
There , the heaps of countless wrecked tanks , cars , jeeps and buses remind us that , in the final hours of the conflict , even as the Iraqi troops were falling back , a final bombardment claimed more than thirty thousand needless victims .
Against this background , now , the predominant feelings are of fatalism , resignation , and silent traumatisation .
A new war would undoubtedly lead to the catastrophic disruption of supplies of food and water .
It would be a humanitarian disaster .
In our view this reason alone is enough to rule out absolutely any new recourse to war , whatever the circumstances .
There is also another reason , however , namely the risk of destabilising the whole region , starting with the Middle East , where the Palestinians are currently facing one of the worst situations in their history .
The other striking experience in our view was our meeting with the spokesman of the inspectors and the director of the UN inspection centre in Baghdad .
What they told us makes good sense . First of all , as long as the inspectors are present , it will be difficult for Saddam Hussein to manufacture prohibited weapons .
Then again , it is completely impossible to complete such a mission in the space of two months , but given time , resources and the cooperation of the authorities , it will be possible to achieve the international community 's objective , namely to ensure that Iraq no longer constitutes a threat to the world .
This is why we stated publicly , on the spot , that in our view , at the present time , the only chance for Iraq lies in complete cooperation with the United Nations inspectors .
This is also why the Franco-German proposals seeking to strengthen the resources of the inspectors now constitute , in our view , the only acceptable outcome of this crisis , ruling out any military action .
This is the position that our group expects Member States to adopt , especially those among them who sit on the UN Security Council , particularly if they have the power of veto , which if necessary they should use if that is the only way of refusing to sanction the shameful actions of a team which is drunk with power and is currently placing world peace and equilibrium at risk .
What credibility would the United Nations be left with if a policy of giving in to the strongest party were to lead a handful of states to violate so cynically the spirit of the UN Charter ?
Next Saturday , throughout the world , a tidal wave without precedent in many countries will rise up and say no to war .
We hope that as many Members of the European Parliament as possible will be seen at these demonstrations , because Europe has a duty to say no to an imperial machine , whose new strategic doctrine , as published by the Bush administration on 20 September last , illustrates its nature and its scope , namely the cult of military power , the thirst for domination , the claim to be able to act alone , if necessary , on a preventive basis , in order to achieve objectives which have nothing to do with world security .
Following the events of 11 September , we said that we were allied but not aligned .
This handful of Member State leaders who are ready to divide Europe at a signal from the White House needs to be reminded of this principle .
As for the candidate countries , I believe that this is the time to let them know , in all frankness , before the ratification of the accession treaties , that we must be clear about our common ambition : let us not confuse the new Europe with the reform of NATO .
We must keep abreast of European public opinion as it emerges throughout the continent .
In the eyes of an increasing number of our fellow citizens , what the United States has gained in power it is losing in confidence , owing to the Messianic and megalomaniac behaviour of its leaders .
This situation gives the European Union a historic responsibility , not against America , but against the dangerous desire for hegemony on the part of those who claim , on its behalf , to dictate to the world , only to lead that world into chaos .
We are , as I said , facing a test of truth .
History has not yet been written .
Let us hope that those who are holding the cards are able to measure the weight of their responsibility .
President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , in every country in the European Union , the great majority of public opinion is still opposed to the idea of a war in Iraq .
If the objective really being pursued is that of disarming Iraq , we must strengthen the inspection programme .
The inspectors are the alternative to war .
If , on the other hand , the objective is first and foremost to topple the Iraqi regime by force , then we must conclude , here and now , as the American Government has done , that the inspection programme has now become pointless .
We must therefore confirm , at the Security Council on Friday , that the sole objective of Resolution 1441 is to disarm Iraq .
I would remind you that the resolution adopted by the plenary session of the European Parliament on 30 January is clearly in line with this reasoning .
This attitude in no way signifies that we accept the dictatorial nature of the Iraqi Government .
It signifies that we do not want a change of regime to be brought about by war .
That , Mr Poettering , is the attitude of the German Government , and it is not an isolated one : it is also the attitude of the French Government and the Belgian Government , and I hope that next Monday , at the European Council meeting , it will be the unified attitude of the fifteen governments of the Union .
Whatever happens , I am proud of the position adopted by these various governments .
I mentioned public opinion in Europe , but I should also like to talk , though not at such length as Mr Wurtz , about the fate of the people of Iraq .
I too was a member of that delegation of 31 Members .
The contact that we had there , both with the authorities of the UN agency and with the NGO officials , have led us unanimously to conclude that after two wars and the current embargo the Iraqi population is at the end of its tether .
A new war in Iraq would obviously have catastrophic humanitarian consequences , and this was confirmed to us by all the UN workers whom we met in Baghdad .
Is this really how we imagine we are preparing a future for the people of Iraq ?
Finally , in order to give some hope back to the people of Iraq , I should like to emphasise , as I already have done and as we already did at the previous plenary session , the need to change the embargo arrangements .
Before 11 September 2001 , the whole of the international community recognised the negative effects of this embargo , which is helping the dictatorship and keeping the population in a state of dependency while at the same time stifling the Iraqi economy .
I propose that , at the same time as we intensify the inspection programme , there should also be a revision of the mandate of the ' oil for food ' programme , which would make it possible to buy local products , thereby encouraging the Iraqi economy to make a fresh start , and which would also give responsibility for distributing food rations to the UN World Food Programme .
( Applause )
Mr President , this is an exceptionally important debate .
Tensions are certainly rising in an international context .
If we are not careful , and if this crisis is badly handled , this will only result in serious and long-term consequences for us all on many fronts .
It would be tragic if the authority of the United Nations is weakened to a point where it loses international credibility .
That is why it is so necessary to guarantee that the United Nations is involved at each and every stage of the developments to disarm the Iraqi Government of its weapons of mass destruction .
International security is best served in a collective sense , via global institutions such as the United Nations .
In many ways , it is even more important for smaller Member States to have their security protected by an international organisation such as the United Nations .
This is the crux of the issue .
There is genuine good will , support and confidence on the part of the people of Europe in the work of the United Nations .
In fact , no one would dispute for one moment the professionalism and integrity of the United Nations officials who are officially involved in the inspection missions in Iraq .
The United Nations has been involved in the whole process to disarm the Iraqi Government of its weapons of mass destruction .
The United Nations must remain a central player in this ongoing process of disarmament .
Any unilateral action in the coming weeks would gravely and seriously damage the authority and credibility of the United Nations as an organisation involved in maintaining international governance in the world .
Weapons inspections must continue as long as the inspectors themselves and the United Nations Security Council believe that they will serve a useful purpose .
We all want to see a peaceful solution to this issue by guaranteeing the compliance of the Iraqi Government with United Nations Security Council Resolution 1441 .
Saddam Hussein must recognise that the international community wants to resolve this issue by peaceful means .
Disarming Saddam Hussein in a peaceful manner is by far the most acceptable and preferable course of action for all of us .
EU governments are meeting next Monday to review the political situation .
This meeting is taking place at a time of rising tension between the different European Union states .
I certainly hope that this meeting can and will be used to defuse this tension which simply serves no one 's interests whatsoever .
This meeting will take place only a few days after the next United Nations weapons inspectors ' report is published .
We must continue to try to secure a common European position on Iraq , notwithstanding the very clear differences in approach to this issue that now exist between the different EU governments .
We must all try to approach the next few weeks collectively in a calm and reasoned manner .
However , Saddam Hussein must not be allowed to defy the authority of the United Nations as he has sought to in the past .
We must not forget that this is a man who brutally abuses the human rights of his people .
He has used chemical weapons on his own people ; he has invaded Iran and Kuwait and bombed Saudi Arabia and Israel in the past .
This is certainly a track record of brutal belligerence .
Saddam Hussein needs to be disarmed , and he must recognise that the international community will continue to demand that he does disarm .
However , the United Nations must continue to be the organisation that oversees the implementation of United Nations Resolution 1441 or any future resolutions that may be agreed at the UN on this very important and sensitive matter .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that there is only one person at this time , shut up in his 13 palaces , who is happy and feels in a stronger position because of what is happening .
That person is Saddam Hussein .
That person - I do not know whether it is his evil genius or our or your stupidity - has succeeded in very little time in exposing the European crisis , the Nato crisis and what we hope , at least , will not be a United Nations crisis .
Ladies and gentlemen , the alternative to war is not , for democrats , the status quo , that bloodthirsty , cruel dictatorial regime described by many of you as ' peace ' .
The alternative is politics , and it is the role of politics to define what kind of peace , what kind of conditions , what kind of rules .
Yet , here , there have been no political proposals , apart from a few banalities , and , whether this self-important House likes it or not , the only political proposal currently on the table is for a free , democratic Iraq governed by a transition government under the auspices of the United Nations , which would mastermind the democratic transition for Iraq and the Iraqi people .
You see , you are incapable of doing anything except mumbling ' peace ' .
And what does that mean , pray ?
Peace for whom ?
For the oppressed Iraqis ?
You will go out in your millions to demonstrate for peace and Arab public opinion will see you as supporting Saddam Hussein , whether you like it or not .
If you had taken ' A free Iraq ' as your slogan , that would have weakened the conflicting arguments and created such a strong position that even Saddam Hussein would have seen the advantages of going into exile .
That did not happen , and just look at the chaos .
I hope that , at the European Council , this single proposal , which has now been signed by thousands of people , will be the only point of convergence .
I believe it can enable us to regain some of our lost dignity .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have just been listening carefully to the President-in-Office of the Council setting out what the extraordinary summit on the 17th is intended to do .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I think it would be a very good thing if we really could find a common position on the points you have set out .
They are also the essential points of the resolution adopted by this Parliament on 30 January , with which you are no doubt well acquainted .
I would like to take a close look at these four points .
The removal of all weapons of mass destruction from Iraq is not at issue .
That , I believe , is something we can all agree on , as , no doubt , we do on support for UNMOVAC and IAEA , that is to say , for the inspectors ' attempts to bring all this about in Iraq .
Where we will have difficulties , and where it is important that we be clear in our own minds , is with the maintenance of the UN 's primacy .
That international organisation is in charge of the process and must remain so ; it alone is capable of endowing with legitimacy whatever measures will turn out to be necessary in this case .
We also have to make clear our opposition to unilateral courses of action and , most certainly , our opposition to a preventive war .
The final point that needs to be made is that we must try everything that occurs to us as individuals and groups as a means of averting this war and finding a peaceful solution .
There are many possibilities for this .
The latest proposals put forward in Europe point in this direction .
There is one point I would like to address and one prefatory remark I would like to make in order to make Mr Poettering 's speech comprehensible .
This House is perhaps not aware that we had elections in Germany on 22 September last year .
They were won by Gerhard Schröder and not by Mr Stoiber .
That is something with which Mr Poettering cannot yet come to terms , and he believes that his speeches in this Parliament will bring about Mr Schröder 's downfall in Germany .
He can carry on believing that , but I do not believe that this House is particularly interested .
We have quite different problems with which we should be getting to grips .
One of those problems is that with the candidate countries .
I think we have to make abundantly clear to the future members of the European Union the importance of the principle of solidarity , which is in every respect equal to the Copenhagen criteria and all the other technocratic criteria by which - so to speak - their readiness for accession was measured .
I do not find it acceptable for these states , at this point in time , to make affirmations of solidarity , although I too welcome solidarity with the United States of America and have nothing against it .
What is of primary importance , though , is solidarity with the European Union , which is to accept them as Member States and has made massive efforts in order to do so .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , a great deal is being said at them moment about Europe being divided .
I believe that never has Europe been so united at the level of its peoples as it is today in rejecting this war in Iraq .
Opinion in all the Member States and in the candidate countries is between 80 % and 90 % opposed to war .
And I wonder how Mr Poettering , whom I have known for twenty years now , can make himself so remote from the opinions of his own people .
( Applause )
Mr President , I was also part of a delegation from the Verts / ALE Group which went to Iraq last week , and we would like to say to those eminent Members of Parliament who criticised the visit that it was an important and timely initiative for peace , during which we also had occasion to criticise the Iraqi Government in no uncertain terms and call for the resignation of Saddam Hussein .
There is genuine desire for peace in Iraq .
It is a country devastated by sanctions , with teachers and university professors earning as little as USD 10 per month and 3 000 children a month dying of malnutrition and the lack of essential medicine .
If war finally breaks out there , the only means through which the country presently survives - the Oil for Food programme - will come to an end and throw the country into massive chaos .
It will create 900 000 refugees - those are not my figures , they are figures produced by the United Nations - who will flee , not to America , but to countries in the Middle East and Europe , creating an unprecedented humanitarian aid disaster .
If the human tragedy unfolding before us can be resolved peacefully - and I am heartened by the initiative of several countries now , calling for more staff resources and more time for the weapons inspectors and for the possible intervention of a UN peace keeping force - then surely that is the only alternative before us .
If weapons inspectors can avoid the deaths of half a million civilians , then that is surely the only logical course of action we can consider .
This imminent war is also about human rights and democracy in Iraq .
I visited a Kurdish refugee camp in Makhtur in northern Iraq , where 10 000 refugees from Turkey are captives in their own camp .
They are allowed to leave the camp only under strict surveillance .
The latest understanding between America and Turkey , ceding control over the whole of the devolved Kurdish territory in the north of Iraq , is a nightmare scenario in which the Kurds will again face persecution and attack .
How long can the international community allow the continued suffering of the Kurdish people ?
Democracy must apply to all in any new Iraqi administration : to the Kurds , the Shias and the Turkmens and , of course , to the Iraqis themselves .
But it must be achieved through peaceful means , not through the bombing and killing of half a million defenceless men , women and children .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that Mr Le Pen is applying the yardstick in not quite the right way .
If anyone is a mass murderer , it is Saddam Hussein ; of that there is no doubt .
The question is by what means he may be disarmed .
We have to make clear the necessity of using every possibility of a peaceful solution , no matter how difficult that may be in the days that remain to us .
I am very grateful to the Greek Presidency of the Council for having , despite the behaviour of many Member States of the European Union over recent weeks and months , summoned a special summit , in order that , in what one almost has to call a free-for-all in the European Union , we may seize the opportunity to pause for a moment and consider where there might be common ground , where we can still join in playing our part , in order to make a positive contribution .
I hope that they will be supported by many Members of this House and that Monday 's summit will meet with the success it deserves , so that Europe does not end up looking foolish on the sidelines of this dispute .
I think it is important to see that there must be no emotional reflex actions .
Although historical parallels are never a good idea , I sometimes get the feeling that we are in something like the summer of 1914 , and so I believe that we all have to engage in renewed dialogue with each other , so that we Europeans , being united on the essentials , can take our place in the negotiations on the final United Nations resolution , which must aim to make good use of every opportunity for peace , whilst at the same time making it clear that Saddam Hussein has to be disarmed .
If the relevant United Nations resolution makes it possible for this to be done by force if need be - but only if we avoid unilateralism - then we have a chance of doing this .
But the use of force can be avoided only if Europeans present a united front .
All those who have violated this unity have also thrown away Europe 's chance of playing a part in this dispute .
Mr President , on the issue of Iraq , Europe is not divided .
Its governments are , but its public opinion is not .
As we all know , the majority of European public opinion is united against war .
So the discussion on the division of Europe , in relation to the CFSP , must take this aspect into account .
And , incidentally , the European citizens should take this into account when casting their votes in the forthcoming elections .
However , there is an aspect which worries me particularly and that is the high number of governments of European candidate countries who have joined an operation which , rather than reinforcing European values and principles , supports the warlike approach of a non-European superpower whose values , such as the death penalty and the rejection of the International Criminal Court , are not our values .
Having said that , I also have faith in the public opinion of those candidate countries .
I am less optimistic when it comes to the gulf separating us from the United States , or rather the gulf which the Bush Administration is widening every day .
I believe it is a bad sign that some sections of the so-called ' liberal ' press in the United States are tending to jump on the war bandwagon and that in doing so it is furthermore using insults which are not supposedly worthy of it .
Thus , regrettably , we have recently read this sentence in the New York Times : ' Only an imbecile or perhaps a Frenchman could be insensitive to Colin Powell 's arguments ' .
Well , I would declare myself French and insensitive .
This francophobia is being cultivated alongside germanophobia .
It has just been said insultingly of the other unfortunate partner from the old Europe : ' The Germans do not play any important role in international decision-making ' , said by Richard Perle , one of Minister for War Rumsfeld 's tough advisers .
Well , in view of this I would declare myself to be German and a Social Democrat .
( Applause )
In my opinion , though , the greatest and most significant blunder is from Richard Boucher , spokesman for the State Department .
As you know , Bin Laden has just said in a very timely manner that , in the face of the aggression being prepared , all Muslims should support the Iraqis , despite the fact that the latter are socialists and apostates .
Rather than coming to the opposite conclusion , Mr Boucher not only states that this proves the links between Al Qaeda and Iraq , but he also adds : ' We have already said that this is a fight by civilisation to protect the civilised countries ' .
So it now turns out , Mr President , dear friends , that the Bush Administration sponsors war between civilisations .
( Applause )
Mr President , the risk of terrorism is omnipresent now .
The dull and brooding presence of sudden , unanticipated and violent death hangs over military and civilians alike in all our nations .
Links have been found recently between the Al Qaeda network and pro-Saddam forces fighting the free Kurdish people in northern Iraq .
However , a much better established and older terrorist organisation has been working inside Iraq since 1986 : the MKO , or MEK as they are known inside the USA .
The MKO have thousands of members inside Iraq and thousands outside , financed , equipped , armed and trained by the Iraqi army and fully engaged , militarily at least , since 1986 in all of Saddam 's many wars .
The USA froze MEK assets in 1994 , declaring the group under its many aliases to be an international terrorist organisation .
The EU followed the US example as late as 2001 , yet last week the New York Times published a full-page advertisement for the MEK , using the names and photographs of members of the US Congress and claiming their support .
Our recent debates on Iraq have been attended by known members of MKO .
These people are a threat to world security .
Their organisation strikes silently but with lethal impact .
This is Saddam 's private international terrorist army , working against us all .
Whatever our differences on the future treatment of Iraq , for the sake of our citizens and global safety , I urge that far greater security attention be paid to the MKO .
For war or no war , with or without a war , the criminals who make up the MKO continually kill and destroy the innocent among us .
Mr President , last week I went to New York with a delegation from this Parliament , and there we had , I must say , impressive discussions with Dr Hans Blix and Kofi Annan , but we , as a delegation , were also witness to a shameful performance in which four ambassadors from EU countries that are members of the Security Council made not the slightest effort to hide their differences .
That was humiliating , but was it inevitable ?
It is not clear .
I know that it will be extremely difficult to reach agreement at next Monday 's summit of European leaders , but I refuse to accept that this is inevitable .
There are the French proposals to increase the number and power of the inspectors .
Next Friday , there will probably be a cautiously positive report from Dr Hans Blix and Mohamed El Baradei in favour of doing just that .
I would therefore make an urgent plea to the governments of Great Britain , Spain and Italy to stop playing the role of yes men to the United States and to at last seize the very real chances we still have to disarm Iraq by peaceful means .
I urge those same governments not to turn their backs on Europe .
Many Members have said this already this afternoon : all the opinion polls in all the European countries point to one thing : it is not the French government , not the German government and not the Belgian government that have become isolated ; instead it is Tony Blair , José María Aznar and Silvio Berlusconi that have lost touch with European reality .
To the Eurosceptics in this Parliament , and also to the United States , who are quite happy about this discord among the EU Member States and see it as proof that it is unlikely that anything will ever come of one joint European policy , I would say this : this Parliament is a European institution that , in its pronouncement in its last resolution , gave a voice to the vast majority of the European population and that voice says ' no war ' .
I sincerely hope , therefore , that , next Monday , that voice of the vast majority of the European population resounds in the heads and hearts of the European Heads of Government , too .
Mr President , UN Resolution 1441 must be complied with .
Some say that this is exclusively Saddam Hussein 's responsibility .
They are placing the fate of the world in the hands of a psychopathic dictator .
We too have a responsibility , namely to work out how much cooperation is required here and now in order to prevent a war .
When we were in Baghdad last week , the weapons inspectors made it quite clear that , if they were to continue to be present , Saddam Hussein could neither develop new weapons nor use those he already has .
We must give the weapons inspectors more time .
We must support the Franco-German proposal , and we must do so partly on humanitarian grounds .
UNHCR has drawn attention to the fact that 100 000 Iraqis would die in the first 48 hours of a war .
Seven million people would be without food , and 22 million debilitated Iraqis would be without clean drinking water .
There would be a danger of civil war .
Dare we take responsibility for all this by demanding that UN resolutions be complied with to the letter here and now ?
I also think that this debate is too serious to be subordinated to domestic policy .
Mr President , we are glad that the European Council has been called , as my Group has demanded .
I imagine that the Greek Presidency will be holding very intense contacts in order to propose a common position , because intentions are not sufficient .
But it did not take this crisis to demonstrate that one of the gaps that reform of the Treaties must confront is the lack of instruments to promote the common foreign and security policy .
In fact , it is now exactly two years and seven months , Mr Nielson , since the Commission committed itself to adopting an initiative to respond to Parliament 's proposals on common European diplomacy .
We are still waiting .
Meanwhile , the Member States have taken positions .
I believe that the Franco-German axis is very positive in terms of promoting European integration , but with 15 Members , and particularly with 25 , nobody , by definition , can assume they speak for the European Union , and neither do I believe - as some do - that the European identity must by definition be in opposition to the United States .
At this point the European institutions should take concrete initiatives - and I have not seen any - within the framework of Euro-Mediterranean relations , because the danger does not come from Islam but from the Iraqi regime , and also , despite all the difficulties , initiatives to re-launch the battered Middle East peace process .
And since there has been reference to European history , that history shows that complacency , the failure to meet responsibilities in relation to despotic dictators , for whom expansionist ambitions are intrinsic , may be more comfortable in the short term and also more popular - there were no opinion polls in 1938 but now there are - but sooner or later they cost us dearly in terms of freedom and human lives .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , what happens next week will surely not be about playing Europe off against America , but about countering the Bush Doctrine with an unambiguous European position .
The Bush Doctrine is founded on the assumption of the unilateral use of military might , underpinned by a commitment to preventive warfare .
We in Europe must affirm our commitment to a multilateral approach , in other words , to the United Nations .
We in Europe must start by using every means other than military force .
We in Europe reject the theory of preventive strikes against potential dangers .
We affirm our commitment to containing them , above all when this approach has a chance of success .
What does that mean in terms of Iraq ?
I believe it to mean that we all , out of profound conviction , abhor this regime in Iraq and its inhumanity .
Everyone living in Iraq has the right to democratic government .
Anyone who campaigns - as I do - for the rights of the Kurds in Turkey cannot fail to campaign for the rights of Kurds in Iraq .
Yet no one country and no alliance - be it an alliance of the willing or of the unwilling and dependent - may claim for itself the right to simply get rid of disagreeable governments , and , moreover , to use massive force in doing so - not , above all , when a policy of containment has a chance of succeeding .
Everyone living in the region and beyond it has a justified interest in weapons of mass destruction not ending up in the hands of Saddam Hussein .
Is it not possible , though , to use inspections , surveillance flights , and other non-violent means to prevent him from getting his hands on dangerous weapons ?
Europe must surely not allow itself to be characterised by the pursuit of a policy of non-resistance and appeasement in the face of the present dangers .
Is that , though , a reason for denying Europe the right to refuse to let fly with a war waged in the way that President Bush and Mr Rumsfeld want ?
We Europeans contend particularly for democracy and the rule of law in the Arab world , but we do not do it with weapons in our hands .
Even ' old Europe ' seeks a secure source of oil and gas , but do we therefore have the right to wage war for the sake of oil ?
We do not !
If , moreover , doubt is cast on our clear and unequivocal commitment to the UN and to its resolutions , are we in this House not aware of how many UN resolutions have not been complied with ?
Are we not aware that there is a UN resolution , relating to this region , that dates back to 1947 and has still not yet been complied with ?
Even so , we are not willing to go to war , and rightly !
So I do believe that , yes , we are to help the United Nations get what it is entitled to .
Yes , we are to strive for all the resolutions to be complied with , but that must mean all the resolutions - those on Palestine as much as those on Iraq .
Then our position would be a truly European one .
( Loud applause )

Mr President , after both the First and Second World Wars , people demanded ' No More War ! ' , and the international legislation drawn up in order to give this demand tangible form expressly incorporated a clearly defined ban on the use of force , making the use of it subordinate to the United Nations .
They expressly rejected any preventive war of aggression without United Nations approval .
Any preventive strike against Iraq on the part of America and Great Britain would , without a doubt , be in breach of international law , and its consequences for the Middle East , for the Arab world , but also for the world community as a whole , would be incalculable .
If one or more states arrogate to themselves the pre-eminent right to use force and take the law into their own hands , that amounts to unmitigated private warfare , the so-called law of the strong , one of the characteristics of which is that it breeds more private warfare .
Looking at things from this angle , the European Union must do everything possible to avert a unilateral war of aggression .
Europe 's peoples have long known this , and now it is time for European politics to grasp it .
Mr President , I welcome this debate on the eve of Monday 's Summit , for Europe must speak out for peace , in support of all initiatives which can prevent war in Iraq .
The Council , the Commission and Parliament , acting together , can help to bring about a change in the situation in Baghdad .
However , war can be avoided if Saddam Hussein leaves his country or if he can provide concrete evidence that he has destroyed all the prohibited weapons .
Thus far , the dictator has failed to comply with the United Nations ' requests formulated in the 1991 resolution .
If Iraq had behaved like South Africa , Belarus or Kazakhstan , we would not be in this tragic situation now .
The Baghdad regime is guilty of a major violation of the will of the UN .
Iraq has , in practice , failed to comply .
I wonder , and I put it to you , whether it is still possible to prevent conflict .
It may be , but Europe must stand united , the international community must stand united .
Indeed , the Iraqi regime will use each division , each sign of weakening , to attempt to strengthen its own positions .
That is why the Union must speak with a single voice in order to bring about peace , but also in order to ensure the safety of the citizens , who are still at the mercy of terrorist organisations which are threatening to use bacteriological and chemical weapons which may still be in Iraq .
That is why I support the position calling upon the institutions and governments of Europe to follow three guidelines .
Firstly , to strengthen relations between the countries of the Union in order to achieve a common position .
Secondly , to prevent divisions between the United States and the European Union , and , in this regard , I agree with the Italian politician who said that Europe cannot exist if it stands apart from or in opposition to the United States of America .
Thirdly , to make every endeavour to preserve the credibility of the multilateral organisations , NATO and the UN .
In conclusion , Mr President , not forcing Saddam Hussein to respect the United Nations resolution is tantamount to divesting the Security Council of its authority .
This is the line being taken by the Italian Government , which will be at the helm of the Union during the second half of the year .
I feel this is another reason why we must pay careful attention to and support the peace-keeping initiatives emanating from Rome .
Mr President , I have to say that I was more than a little surprised to hear Commissioner Nielson 's opening remarks .
He said that the poverty in Iraq at the moment is a result of the Iran-Iraq war , the Gulf war and ten years of international sanctions .
I heard no mention whatsoever that Saddam Hussein has used weapons of mass destruction to kill hundreds of thousands of his own people .
Nor was there any reference to the fact that Iraq has a corrupt dictatorship which represses freedom , stifles initiative and siphons off money that was intended for food and medicines for its own people under the oil-for-food programme , but is instead used by Saddam to build more of his own palaces .
We must be clear that the villain of this piece is Saddam Hussein - full stop !
Any weakening of that position will make war more , not less , likely .
Commissioner Nielson also said that this is not an institutional problem , but then he gave us an institutional solution .
He said that we could solve all these problems by more QMV .
QMV will not create the political will to have common policies .
We should have a common foreign and security policy - not a single policy but a common policy .
We all have our views on how it is that the common policy set in Copenhagen has suddenly somewhat disintegrated .
The French President is very good at the rhetoric of European cooperation , but not so good at the practical aspects and seems to think common policies apply to everyone but him .
Nonetheless , we must have a common policy .
That much is very clear .
Let us remind ourselves that Resolution 1441 states that Iraq is already in breach of UN resolutions and has been for over ten years and that any obstruction will lead to serious consequences .
We have to be united in accepting that those serious consequences will follow .
Any weakening of that position runs the risk of undermining world global security .
If we are to resolve this situation we need less name-calling and a more coherent approach .
Mr President , 12 years ago this month , we saw the cease-fire after the liberation of Kuwait .
In March 1991 , UN Resolution 686 set out the conditions of the cease-fire .
In April 1991 UN Resolution 687 required Iraq to accept the internationally supervised destruction , removal or rendering harmless of all chemical and biological weapons , agents and components .
In August 1991 , UN Resolution 707 condemned Iraq 's non-compliance .
Now , after 12 years of flouted UN resolutions , 12 years of internal oppression and torture , 12 years of violence against the Kurds and Shi 'ites of his own country , Saddam Hussein has been given a last chance .
And yet , unlike when we took action to rescue the Falklands , Kuwait and Bosnia , this time our constituents are uneasy and uncertain .
They see no unity of purpose among the governments of Europe .
They see Member States declining to comply with their Nato obligation to protect Turkey against the possibility of attack .
Their fears are confirmed that a European defence policy could be dangerous for Nato .
They do not know why action is being proposed , what is supposed to happen at the end of it and which countries might be next .
The guilt of Saddam Hussein is in effect being compounded by the failure of our leaders to explain .
My own Prime Minister , Mr Blair , has abysmally failed to persuade the British people .
He could not even persuade a single one of his own Labour MEPs to vote for his policy .
Unlike Iraq , we are democracies .
Unlike Saddam , Mr Blair , you cannot go to war without heeding the concerns of your own people .
It is time we set out the facts and destroyed the myths .
UN inspectors are not like a team of archaeologists excavating for ancient Mesopotamia in the sand .
It is not their task to play ' seek ' to Saddam 's ' hide ' .
They are there to assess Saddam 's evidence of how , when and where he has destroyed or handed over his weapons of mass destruction .
We do not need more inspectors .
Mr Blix has confirmed that .
We need compliance by Saddam Hussein .
Where are those precursor chemicals , the munitions ?
Where are the tonnes of bulk chemical warfare agents : 1.5 tonnes of VX nerve agent , 10 milligrams of which on the skin results in rapid death ?
I do not believe that any of us want war .
We want peace , but we want a peace that is free from the threat of terrorism .
Saddam Hussein needs to understand that either he complies in full with the UN resolutions or he risks plunging his own people , once again , into the suffering of war .
Mr President , as everyone knows , the Portuguese Prime Minister signed the letter from the European heads of state and government because he believes it is crucial to ensure that Iraq disarms and complies with Resolution 1441 .
The Portuguese Members of the European People 's Party unreservedly support this view because this is a clear position underpinned by the political tradition of the European democracies , based on the transatlantic alliance with the democracy represented by the US and also , it should be remembered , by Canada , Australia and many other democratic countries in the world .
It comes as no surprise that today this approach has the support of the overwhelming majority of European countries , within the European Union , amongst those who will be joining it in the forthcoming round of enlargement , and also amongst other countries on the continent .
Nevertheless , recent events that have led to a crisis in NATO and to the danger of a veto in the Security Council by Member States of the Union pose a serious risk to the unity of Europe .
What we are seeing is that there can be no common foreign policy based on anti-American prejudice and on complacency towards the threat from dictators who present a danger to world peace , such as Saddam Hussein .
We should , therefore , bear in mind some aspects that should not be forgotten :
firstly , Europe does not have strategic defence capacity against the new forms of international terrorism that are bound up with the States that support them ;
secondly , the only strategic defence body of which Europeans countries are members is NATO .
If this body goes into crisis , it is Europe that will suffer most at the hands of its enemies , more than the United States , for example , because Europe cannot defend itself .
The crisis in NATO will make any common defence policy for the European Union impossible ;
thirdly , for the enlargement countries , with their recent experience of totalitarian regimes , security concerns are vital .
Provoking a crisis in NATO will be profoundly damaging to these countries and will cause them to have confidence only in bilateral strategic alliances with the United States , outside the framework of the European Union and of NATO .
It would be extremely bad if these countries ' freedom to take political decisions suffered because they do not agree with some , and I repeat some , countries of the European Union .
Lastly , the effect of a crisis in NATO will isolate the Europeans , and will reinforce the United States ' tendency to act unilaterally .
If the United States and its allies , including the majority of European countries , were to embark on military action in order to ensure compliance with Resolution 1441 without the explicit support of the European Union and with NATO in deadlock , the damage caused to European alliances will be very difficult to resolve .
This is my request to the Council and the Commission ; please use the little time available to you to prevent action being taken to force Iraq to comply with the Resolution without there being unity amongst the countries of Europe .
The majority of the members of the Security Council seem to want to give peace another chance .
They prefer to disarm Iraq by peaceful means , using the weapons inspectors .
More pressure must be put on Iraq to cooperate .
Parliament has contributed to this through its resolution and by a number of MEPs travelling to Baghdad to explain our position .
A majority in Parliament is on the same wavelength , therefore , as the majority of the public .
It is remarkable that the governments of some Member States would rather take the side of the United States than that of their own citizens .
Even Turkey , traditionally a staunch supporter of the United States , considers war to be very risky .
And then people say that France , Germany and Belgium are isolated !
Would it not be the US , rather , that was isolated if they could not bring to bear a whole arsenal of means of coercion ?
It is not enough to make every effort to stave off a military invasion of Iraq .
Peaceful means must indeed be used to bring Iraq not only to disarm , but also to change , to respect human rights , to respect the right to life and respect for the diverse peoples and cultures within the Iraqi borders and to respect for all the peoples in the region .
( Text abbreviated in accordance with Rule 120 ( 7 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
It now seems to be an established fact that the Government of the United States is determined to go to war against Iraq , whatever the Security Council decides .
With or without the authorisation of the Security Council , this war is unjustifiable .
Of course we must hope that reason will prevail within the Security Council and that , if there is a war , it will be formally contrary to international legality .
Those thirty or so of us who have just been to Iraq were able to see for ourselves the state of material and moral dilapidation of the country , trapped as it is between a ludicrous and bloody dictatorship and the sanctions imposed by the international community .
The Iraqi army is merely a shadow of its former self , and is formidable only in the hallucinations of the American President .
What concerns the oil-obsessed Government of the United States is of course control of the black gold , and not the weapons of mass destruction which , as the experts know full well , Iraq does not possess .
This war will be another crushing blow for people who are already suffering greatly , particularly the Kurdish population .
Among those people it will give rise to lasting and justified hatred of the West , and will cause innumerable tragedies .
This crisis shows how far Europe still has to go before it becomes anything other than an integrated economic area .
( Written statement abbreviated in accordance with Rule 120 ( 7 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
The next item is the debate on oral questions to the Council and the Commission ( B5-2 / 2003 and ? 5-3 / 2003 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the 2002 Annual debate on an area of freedom , security and justice .
Mr President , Minister , ladies and gentlemen , the annual debate on an area of freedom , security and justice must be seen against the broader backdrop of the progress that has actually been made in the course of the last year , as a result of the commitment of the successive Spanish and Danish Presidencies . This debate must also be seen in the context of the forthcoming enlargement and of the work of the Convention on the Future of Europe .
First of all , I wish to congratulate Baroness Ludford on the quality of the questions she has put to the Commission and to answer the first of these by saying that the Commission still takes the view that the future Treaty on the area of freedom , security and justice should enshrine the principle of the Commission 's exclusive right of legislative initiative .
Indeed , we feel that the transfer of the majority of legislative aspects to the codecision process will only be coherent if we retain the framework of the Commission 's right of legislative initiative .
Giving the right of legislative initiative to a Member State or to some Member States will always cause problems and confusion in implementing common codecision rules .
I would add that the Commission 's right of initiative is today the most appropriate , precisely because it is exercised in the framework of a set of interinstitutional programmes agreed with the European Parliament and with the European Council itself .
With regard to the second question , dealing with the priority given to combating terrorism and illegal immigration , the Commission believes that these were not only priorities in 2002 , but will also be priorities in 2003 .
The European Union has demonstrated its ability to respond to the terrorist threat by adopting two important instruments : the European arrest warrant and the framework decision on combating terrorism .
From the Commission 's point of view , the final text of these two legislative initiatives will ensure a healthy balance between the objectives intended to facilitate investigations and prosecutions against terrorists , on the one hand , and , on the other , the protection of defendants ' rights , but I shall return to this issue a little later .
The Seville European Council gave new impetus to speeding up all aspects of implementing the programme adopted in Tampere with a view to creating an area of freedom , security and justice .
New priority has been given to measures intended to combat illegal immigration and to establish the common management of our external borders .
At the same time , however , the Seville Council also laid down objectives and timetables for adopting the other decisions in the field of asylum and immigration policy laid down in the Tampere Council conclusions .
The Commission responded quickly to this new priority by presenting its proposals for an integrated management system for external borders , that was generally well received by the Council and included in the action plan that was not only approved by the Council last June , but was also recently endorsed by the European Parliament in a resolution voted on last month .
This progress must of course be assessed in light of the timetable and programmes for measures established at Tampere . Progress must also be in line with an approach that is balanced between the three components : freedom , security and justice .
The Commission emphasised once again in the last scoreboard , of 16 December 2002 , that there are still delays in adopting asylum and immigration issues .
We hope that the Greek Presidency will , as the Minister has just stated , give a commitment to speeding up work on adopting this legislation within the framework laid down by the Seville European Council .
In relation to the fourth issue raised by Baroness Ludford , I wish to say that the Greek Presidency has given pride of place on its agenda to the debate on family reunification and on the status of long-term residents in the European Union , together with the directive that Parliament debated yesterday , on the entry of third-country nationals for the purpose of paid employment and with the directive on the conditions of entry and residence for citizens from third countries for the purpose of study .
We will consequently have the basic legislative framework in the field of immigration policy that is being discussed in Council .
I would also add the initiative that the Commission will be adopting next month to present a communication focusing on the issue of integrating third-country nationals into European reception societies .
With regard to the future of decision-making processes , the Commission welcomes the conclusions reached by the Convention 's working group on Justice and Home Affairs , because it acknowledges that in issues of asylum , immigration and other policies involving freedom of movement , the general rule for decision-making must be to adopt legislative acts under the codecision process , in which the Council reaches agreement by qualified majority .
I also welcome the fact that this conclusion has been reached by the Convention 's working group with a broad majority .
In terms of changes to the Treaty , the Commission is encouraging the Convention to adopt the rule of a more explicit legal basis for developing a common European asylum system that goes beyond the mere minimum common rules that the Council is currently discussing .
As to the issue the honourable Member raised concerning the usefulness and effectiveness of the networks , the Commission wishes to state clearly to Parliament that its assessment of the work undertaken by the networks that have real operational duties , such as Europol , Eurojust , or bodies such as the Chiefs of Police task-force and the judicial networks in civil and criminal matters , is positive .
Nevertheless , we must emphasise that not all networks present the same added value and that the Council should be more particular in selecting its priorities for establishing these networks .
With regard to the relationship between the Commission and the European Parliament , the Commission is attempting scrupulously to comply with the framework agreement signed by the two institutions on 5 July 2000 .
In this context , I intend , as early as next week in Brussels , to inform the European Parliament 's Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs of developments in the negotiations underway on readmission agreements with third countries .
With regard to the issue of evaluating the way in which framework decisions are transposed into the national legal system of each State , The Commission wishes to draw Parliament 's attention to the fact that evaluation methods vary from framework decision to framework decision .
Our view is that priority should now be given to the framework decision on combating terrorism , which should be transposed by all Member States by the end of 2002 .
We are gathering information from the Member States on this transposal and we hope to be able to present the corresponding report by the end of 2003 .
As always , the Commission is paying particular attention to achieving the necessary balance between respect for the law and for the protection of people 's fundamental rights and the fight against organised crime and terrorism .
To this end , following a recommendation of the European Parliament , the Commission has created a network of experts in fundamental rights .
This year 's report on this network of experts focuses in particular on the compatibility of the measures adopted by the Member States and by the European Union on the fight against terrorism and respect for fundamental rights .
Finally , with regard to the rapporteur 's last question on the framework decision on procedural guarantees for persons standing trial , the Commission welcomes the Greek Presidency 's intention to include this matter in the discussion at the Véria informal Council at the end of March .
For our part , before this Council we will be adopting a Green Paper on common rules for procedural guarantees for persons standing trial anywhere in the Union .
This Green Paper will give civil society and legal professionals , in both current and future Member States , the opportunity to contribute to the debate , with a view to our presenting a proposal for a framework decision that we believe must be scheduled by the end of this year .
The Commission is consequently committed to establishing minimum common rules in this field , as stated in its presentation of the annual work programme for 2003 .
I wish to conclude by announcing that work is also underway on guarantees for equal treatment in gathering and processing evidence and the on the right to remain silent during trial . We believe these matters to be particularly important for creating a common base , a common platform in criminal cases , in order to make mutual trust and cooperation between judicial authorities more effective in the fight against organised crime .
In short , the progress that has been made is unequivocal and undeniable .
They are not balanced in all aspects of the area of freedom , security and justice , but in light of this experience we can help the Convention on the Future of Europe to overcome the main institutional and procedural difficulties to ensure that the Union becomes an area of peace , prosperity , freedom , cohesion , security and solidarity .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by expressing my appreciation for Baroness Ludford 's question , which , being comprehensive in its scope , was a very good one .
I cannot do other than endorse the rapporteur 's constitutional thinking on the subject of asylum and immigration policy .
We need majority voting in the Council , Parliament needs to have the power of codecision , and the right of the Member States to propose legislation needs to be limited , as it is mainly used for reasons of domestic policy and rarely advances the cause of European Union .
She is also right in her conclusion that the EU is a long way from implementing what was decided at Tampere .
Whilst Baroness Ludford regards the Council as being to blame for this , I take the contrary view that the Commission must shoulder a large share of the responsibility for it .
Commissioner Vitorino , although the Treaties require minimum standards of you , you wanted to go ahead and generously broaden the scope of both the Convention on Refugees and the provisions of national law , and your attempts to do so failed at Council level on many occasions .
It might be a good idea if you were to slowly learn the error of your ways ; your new proposal on the reunification of families certainly gives us hope that you are willing to do so .
It so happens , Baroness Ludford , that minimum standards are often the lowest common denominator .
The Group of the European People 's Party welcomes the Commission 's commitment to combating illegal immigration , which demonstrates , Commissioner Vitorino , that you can see that there are two sides to the coin and that you are getting down to work .
Let us turn to counter-terrorism , an area in which 2002 has seen great progress made .
The common definition of terrorism , the European arrest warrant , and the reinforcement of Europol were important milestones on the road towards terrorism being effectively combated in Europe .
I would like to take this opportunity to specifically call upon the Council to make use of the funds we have allocated to Europol , which amount to over EUR 3 million , for if they do not do so , nobody will be in a position , in the event of one or more attacks in Europe , to coordinate or to lead police operations .
Your disputes about competence will not , at any rate , meet with much public sympathy .
Baroness Ludford has diagnosed an imbalance between the methods of counter-terrorism on the one hand and guaranteed fundamental rights on the other .
I do not see that such is the case .
Laws at national and European level have made very good provision for data protection , we have extensive systems for defence and legal protection , and direct intervention can , of course , still only be carried out at national level .
She is right , however , to demand that Europol and Eurojust - which latter has had a successful start - should be brought within the Community sphere , for that , in the long term , is the only way to guarantee effective democratic and juridical control and to prevent duplication of structures .
It is clear to see that , if Eurojust were to be brought within the Community sphere , it could take over OLAF 's tasks as well as ensuring that the Community 's financial interest was protected .
As well as that , though , the Schengen Agreement and its associated information system have to be brought within the Community sphere .
I might add , by the way , that the plethora of information systems will function effectively only when they are interconnected and equipped with standard rules on data protection , which could also be monitored by the new data protection commissioner .
At the same time , we also need a new coordination body for the external borders , by which I mean a sort of ' Eurobord ' or ' Euroguard ' .
Open internal borders mean that it is in the interest of all Member States that Poland 's eastern border , the waters of the Italian Adriatic , and the Straits of Gibraltar should be secured , and this calls for solidarity on their part .
I might add that the EU has wasted years of valuable time when it comes to these matters , which are closely connected with its own enlargement .
For far too long , Commissioner Verheugen has been lulling the EU to sleep and reassuring it that no reforms are needed .
The second generation SIS has now been delayed , and frameworks for common border control are also only in their early stages - all this with enlargement one year away .
These are issues where we have to work , even now , much more closely with the candidate countries than we have done before .
We all have a long road ahead of us before we can present the Europe of freedom , security and justice to its citizens , but we have to take the first steps , and , Commissioner , let me add that the Convention has to become even more courageous .
Mr President , I would firstly like to congratulate the rapporteur on the questions she has addressed to the Council and the Commission , which anticipate a resolution from this House and which I hope will receive strong support .
And I would also like to thank the Council and the European Commission for their comprehensive replies .
Firstly , I agree with both the Council and the Commission that it is fair to say that we have made a lot of progress in the field of cooperation on criminal matters .
So much so that it now seems reasonable - and I hope that everyone agrees - that we should expect and ask for the proposals which the Commissioner has put forward here , more than once , in relation to improving judicial standards in the European Union and creating common minimum standards which guarantee to the European citizens that this framework of criminal cooperation reinforces not only their freedom and security but also the efficiency of justice .
I believe that this is really positive .
In relation to the fight against this type of cross-border crime , I would simply like to draw attention to the Conference which took place in Brussels with regard to trafficking in women and children .
I believe that the citizens expect us to deal with this issue from a Community point of view .
We adopted a declaration , the Brussels Declaration , which had our full support , and I believe we should take the lead in the implementation of the measures it called for .
With regard to asylum and immigration , the truth is that I have been perplexed all day .
I do not understand what is going on here .
We have often said in this House that we endorsed the Tampere agreements , that we wanted a common , balanced and global immigration policy , in the way that all the Ministers , including those from the PPE group , had stated in Tampere .
We all agree that the framework referred to by Mr Vitorino is the one we need in order to create this common area for immigration and asylum , in the terms indicated by the Commission and undoubtedly in the terms which inspired the debates in the Parliament and the Council .
Now it seems that , on the contrary , we are only calling for certain minimal things in the field of immigration .
I do not understand .
I hope , Mr von Boetticher , that you are not in the government at some time in the future and that we do not hear you saying , ' This is a European problem which must be dealt with from a European perspective ' , as so many Prime Ministers affiliated to the PPE do , quite rightly .
I hope that this can carry on and to this end I hope that the Convention will grant Parliament and the Council co-decision powers , as the Commissioner requested , in the field of justice , freedom and security , because the citizens must be secure in this area , and that the Commission will have its right to initiative returned so that progress can be made logically and coherently .
Mr President , in the course of 2002 we saw a broad debate and a profusion of legislation on matters relating to what is known as the area of freedom , security and justice .
For obvious reasons it was felt necessary to establish more ambitious targets in areas such as illegal immigration , border control , the European arrest warrant , asylum and police and judicial cooperation , amongst others .
Something that has also made a positive contribution to these developments , and I cannot deny this , is the dynamism of Commissioner Vitorino , who is responsible for these matters within the Commission and whom I should like to take this opportunity to congratulate .
We cannot forget , however , that these matters are of enormous political sensitivity .
We are invading the traditional sovereign borders of the Member States , a fact that cannot be ignored or played down .
Recent international events are a clear reminder that the European Union is still made up of sovereign States .
It is also the rights and the obligations of their citizens , however , that are at stake here and which must be acknowledged and defined with a sense of responsibility , in an attempt to respond to the needs imposed on us all by the complex current situation .
Mr President , in the short time I have left , I shall concentrate on the new terrorist threats , which require action at European level and solidarity at international level .
In fact , the way in which we approach terrorism these days is completely different to the approach pursued in the 1970s and 1980s .
We know that the terrorist threat today is hard to see and is underpinned by motives other than political ones .
As a rule , it acts illegitimately , I repeat , illegitimately , in the name of a given civilisation in the aim of setting this on a collision course with our own .
Today 's form of terrorism is well known : it selects its targets according to the visibility of the results of its action , which incidentally makes all of us and our institutions possible targets .
We also know that it is extremely mobile and that it uses , as we all do , modern means of communication .
We know that its sources of funding are diverse and that this funding is often obtained under the guise of promoting respectable aims .
No less importantly , we know that it certainly has access to arms of mass destruction , especially chemical and biological weapons .
Against this backdrop , we must of course provide responses that go beyond the national sphere and even the spheres of action for justice and domestic security , which naturally highlights the importance of this debate of ours .
The presence of these new terrorist threats undeniably requires action at European level .
Unilateral national action is no longer sufficient to ensure that our populations are protected .
These new concerns do not mean , however , that we should indefinitely extend the rules of Community initiative and of qualified majority in this entire area .
We believe that these developments do not necessarily mean that the Union 's procedures must all be produced or implemented in the same way .
I am sure that it will be possible to take decisions on issues of Justice and Home Affairs by simplifying the structure of the pillars , without this changing the balance of the necessary cooperation between governments and national authorities in conjunction with the system of joint management developed by the European Union .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to make use of today 's debate , in the presence both of the Commissioner and the ambitious Council Presidency , to direct our attention to the potential influx of a massive number of refugees , triggered by a war in Iraq that we hope will not happen , but is nonetheless possible , and the related subject of the Refugee Fund , which was set up two years ago .
It makes it possible for us , in accordance with Article 6 of the Council Decision establishing the European Refugee Fund , to take special steps in the event of a mass influx of refugees .
What I now propose is that you , as representatives of the Commission and of the Council , make every conceivable preparation for such an eventuality , so that the Member States may not be left to their own devices , but may be supported in the manner provided for in Article 6 .
You should be allocating up to 80 % of the funds required , but this requires that you take the necessary precautions right now .
The Member States are to be urged to take the necessary precautions by appointing authorities to which the Commission may have recourse .
I am addressing both the Council and the Commission when I propose that consideration should be given to setting aside funds for eventual allocation to international aid organisations providing the relevant help on the spot , which should be the primary and most efficient form of aid .
I propose , thirdly , that you should not leave the Member States to deal with this potentially tragic situation on their own , but should , in advance of events , give consideration to spreading the load of dealing with the people involved , as we know that a few countries were obliged to shoulder most of the burdens resulting from the crisis in the Balkans .
We should be learning from our mistakes and preventing such a thing from recurring in future , so we should be preparing to apportion the people involved to individual Member States .
I would very much like to know how , and to what extent , you envisage acting upon these proposals .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the reason I am taking the floor in this debate is that I would like to make two basic observations on how this House cooperates .
Mr von Boetticher , in the few parts of his speech that were any good , pointed out that we will , in future , have to do more legislative work if we are to achieve what we want , that being the bringing within the Community sphere of more aspects of the European Union currently covered by policy on the area of freedom , security and justice .
In this sector , too , majority decision-making and the codecision procedure would have to be normative , with the Commission , rather than the Member States , having the right to initiate legislation .
Very good !
That is something I can only endorse .
If , however , that is how he thinks , then what is needed today is a sober inventory of the present situation , so that , if we want to overcome the challenges of the future , we are equipped to do so and able to fashion a policy that makes sense and will work .
So what is the situation today ?
Commissioner Vitorino is thinking up something good .
By making proposals , he is discharging the obligations laid on him by the scoreboard that he announced after Tampere .
What he proposes goes too far for the Council , on the assumption that they actually read the stuff .
The proposals then end up in Parliament , and Parliament adds to them and forwards them to the Council .
What does the Council do ?
It throws them in the waste-paper basket .
Such is the reality of the situation today .
Now , I do not want to tread on the Council 's toes .
I am quite convinced that the Greek Presidency of the Council will read everything .
Do not take what I say too personally .
What we need in future , though , is a different way of making laws , one in which the balance between the three institutions involved is safeguarded .
This will involve all three bodies being willing to compromise .
The Commission must be willing to compromise , as indeed it is , as all of us who know Commissioner Vitorino can tell you , even if he has to put up with being given an unjustified battering in the German press by young and rather immature MEPs .
The Council 's willingness to compromise is a matter of doubt , as the Council 's policy is not - primarily , at any rate - guided by European standards , but by the demands of every single Member State 's domestic policies .
That is wrong .
And thirdly , it is one of our institution 's failings .
It is at this point that Members of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats should prick up their ears and listen .
I am now making them an offer , and this is the first time - but not , I hope , the last - that they will receive such an offer in this form .
Let us talk together , so that we are not always coming up with the minimum of consensus , but can get the legislative work done .
What are your demands , and what are ours ?
Where are you prepared to give some ground on your position , and where are we prepared to give some ground on our own ?
Where , then , can we achieve real compromises that make real law-making possible ?
Business in this place has hitherto been conducted on the basis that anyone who is not on my side is against me , and that I will not vote with anyone who does not back up my position 100 % , so this House ends up passing fortuitous texts by fortuitous majorities .
If we want to do real legislative work , then I invite you to discuss compromise , but you will then have to demonstrate your capacity for it .
This will involve you putting some of the hardliners in your ranks on the lead .
But , Mr von Boetticher and Mr Pirker , being made of the stuff you are , I am sure you will manage that .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the area of freedom , security and justice is something that many Members of this House still imagine to be a highly advanced position adopted by a European Union that offers its citizens the greatest possible degree of freedom and protection from the State .
It is not only in the last year that events have proved the opposite to be the case : repressive measures are enjoying a boom , with the European Union and its Member States forcing through controls on the EU 's external borders no less than in its interior .
On top of that , there is increased monitoring of personal data and of free communication .
Biometric means are being used to evacuate privacy of any meaning .
Finally , the EU 's racist character is enhanced still further by the many laws aimed at so-called ' foreigners ' , with the introduction of the Eurodac system and the development of the Schengen Information System representing only the tip of the iceberg .
This security means , then , the greatest possible security for the State , whereas freedom would require a quite different policy - some would call it a more mature one - backing effective data protection , the demolition of Fortress Europe and the repeal of all racist special laws , including those on the right to citizenship .
Such , though , is not the case .
What we are building here is a Union of state security , control and monitoring .
Baroness Ludford 's Liberalism , does not , unfortunately , extend to addressing any of these points in her question .
Mr President , the President-in-Office has just reminded us that the Tampere Conclusions in the area of Freedom , Security , Justice and Home Affairs proclaimed in 1999 the principles of transparency and democratic control for the protection of citizens ' human rights .
In the Kingdom of Spain on 13 February 1983 , that is to say 20 years ago , Joseba Arregi , a Basque political prisoner , died under torture while he was in police custody .
That was 20 years ago tomorrow .
In 2002 , 634 politically motivated people were arrested .
127 of them subsequently claimed in court that they had suffered ill treatment or torture .
Have the Council and the Commission received clear information about this issue from the Spanish Government ?
Do the Council and the Commission consider that the transparency principle has been respected by the Spanish Government ?
Last year the Spanish Government proposed the banning of several social organisations - media and cultural associations - that had denounced the political repression suffered by Basque dissidents .
Through a Spanish initiative , the European Union has drawn up a black list of associations and individuals accused of specific or tacit support for terrorism .
The accused have neither the legal means of defence nor effective access to the courts .
Do the Council and the Commission consider there to have been real enforcement of the democratic control principle with regard to Spain ?
Will the Council and the Commission put forward a judicial instrument in the new texts being prepared for those included on the European Union 's black list ?
I would like to thank Baroness Ludford and express my recognition of the effort she has made in this important area .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I shall , of course , begin by congratulating our rapporteur , Baroness Ludford , on the excellent report she has contributed to this debate .
This annual debate on the area of freedom , security and justice provides Parliament with a new opportunity to express its dissatisfaction and frustration with regard to the paralysis affecting the third pillar as a result of the lack of political will on the part of the Member States , and despite the ongoing efforts of the Commission .
Important Commission initiatives , both before and after 11 September 2001 , remain deadlocked in Council or are still waiting to be transposed or ratified by the Member States .
The States appear to wish to compensate for their inability to establish policies that will provide a structure for the area of freedom , security and justice by putting forward a torrent of proposals based on their right of initiative . As a rule , these proposals make a minuscule , if not counterproductive , contribution to the objectives that these States themselves have imposed on successive European summits .
We are seeing a procession of outlandish proposals , by which I mean proposals that are not part of any plan or form part of the Commission scoreboard .
These are arbitrary proposals of limited or no scope , incoherent , sometimes dictated by national political agendas , proposals that tend to turn the third pillar into a universe in chaos , continuously expanding in all directions - a legal and bureaucratic novel without full stops .
The European Parliament has the duty to condemn this impasse , which is the result of the political inability to date of the Council and the Member States to have brought into force a single measure on the package on combating terrorism that has been drawn up by the Commission or come originally from it and planned in its scoreboard .
The gulf between the discourse of political leaders , in particular , of government representatives , and this resulting in practical actions is reaching scandalous proportions in the field of fighting transnational crime .
Furthermore , in the areas covered by Title IV , we are still seeing a persistent imbalance , rightly condemned by the rapporteur , between the relative ease with which agreements are concluded on the repressive elements of controlling immigration and the ongoing inability to establish common policies in the field of asylum and regulating legal immigration , specifically in the field of civil rights and social integration .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I must congratulate Commissioner António Vitorino on his efficiency and hard work that have led to the progress made , which has been particularly noticeable in the last six months .
2002 was more positive than previous years and we saw a considerable number of initiatives in the field of justice and home affairs .
The proposals for a European arrest warrant and for a framework decision on terrorism that have already been referred to , for example , are proof of the Union 's ability to implement the objectives set by the Treaty of Amsterdam when the need to act is combined with the will to do so .
Nevertheless , and despite the progress that has been made , as Baroness Ludford has already observed and as was also stated at Laeken , I quote , ' new boosts and new guidelines are needed to make good the delay seen in certain areas ' .
On the one hand considerable progress has been made in stepping up cooperation between the agencies responsible for implementing the law on the mutual recognition of judgments in criminal matters , on the European arrest warrant and on harmonising criminal and anti-terrorist legislation . On the other , much still remains to be done in order to achieve a practical and effective system for safeguarding citizens ' rights .
It cannot be emphasised too much , as indeed Commissioner Vitorino emphasised , that it is crucial to maintain a balance between the three components of the same concept , which together constitute the area of freedom , security and justice .
In other words , there can be no security without freedom and justice .
Another source of regret , as various speakers have said today , is the excessively frequent use of the right of initiative by the Member States , who have increased the number of proposals that this Parliament has felt obliged to reject because they lack coherence , clarity and even usefulness and which were only guided by the requirements of national politics or to placate the media .
Furthermore , the imposition of matters pertaining to the first pillar and of means that fall under the third pillar has been an ongoing source of difficulties .
Decisions need to be taken , especially in areas such as data protection .
With regard to Europol and Eurojust , it is regrettable that there is still only an indirect democratic division of responsibility , which is fragmented and insufficiently limited .
To conclude , Mr President , the reduced level of democratic legitimacy that we are still seeing is also a matter of regret .
Parliament is rarely consulted and often on political agreements that have already been concluded in Council , which means that our contribution is an irrelevant and useless document .
Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking all those who have contributed to this debate and , above all , Baroness Ludford for her excellent contribution .
I shall just address a few of the questions raised during the debate , starting with a remark by Mr Schulz .
We should all resist the temptation to reduce the debate on asylum and migration to a purely ideological debate .
It is indeed tempting and very easy to do this by using slogans to manipulate emotions .
However , if we reduce the debate to such positions , I wonder whether we are really addressing the dramatic problems that asylum and migration raise for thousands of people all over the world and especially in the European Union .
It might even be tempting to make the Commission the bad guy .
I am used to performing several roles , but this would be a new one for me .
However , the Commission has always tried to put forward the right balance between an efficient policy combating illegal migration and , at the same time , defining the grass roots of a proactive , positive policy on migration .
This is not for ideological reasons .
We believe that if we do not succeed in having a clear , transparent and coordinated policy on legal migration , we will not succeed in the fight against trafficking in human beings and illegal migration .
If I appear too generous , I would like to recall that the Commission put forward a proposal for a framework decision on combating trafficking in human beings .
The Commission presented the action plan on illegal migration that was taken on board by the Council .
The Commission presented the action plan on external border controls that was taken on board by the Council .
The Commission presented the proposal on the return action plan .
The Commission made the proposal on a new Schengen information system .
The Commission proposed the creation of a visa database .
If this is being too generous , I admit that I have some differences with some Members regarding the notion of generosity .
When it comes to the new terrorist threat , as Mr Queiró has emphasised , we recognise that we are confronted with a phenomenon we know little about .
We are not yet at the stage of being prepared to face the new profile of the terrorist threat , not only as far as the possibility of terrorist attacks is concerned - and one must be prepared for whatever might happen in the near future , in the light of the evolution of international events - but also in terms of a key question you have raised : the financing of the terrorist networks .
Therefore I hope that during 2003 , Member States will be able to make effective progress in achieving concrete results and adopt legislation to combat the financing of terrorism .
This should include not only the illegal financing of terrorism , but also the ' legal ' financing of terrorism in the European Union , including offshore centres on its territory .
I would like to confirm to Mrs Terrón i Cusí that the Commission intends to set up a network of experts during spring 2003 , thus following up the Brussels Declaration .
I now turn to the issue raised by Mr Coehlo .
Difficulties abound in dealing with certain specific and very sensitive issues because we have a split between the first and third pillars ; data protection is a very good example of this .
We should emphasise that there is a clear sign from the European Convention that the values of freedom , security and justice cannot be held hostage by a schizophrenic division between pillars that is blocking us every day .
Finally , on the very important issue raised by Mr Pirker , I can guarantee that we are preparing for the possibility of a mass influx .
I do not want to anticipate the evolution of international events , but we have learned much from the experience in Kosovo .
We have the directive on temporary protection .
It has been transposed into national legislation by Sweden , Finland and Belgium , and other Member States already have provisions in their national legislation concerning sudden influxes of migrants and refugees .
Therefore , to deal with the most urgent situations we can mobilise , in the very short term , the reserve of the fund for European refugees .
My colleague , Commissioner Nielson , together with ECHO , and in close coordination with UNHCR , is looking at the possibility of supporting refugees in the region .
I hope that this time things will work much better , thanks to the progress that has been achieved as far as temporary protection is concerned .
I would like to pay my sincere respects to Parliament .
If we have problems in terms of progress during this year Parliament cannot be blamed for any kind of delay .
It has always given its opinions on time .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be held on 11 March .
Mr President , I just wish to make a point of order .
There was no simultaneous interpretation into Portuguese during the last speech .
I would therefore ask you to have someone look into this matter .
Mr President , it is , in my view , clearer than ever nowadays that there is a need for an international legal system , and it is also becoming ever clearer that , if an international legal system is to be developed that is viable and that applies to large as well as small countries , it is the EU that must play the decisive role and be the guarantor of large , as well as small , countries ' complying with a set of international ground rules .
I therefore think it important also to get the Council and the Commission to follow up this very important matter of how best to emphasise to one 's partners , and in any future situation , that to use anti-personnel mines , cluster bombs and depleted uranium is to use weapons that strike indiscriminately , that hit civilian as well as non-civilian targets , that hit the innocent as well as the guilty and that can be dormant for a long time and only make themselves felt perhaps years after a possible war is over .
These are weapons that are contrary to the provisions of the Geneva Convention on how we are to treat one another in the course of war .
I therefore think the Council and the Commission should understand that , firstly , we must prevent these types of war crime from being committed .
We must prevent these weapons being used in possible future conflicts and , clearly , we are all nowadays thinking of Iraq in this connection .
There are , however , other places too in which this could be relevant .
That was the first aspect .
The second is to follow up those crimes that have already been committed .
In that connection , I should also very much like to hear the Council 's and the Commission 's answers regarding how these crimes are to be followed up and how it is to be ensured that those who are responsible for using weapons in ways that constitute war crimes are dragged before the International War Crimes Tribunal and prosecuted , for it is not enough for us to have a set of ground rules .
We must also be prepared to apply them , and we must be prepared to apply the sanctions available to us at present .
It is the EU that must take this task upon itself .
Otherwise , we shall end up in a world in which only the strong make the decisions , in which only the strong can do as they see fit and in which weak countries are entirely subject to the diktat of a stronger power .
I eagerly await the Council 's and the Commission 's answers .
Mr President , as we are all aware , dormant explosive devices , landmines and cluster bombs are among the weapons that can cause especially cruel injuries and mutilations .
Those of us who have been to countries in conflict will know the mutilations and wounds with which one is confronted there . I myself became familiar with these sights in Central America .
Parliament has , in various resolutions , insisted on the implementation of the 1997 Ottawa Convention , which banned the use of landmines .
It is with reference to this that I want to praise the Commission for the excellent work it has done , not only in the field of mine clearance , but also in educating people as to why landmines have to be banned .
Work is progressing at present on preparations for the next conference on the revision of the Ottawa Convention , which is to be held this September in Bangkok , by which time I very much hope that those European states that have not yet ratified the Ottawa Convention will have made good their omission .
I look forward to hearing what the President-in-Office of the Council will have to say in response to this question .
I think he might well be about to bring Parliament good news from Greece .
The worldwide campaign against landmines has already made great progress .
Considerable efforts are currently being made to get belligerent parties other than states to sign up to the Ottawa Convention .
This work is being undertaken by a non-governmental organisation - ' Appell de Genève ' - and I believe that we can rejoice that such work is being done by non-governmental organisations when state bodies cannot carry it out .
In Somalia , for example , 15 organisations and belligerent parties , none of them part of any state apparatus , have signed the Convention .
Another problem of a particularly shattering nature comes in the form of cluster bombs , whose victims include innocent civilians ; the injuries these bombs inflict are so horrific and their effects so indiscriminate , that they should be prohibited outright .
Previous speakers have described this , and I wish to touch on it only very briefly .
You are all familiar with the descriptions of the horrendous injuries resulting from the deployment of cluster bombs .
The particularly dreadful thing about it is that the splinters from the cluster bombs that remain in the human body are almost never capable of being removed .
Not only are the effects of these bombs indiscriminate in that they can strike civilians as much as soldiers , but they are also imprecise in the area they affect , which amounts to something like 350 football fields every time a cluster bomb is dropped .
This makes the precision bombing of military targets impossible , so that there is an increased risk of innocent people being injured .
Finally , these bombs also vary in their effect over time , since , if they do not explode , they can remain live for years to come .
It was in December 2001 that Parliament last recalled the 1980 UN agreement on certain conventional weapons and demanded an immediate moratorium on the use of cluster bombs .
A moratorium can clearly only be the second best solution until such time as a ban on these inhuman weapons becomes enforceable , but I believe that imposing a moratorium in the first instance is the pragmatic way to go about things .
It is here that the European Union could , by its actions , give a very good example .
Mr President , I wish to state that the current international situation is not preventing us from adopting the necessary objectivity in this debate on unexploded ordnance and depleted uranium ammunition .
It will therefore be easier to assess all the consequences underlying this debate .
Mr President , war is always war and its effects are always appalling .
The fact is , however , that sometimes we cannot escape the need for military intervention or its inevitability .
This is why we must concern ourselves with the long-term effects of this ordnance , out of consideration in particular for the innocent victims and most frequently , those harmed by their effects after operations have ended .
There is growing concern amongst interested communities and also amongst the general public in this field .
With regard to the specific case of ammunition that contains depleted uranium , the lack of rigorous clinical proof that clearly confirms the cause-and-effect relationship between its use and the occurrence of diseases must lead us to invest even more heavily in research into this possible connection .
This is where the Council 's action could be extremely useful , particularly in supporting the work of groups of government experts on the leftovers of war , such as explosives and anti-tank mines , and in giving priority to this issue .
Next it is crucial that the Council and also the Commission heed the results obtained and present , within the scope of their respective competences , practical recommendations or measures to help to improve and increase the reliability of ordnance with a view to eliminating the lethal damage it causes following conflicts .
Incidentally , and to conclude , Mr President , I wish to say a few words about the people that this debate is seeking to protect .
Even without conclusive proof , it is a requisite of conscience to provide effective forms of support for victims and their families , whether or not they are military personnel , who have been affected after the end of a conflict and whose suffering could be related to unexploded ordnance or depleted uranium ammunition .
This would not be the first such action .
Portugal , for example , has been doing just this .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union is particularly concerned about the deaths and injury caused every year by explosive remnants of war .
Apart from directly killing and injuring civilians , explosive remnants of war often hamper humanitarian assistance , peacekeeping forces , reconstruction following conflict and development in general , which is why the Union has taken an active part in the debate on explosive remnants of war within the framework of the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons .
Allow me to quote a few examples of Union activities in this sector .
In June 2001 , the Union circulated a discussion paper on explosive remnants of war at the meeting held on the subject in the run-up to the second review congress on the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons .
The General Affairs Council issued conclusions on 19 November 2001 promoting the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons , in which it called on the second review congress to set up a working party on explosive remnants of war .
Thirdly , the European Union submitted a working paper to the second review congress on the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons in Geneva in December 2001 , calling for legal instruments to be introduced in order to deal with explosive remnants of war , as a result of which efforts will be made to prevent explosive remnants of war , including through provisions requiring them to be more reliably designed and to have self-destruct mechanisms , and to prevent physical injury from detonators in explosive remnants of war .
The Union also submitted a paper on explosive remnants of war to the team of government experts set up by the second review congress .
During the congress of the States Parties to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons , the Presidency stressed on behalf of the European Union that the introduction of a legally binding instrument on explosive remnants of war within the framework of the Convention was a priority issue for the Union .
The congress agreed with the recommendation of the team of government experts that negotiations should start on an instrument for these explosives .
The Council 's competent working party will be discussing future Union action in this sector .
I should like to point out on behalf of the Council that the Member States of the Union are not unanimously in favour of declaring an immediate moratorium on the use of all types of cluster bombs .
The Council has not received reports of any NATO members using cluster bombs .
The common action by the Union in November 1997 dealt in its first three articles with the question of the universality of the agreement banning mines , in which the Member States of the Union set a target of totally eliminating anti-personnel mines worldwide .
The common action authorised the Presidency to take suitable measures .
These measures have consisted to date of demarches to countries which have not yet signed up to the Convention , including associated countries , and it has also recommended that churches sign the Convention .
These demarches are carried out by the Presidency at the time .
The Union has also been promoting the universality of the Convention at all the appropriate fora , especially the United Nations .
The resolutions of the General Assembly on the application of the Convention have been unanimously supported by the Member States of the European Union .
In addition , the European Parliament and Council resolutions of 23 July 2001 concerning action against anti-personnel landmines in developing countries and in third countries other than developing countries both state in article 3 that operations against landmines financed by the Union must in principle benefit those countries which are party to the convention banning landmines .
Exceptions may only be made for humanitarian reasons .
This stand by the Union has created an important incentive for countries to sign up to the convention banning landmines .
The European Union and its Member States are the main international source of funding for action against landmines , which in itself is an important way of promoting compliance with the convention .
I should also like to point out that no reports have been submitted to the Council on the use of depleted uranium ammunition by the American or British forces during the intervention in Afghanistan .
The Council has not addressed the question of the application of the protocol to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons on non-detectable fragments to which all the Member States are party .
Nor has the Council discussed ongoing work on this question at the United Nations .
Finally , the Council does not have a catalogue of depleted uranium ammunition in current use .
Decisions on the use of various types of ammunition are taken by Member States exercising their national sovereignty .
All the Member States are party to the Geneva Conventions .
Similarly , the Council has received no information about the use of depleted uranium ammunition in Chechnya , nor has it discussed the possibility of making the use of cluster bombs or depleted uranium a war crime under the statute of the International Criminal Court .
Mr President , I can well imagine that the Commissioner is right about depleted uranium .
As far as I am aware , and if my memory serves me right , it even has its civilian uses , but that is something that would have to be checked .
However , as we know nothing about what long-term effects the dispersed material may have , there may be some surprises in store for us .
I would like to say something about landmines .
What we have to know about landmines that some 230 million of them are currently stored in a number of countries .
Between 70 and 100 million of them have been laid around the world .
It is unfortunate , moreover , that new ones are being laid all the time , so that great significance attaches to the issue of how we locate these landmines and destroy them , primarily in human terms - that is , about ensuring that people do not get hurt in the process - but also in economic terms - that is , about keeping costs down .
I would like to encourage the Commission to make the right use of the funds that we have inserted in the Budget for research purposes .
In recent years , we have kept on adding funds to the research framework programme for the purpose of researching new technologies for locating landmines , so they should be used for that purpose .
Progress has been made , and for that I want to express my gratitude , but these things are extraordinarily complex , and I would like again to encourage you to help , perhaps by developing some sort of multifunctional location device .
For my final comment , I turn to disarmament .
There are other things - weapons of mass destruction , for example - that have to be disposed of .
Every year , our Budget allocates some EUR 100 million to the disposal of chemical , biological and atomic weapons in the countries that formerly made up the Soviet Union .
I would like you to submit a report on this , and for us to have a debate on it or produce a statement on the subject .
After all , a great deal of money is involved and this is , above all , very much a live issue .
Mr President , I have to confess that I am rather concerned and astonished after hearing the Commissioner 's statements .
We are on the eve of a war which we seem likely to wage on the basis of a mere suspicion : the suspicion that there may be chemical weapons .
I am concerned and astonished at the ease with which our suspicions - the suspicion that depleted uranium might have been used in a number of conflicts and that it might have had serious effects on civilians ' health - are being dispelled .
I will mention just three facts .
Firstly , Nato has not banned depleted uranium weapons , and the fact that it has not banned them leads us to fear , to believe that they have been used , that they might even have been used more than once .
Secondly , a statement by the US Secretary of State for Defence in January last year referred to an increase in radiation emissions from depleted uranium weapons in Afghanistan .
Thirdly , a number of medical tests carried out - under very difficult conditions because of the situation - in Afghanistan by a Canadian NGO found depleted uranium levels a hundred times as high as usual , due - it is extremely likely - to the use of depleted uranium weapons .
Now , in the light of all this , it would seem to be too easy , too hasty to claim that we do not have enough information to be able to presume to raise our voice and call for these weapons not to be used in any conflict and , in particular , to call for the danger of such weapons being used in Iraq to be avoided .
This is the essence of our resolution but , tomorrow , it will be the responsibility of the Council and the Commission not just not to exclude the possibility of this danger being fully prevented once and for all but to demand it .
Thank you , Mr President . I have just one comment to make because a question was asked about Greece and the anti-personnel landmine convention .
I should like to point out that the Greek Government has signed this convention .
The convention was ratified by the Greek parliament and I did not understand the insinuations or what exactly the two speakers were trying to say .
The debate is closed .
I should like to inform the House that I have received 6 motions for resolutions on this subject under Rule 42 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure
Mr President , Commissioner , as the Commission has just said , we are dealing with a report which we will vote on tomorrow , which has been approved by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , and which in overall terms has supported the report produced by this rapporteur .
Forest Focus replaces two regulations in force until December 2002 , the legal basis of which , changed from the former Article 130 to the current Article 175 , was changed on 25 February .
In other words , it became subject to approval by co-decision .
This report studied both protection against fires and atmospheric pollution , and now actions in the field of biodiversity , climate change and the retention of carbon are going to be included .
Actions in the sixth framework action programme in the field of the environment which the European Commission and the Community are obliged to implement .
However , the proposal replaces the majority of the measures on fire prevention in the former Regulation ( EEC ) No 2158 / 92 .
Now , the Commissioner has just told us that these measures are included in the rural and regional development programmes which he mentioned .
I must say to him that the Member States have already presented the plans of the rural development Regulation , which was approved in 2000 , but which has not been able to take account of fire prevention plans .
Therefore , it does not seem to make sense to have asked the Member States to guess that in 2003 or at the end of 2002 , as it should have been , this Parliament and the Commission were going to debate the replacement of the Regulation and that it was going to be transferred to the rural development programme and furthermore that it was going to be transferred with a miserable budget of EUR 5 million , because this quantity does not appear in the rural development programme .
It will therefore have to appear in order to balance the 2002 budget .
That is , EUR 18 million per year .
Now , Commissioner , we are spending EUR 18 million .
That is what is balanced and consolidated in 2002 .
The Commission proposes EUR 13 million .
It seems absurd that we want to take the same measures , plus those relating to biodiversity , climate change and the retention of carbon , with such a significant reduction in the budget .
I believe that considerable efforts have been made , both by the Council and by this Parliament , to reach to a compromise agreement , with compromise measures which ended in 2006 .
It appears that it has not been possible for the Commission to reach this agreement .
I am sorry , Commissioner , but this is a regulation which is decided by means of co-decision in this Parliament and I therefore believe that the proposal which was originally on the table has been withdrawn by this rapporteur in Amendment No 44 so that we can all discuss it on equal terms .
I believe that we all have to make a move , not just Parliament .
Of the amendments presented by the Group of the European Socialist Party , this rapporteur accepts Amendment No 48 .
However , Amendment No 47 is not acceptable since it would go against the spirit of the report .
There are other amendments presented by this rapporteur : two of them are amendments of a legal nature , and a third in which all we ask is that the idea already included in the recitals of increasing the scope of the European forest information system be incorporated into the Articles .
I would have liked to have introduced some other ideas , such as prioritising certain methodological projects and also promoting ' old ' activities , if I may put it like that , and not just those proposed in the new modules .
I also believe that it would most advisable for the time periods to last one year , and that there be a pilot period , which needs to take account of the frequent interactions of the experts .
I do not believe it is a good idea to transfer these issues to the rural development programme , Commissioner , since that would mean moving from the only regulation which is currently subject to co-decision and it is the only regulation which protects our forests .
I would say , to use rather unorthodox terms for a plenary session , that this would be like leaving a sweet at the gates of a school .
Commissioner , we have time to clarify both the budget and the harmony of these regulations .
I believe we are obliged to do so .
Mr President , Mrs Redondo Jiménez has drawn up an excellent and comprehensive report on the monitoring of forests and environmental interactions , for which I thank her sincerely .
The Commission proposal combines two former regulations , one of which concerns the protection of the forests from air pollution and the other forest fire prevention .
The Committee on Budgets has delivered an opinion on this matter .
In its first opinion it said that the financial statement of the Commission proposal is compatible with the ceiling of heading 3 of the financial perspective and that it will not restrict other action in the period 2003-2006 .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , however , raised this financial framework of EUR 52 million to EUR 67 million .
This being the case , the Committee on Budgets stated that the framework was compatible with the ceiling of heading 3 , if necessary through a reduction of other policies or through recourse to the provisions of the interinstitutional agreement .
In practice the Committee on Budgets is warning that reductions in other areas of policy will have to be made or increases in the financial perspective will have to be resorted to , which will be politically very difficult .
The opinion of the Committee on Budgets is based on the new Rule 63a in Parliament 's Rules of Procedure , which obliges a committee to adopt a position on the compatibility of proposed legislation with the financial perspective .
This is meant as a guiding principle for the plenary debate , which of course is free to take its own decision .
This week Rule 63a is being applied not only to this report but also to that by Ulla Sandbæk , for example .
It should be noted that if the committee responsible increases the financial framework in question it must once again request an opinion from the Committee on Budgets .
Verification of compatibility does on no account constitute a position on whether the proposal by the committee responsible regarding a larger financial framework is appropriate or reasonable .
This procedure will hopefully become automatic and natural .
The plenary session must have knowledge regarding the compatibility of the financial framework with the financial perspective so that it can take its decision .
The procedure increases the responsibility of the committees responsible for the legislative proposal being debated at the time .
Activity-based budgeting , which is already established , also has the same objective .
Verification of financial compatibility under Rule 63a thus serves , above all , the interests of the committee responsible .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin with a timely and relevant saying .
It goes , ' The culture of peoples is measured in terms of their love for trees ' - and I would like the peoples of the European Union to demonstrate this .
When we talk about forests we are talking about one of the most important ecosystems on Earth given their wealth and importance for the international community , since they offer both productive and protective services .
The European continent shows the general characteristics of a region located in the planet 's northern hemisphere and has forests with highly differentiated coniferous and non-coniferous species which reflect the regional biodiversity and bio-climatic wealth of the old Europe .
In view of all of this , we must recognise the importance today of the report by Mrs Redondo Jiménez for nature in the European Union .
I believe there are various reasons for this .
On the one hand , the report considers in a general sense the general actions necessary to prevent the deterioration of Community forests as a result of atmospheric pollution and insists on implementing a specific European Union policy to combat forest fires , which are one of the factors threatening the survival of the forests .
Furthermore , it specifically recognises the ecological wealth of certain European regions , such as the so-called outermost regions , in which certain forest ecosystems stand out , which in some cases are genuine natural botanical museums , as in the case of the region I come from , the Canary Islands , where forest observatories should be established in these unique Macaronesian islands , one of the bio-geographical regions of the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources ( IUCN ) with the greatest biodiversity in the European Union .
But all of this could come to nought if the Commission does not allocate the funding needed to adopt the measures necessary to achieve an appropriate European policy on forests .
I congratulate the rapporteur on her sensitivity to the problem of forests and on her courage in defending the Community forests .
Mr President , it is important to remember , in the context of this debate , the importance of the actions undertaken under Regulation 2158 on the protection of Community forests against fires because this complementary action has contributed to and indeed made possible various projects intended to achieve prevention through actions to combat the causes and forest fires that represent a veritable scourge for various regions , especially in Portugal .
Between 1992 and 2002 around 800 projects and 18 national programmes were funded in six countries , Germany , Greece , Spain , France , Italy and Portugal , totalling around EUR 123.6 million , which demonstrates the importance of this Regulation .
Consequently , taking account of the degree of efficiency and budgetary execution of the programme , which has always lacked further means , it becomes important to keep up actions to protect forests ( both actions against both pollution and fires ) included in the same Regulation , thereby honouring commitments , which will become redundant with the entry into force of the current regulation .
We must take account of the fact that whereas pollution affects northern Europe more , forest fires are a scourge of the South , which means that the exclusion proposed by the Commission makes no sense , especially given that the preventive measures included in Regulation 2158 / 1992 contain actions not covered by the regulation on rural development , which has other aims for forests and forestry , despite what the Commissioner has said .
The failure to include these preventive measures in this regulation would mean a reduction in funds for fire prevention and would call into question a set of projects already underway , which have already demonstrated the added value of Community action .
I therefore agree with the amendments tabled by the rapporteur , seeking to uphold fire prevention actions .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too would like to thank Mrs Redondo Jiménez for this report .
Our Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance can support this report in its entirety and without reservation .
Whilst I think it very much something to be welcomed that we at last have a commitment to woodland at European level , I share Mrs Figueiredo 's view that we have to try to concentrate more on biodiversity , changes in climate and the database for monitoring purposes , and that perhaps less prominence should be given to forest fires .
We must be clear in our own minds about one thing : this , too , is a matter of environmental concern , and so we should try to give this important step our support .
We hope that this report can be adopted as soon as possible and will enjoy broad support in Parliament as early as first reading stage , so that we can start to implement this programme as soon as possible and so that the Member States have the resources to at last implement this programme in a practical way .
Today marks the first occasion on which I have not needed to make use of all my speaking time , as I believe that we all agree that what matters is that we assign greater importance to European woodland , seeing it as an essential habitat and making it clear that changes in climate have to be monitored , and that the Commission 's approach has to be widened a great deal to take account of biodiversity .
We therefore give the report our full support and hope that the Member States will be able to get down to work as soon as possible .
My thanks again to all those who have given their assistance .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , year after year Portuguese forests are the silent victims of fires , which are becoming increasingly frequent , intense and devastating .
Every summer brings with it this national scourge and its consequences , which are tragic at various levels : economic , ecological , social and human .
Our forest heritage is gradually burning down and disappearing .
Sustainable forest management is becoming increasingly complex and technical .
Apart from fires , forests are exposed to other , more recent threats , caused by atmospheric pollution and climate change .
It is always worth reminding fellow Members and making them aware of the importance of forests and their resources .
To do this , it shall suffice to state that forests represent around 40 % of the Union 's territory , a percentage that will increase once the process of enlargement is concluded .
I therefore warmly welcome the Forest Focus Programme , a Community initiative that will help to protect and value forests in Portugal and throughout the Community .
European Union policy dovetails perfectly with cooperation in gathering data and in sharing experience and information amongst the various Member States .
The Commission 's initiative takes account of the legislative framework in force to protect forests against fires and atmospheric pollution and furthermore introduces a new Community mechanism for the long-term monitoring of forests and environmental interactions .
For this programme 's financial support , it has been decided to allocate it a multiannual financial framework , covering the period 2003-2008 , totalling EUR 67 million .
Monitoring is actually the key word in this proposal .
I therefore heartily support Mrs Redondo Jiménez 's idea that it makes perfect sense to maintain specific measures for fire protection and rural development .
I also agree that this proposal must cover the commitments given in the Convention on Climate Change , which portrays forests as sinks full of greenhouse gases .
Lastly , I am bound to regret the fact that the Commission proposal abuses the principle of subsidiarity , giving the Member States a rather passive role whereas it is their forests that suffer the damage .
Even more serious is the fact that the Commission proposal does not cover the measures to prevent forest fires previously funded under Regulation No 2158 / 92 .
I therefore support all the amendments to the proposal that are intended to give the Member States greater involvement .
Mr President , I would firstly like to congratulate Mrs Redondo on the magnificent work she has done on her report .
I believe that all of us here consider it very important to continue improving and fighting for these measures against the factors which contribute to all the deterioration of the European Union 's forests , such as fires and acid rain , to which we can now add the Commission 's proposal , relating to the fight to improve biodiversity .
In view of the obvious deterioration of the forests , I believe you should be sensitive to Mrs Redondo 's proposals .
One of the issues I know best and which I believe is highly topical relates to the southern European regions , which are - as you know - most sensitive to the risks of forest fires .
With regard to these regions we must continue to develop and expand a specific policy and we must combat forest fires .
In relation to the Mediterranean forests , although they offer a great variety of strategies for combating drought , at the same time these strategies make it very easy for them to catch fire .
The dry , arid climate , accidents - caused voluntarily or involuntarily - are reasons for the vulnerability of an ecosystem which is under a lot of pressure and which requires a lot of assistance if it is to be conserved .
We will therefore support Mrs Redondo 's report , and we ask the Commission to be sensitive to her amendments , and also , the great majority of the speeches of those of us who are trying to support the report by Mrs Redondo .
Prevention and safety are very important in terms of maintaining all the European forests , above all in view of the characteristics of the southern forests .
It is essential that the Commission take note and that it be sensitive to this report and our speeches defending the forests .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is hardly necessary to talk about the importance of forests to the European Union , in light of the fact that they occupy 40 % of our territory and that they provide two and a half million jobs , not to mention their importance to the environment , as the Kyoto protocol recently acknowledged .
It is therefore hard to understand why this Commission proposal excludes the cofinancing of measures to prevent forest fires , measures that were previously funded under Regulation 2158 / 92 .
The southern parts of the European Union are at greatest risk of desertification , as various speakers have already said , due to their hot , arid climate , which is extremely propitious to fires .
Therefore , if we wish seriously to preserve the forests of southern Europe , we will have to provide for the funding of fire prevention measures .
Unless the Council adopts Parliament 's amendments to achieve this , the countries of southern Europe will not have the means to continue the actions they have embarked on to prevent forest fires , actions which , by their very nature , cannot be separated from monitoring actions provided for , incidentally , in the regulation .
Unless forests are protected from fires , there is no point in talking about biodiversity , because when fires occur , they burn down everything .
Neither plants nor animals survive .
Tens of thousands of hectares burn down every year in Portugal and in other Mediterranean countries .
Parliament has been sensitive to this scourge and has therefore proposed - and I hope will adopt - the amendments presented to us by Mrs Redondo Jiménez .
Unless the Council is able to understand this , doubts will remain as to its ability to understand the reality of the situation of Europe 's forests .
I thank and congratulate Mrs Redondo Jiménez , who has guided us through this matter extremely ably , with great skill and tenacity .
Mr President , Commissioner , I , too , am sincerely grateful to the rapporteur , Mrs Redondo .
The way that this new proposal Forest Focus combines two old demands , that woodland be protected against environmental pollution and against fires , meets with my fundamental approval .
Just so that you realise that I know what I am talking about , Commissioner , I will say that I have a background in forestry , but in a northern country .
I want to strongly emphasise the point of principle that forestry policy must remain in the hands of the Member States , and to keep on reminding the Commission of the principle of subsidiarity .
Will Forest Focus have a beneficial effect on woodland and on those who own it , or is this just another exercise in keeping new hordes of bureaucrats employed and fed ?
I have to tell you that , representing as I do the German province of North Rhine-Westphalia , I get the impression that Brussels takes absolutely no notice of what is really going on in European forestry .
Within the European Union , 65 % of the woodland is owned and managed by 12 million forest owners , and this branch of agriculture causes them serious problems as far as profitability is concerned .
Two years ago , we ran a conference on this subject in Brussels .
In my homeland , Commissioner , young farmers no longer have any interest in woodlands or in forestry .
The property rights of woodland farmers are constantly being eroded .
Why should a forester give his all without getting financial compensation , often without his efforts even being recognised by society ?
If we say yes to it , Forest Focus will have to cover the social , economic and ecological fields in Europe .
Bio-diversity and monitoring have a nice sound to them , but they do not give woodland farmers any financial entitlements in respect of the work they do .
Let me say in conclusion that it is not those who are constantly discussing woodlands who are engaged in caring for nature and protecting it .
I can tell you that if we do not succeed in making forestry a more profitable proposition overall for agriculture , young people in my homeland will simply throw in the towel .
Even now , they are no longer prepared to clear up storm damage , for they take the line that this is a luxury they cannot afford .
Let us not start imposing more and more new demands on them .
Let us help to clean up the air .
Let us help provide compensatory measures as well , so that they can do such things as fertilising the soil with manure and lime .
Things really have to be said on the basis of practical experience , instead of just the empty forms of words that really do try my patience this late in the evening .
Forests are an environmental , economic and national resource of incalculable value , as well as a source of health for the whole world , for the whole of Europe and for each individual country and , if we do not wish to become poorer by the year , the Commission and the national governments should treat them as such .
I therefore consider that the Commission 's proposed ' Forest Focus ' places the emphasis on the right direction .
However , I must point out that this proposal precludes the fire prevention measures for which provision is made in Regulation 2158 / 92 , but which were not included in Regulation 1257 / 99 , resulting in a very silly situation in which we have more money for monitoring forests and less money for preventing forest fires .
If you cannot stop the fires , what is the point in monitoring the forests ?
I therefore suggest that attention should be given to continuing and increasing funding for preventive measures .
Neighbouring countries need to cooperate , so that they can prevent and fight fires efficiently , because fires do not recognise and more often than not cut across borders .
If we are to be able to implement an ambitious programme , the budget of EUR 52 million for 2003-2006 needs to be increased to EUR 67 million , with provision for a proportionate increase following enlargement .
The next item is the report ( A5-0020 / 2003 ) tabled by Mrs Ulla Margrethe Sandbæk , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation on aid for policies and actions on reproductive and sexual health and rights in developing countries [ COM ( 2002 ) 120 - C5-0114 / 2002 - 2002 / 0052 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as draftsperson of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets for this report , I must say that we issued our opinion last June with necessary speed for the multi-annual programme , which covers 2003-2006 , to be fulfilled within the scheduled time period , but it was no use because , in view of the dates we are dealing with , it has clearly not been fulfilled .
Without getting into an assessment of the main report which , naturally , is the responsibility of the Committee on Development , from a budgetary point of view I would like to say that the new financial framework proposed by the Commission meant an increase of 78 % in the new programme in comparison with the previous one , which ended on 31 December 2002 , which reflects the importance the Community attaches to this programme with a view to improving the reproductive health of people without sufficient economic resources in the developing countries .
The financial framework we voted on in the Committee on Budgets was the one that appeared in the Commission 's preliminary draft budget and which was finally ratified in the 2003 budget .
It will not be possible to increase the amount proposed without reducing other policies in the same heading , because the financial ceiling has already been reached .
The new Rules of Procedure have already entered into force and we therefore have Rule 63 , which says : ' When the committee responsible amends the financial endowment of the act it is considering , it shall request the opinion of the committee responsible for budgetary issues ' .
This is not trivial .
The Committee on Development , for its part , has increased the amount without requesting the opinion of the Committee on Budgets .
In turn , at the meeting of coordinators of the Committee on Budgets it was agreed to present an amendment on behalf of that committee to the legislative proposal in order to clarify this issue and re-establish the initial amendment presented in my report .
I am aware of the efforts made in the Committee competent for the main report to reach a consensus which would allow it to be approved at first reading and I congratulate them on their work .
I am also aware of the thankless role the Committee on Budgets has to play on this issue , since it makes it the final judge of sensitive programmes whose verdict is based strictly on the budgetary framework .
And I have already said that I am not going to get into assessing the fundamental aspects of the report .
I believe we must be coherent with what we approve on this new regulation and we must use it , because that is what differentiates us from a secondary school assembly .
Therefore , ladies and gentlemen , for the sake of responsible and coherent parliamentary conduct , I would urge you to vote in favour of the amendments presented on behalf of the Committee on Budgets .
Mr President , we too , the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , have been able to discuss this regulation .
Moreover , we have had plenty of time to do so , for the opinion was , I believe , expressed last September .
Indeed , we were aware of the importance of not leaving a gap between the adoption of a new regulation and the expiry of the previous one .
In the Committee on Women 's Rights , we decided to emphasise , first and foremost , the need to accompany these policies with a literacy programme promoting education , training , knowledge and culture , including basic information services on communicable diseases , hygiene , health and human rights .
Great importance and value were accorded to this element , precisely because we believe that all the agreements we negotiate should be accompanied by the requirement of strict observance of human rights and , in particular , by a clear demand for policies of gender equality , as a precondition for any policy on the countries in question .
We are convinced that reproductive health problems are also closely linked to issues of poverty and underdevelopment . We therefore believe that it is only by pursuing this line that they can be resolved .
There is , of course , an urgent need , a need which we intend to address , first and foremost , with preventive and aid policies relating to pregnancy and birth but also responding to the need to combat diseases communicable from mother to child .
Mr President , I would , first , like to congratulate Mrs Sandbæk on her report , which has achieved a broad consensus on a controversial issue .
Reproductive health is one of the fundamental aspects of development and principally , but not solely , affects the developing countries .
In those countries , pregnancies and births are the main cause of death and illness amongst women , as has been said previously .
Therefore the Group of the European Socialist Party will undoubtedly support an active European Union policy on this issue which does not involve any moral stand , but rather a universal ethical imperative , human rights and development , and we therefore support the regulation being debated today .
This regulation comes at a very appropriate time for the European Union to demonstrate its determination , when other large donors , such as the United States , are pushing for a reconsideration of the commitments made in 1994 at the Cairo Conference on Population and Development .
That conference represented great progress , by correcting the political view of population which traditionally focussed on demographic objectives , and since then it has focussed on women 's rights .
No less than 179 countries agreed to an action plan on this new basis .
However , at the 5th Conference on the population of Asia and the Pacific , held in Bangkok in December , there was a desire to remove any reference to rights in the field of reproduction and services relating to genetic health in order to conserve United States aid , which refuses to fund organisations which promote family planning , including the United Nations Population Fund .
In reality , in order to reassure those people who are fundamentally opposed to rights relating to genetic health , we must make it clear that family planning , information and access to reproductive health services prevent abortion and , if it is carried out , it is better that it happens under safe and hygienic conditions in order to prevent the 78 000 deaths per year caused by unsafe abortions .
This report and this regulation do not deal with abortion , but the European Union 's contribution to social development , the population 's access to information , to contraceptives , to health care during pregnancy and birth and responsible sexuality .
The European Union must be generous .
Therefore the Group of the European Socialist Party will do all it can within the framework of the financial perspectives and in accordance with budgetary authority to increase the funding for this regulation .
We will vote tomorrow in favour of the amendments relating to funding and against any other amendment that may affect the content of this report .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is really amazing that we only hear voices of agreement in this Chamber this evening when behind the scenes so many obscure forces are trying to undermine the regulation and the financing of it .
This has to do with the fact that the right to autonomous control over your body , your fertility and reproduction has never been completely accepted .
In some circles people evidently still do not understand that women cannot be denied this right .
Nor men either , but there has always been more sympathy for that in the past .
When we consider the situation today , we see big differences in theory and in practice .
If we look at the European Union , we find something that has not been discussed today that there are many cases in which men 's , and especially women 's , desires with regard to having children cannot be fulfilled because this is so difficult to combine with a demanding professional life and a busy life in general .
Up to now we have not seen this as a collective problem .
But in any case we know that very many women would like more children than the average 1.4 per family that , for example , is reached in Belgium .
In the third world it tends to be the other way round .
Of course a woman 's fertility is a blessing there too , but it is also a curse because the number of children born is often more than the number she wants and more than she can give a decent upbringing to .
That is , of course , because of the poverty in which the women and children live , as , of course , do the men too , but the number of women in the third world having to bring up children on their own is increasing more and more .
The situation is very grave .
At the time of the elections in Kenya , a social worker in one of the slums of Nairobi told me that the women find it so difficult to bring up their children that they are refusing to marry , because then they would have another person to look after and one who hits them .
Family life is so disrupted by poverty that they say : we would rather try on our own .
Of course the children have different fathers who do not care about the women or the children .
We have not explained the need for this programme at all , because if we had we would set all the budgetary concerns on one side and give it far more resources .
But I was talking about the social implications .
In the European Union and the other rich countries this leads to the phenomenon of an ageing population , in the poor countries it leads to overpopulation and worsening poverty that often takes on structural forms .
But your regulation is absolutely not targeting those large-scale societal phenomena .
It is actually elementary , the help , the access that women and men but especially women must have to escape the frightful consequences of unwanted pregnancy , the frightful consequences of rape and also the frightful consequences that occur in other communities .
I heard of a case of Roma women who are sterilised against their will at the moment they give birth .
They are made infertile without knowing it .
All this results from ignorance , of course , but it mainly due to grinding poverty .
That is why we will support the Commissioner and the rapporteur and those who submit amendments , in order to oppose those in the world who through their resistance attempt to smear these regulations , the resources and the people who are working hard to promote reproductive health .
We will make every effort to get these financial resources increased in the future and to see that they are used well .
In view of the spread of AIDS , it has to be said that all our resources are insufficient at the moment .
Fortunately official policy has come back to that meanwhile but in Kenya a few years ago people used not to tell pregnant women infected with the HIV virus that they had it , because they did not have the means to do anything about it .
Now fortunately we have the means to prevent this dreadful disease being passed from mother to child .
That 36 million people have to live with the HIV virus and that millions die of it every year must surely make an impression on those who only care about unborn lives and leave those who have been born to suffer and die .
Mr President , reproduction and sexual health and rights are a very important issue for developing countries where so much could be done to alleviate maternal deaths and the by-product ills of illegal abortions .
Health care is desperately needed yet , as this bundle of e-mails shows , it is also a highly sensitive subject and one that must be treated with respect by those at both ends of the spectrum .
I would therefore begin by thanking Mrs Sandbæk for the long negotiations she has had , firstly with the Council and Commission representatives , and then with the co-ordinators , the political parties in this House .
In any such sensitive issue , no one will be completely happy with the outcome .
That is why - even with the strong feelings I have on this subject - I genuinely believe that the compromise reached in the Committee on Development and Cooperation gives us a package that this House should accept .
I know there is a problem with the budget aspects of this report , but I hope that the amendments tabled are acceptable so that this report can have a clear majority in favour at first reading .
It would be a tragedy for sick women in developing countries if this report were delayed in any way because of budget technicalities .
The facts speak for themselves .
At least 75 % of all maternal deaths and injuries could and should be prevented through reproductive health care .
Reproductive health in the context of this report covers all areas related to reproduction and associated diseases such as HIV-AIDS .
Through long-term investment in reproductive health supplies , services and the appropriate counselling much can be done to stop unwanted pregnancies and to go some way to controlling the spread of sexually-transmitted diseases .
I sincerely hope that honourable Members of this House will support this report .
Mr President , I would firstly like to congratulate Mrs Sandbæk on her work and secondly I would like to express my indignation and condemn the harassment which the Members who have supported this report from the outset have once again been subjected to .
In recent days we have once again suffered - as also happened during the committee procedure and as also happened in this House in the case of the Van Lancker report - the bombardment of our e-mail systems with messages which have always been threatening , aggressive , laden with insults and furthermore always , without exception , lacking in arguments or a rigorous analysis of the content of the report , which is solely attributed with the aim of imposing mass sterilisations , and I will read out a fragment of an e-mail I have received : ' If this report is approved , the European Union would become one of the major promoters of abortion and the culture of death , and its approval would mean accepting the annihilation of the poor ' .

Accusing this Parliament of wanting to annihilate the poor leads me at least to entirely reject the content of such positions and virulent expressions which attempt to conceal a complete lack of arguments , because these groups who harass us and who claim to be pro-life , resorting to their religious convictions , are the ones who condemn poor women to the illness and death resulting from their reproductive role .
In order to explain the true significance and importance of approving this report it is necessary to highlight certain crucial aspects .
On the one hand , the importance of women as the main promoters of health , and on the other , the ratification - as has already been said - of the idea that there can be no social development without a healthy society and that the health of women is directly related to their reproductive role .
Currently , 20 % of the world 's population is at the reproductive stage of their lives and it is therefore crucial that information on their sexuality and their reproductive capacity is available , in order to ensure that that population is protected from unwanted pregnancies and sexually-transmitted diseases .
By ignoring the reproductive rights of women and denying them the power to chose , we are condemning them , their families and the communities they live in to illness and poverty , because we must not forget that health is undoubtedly a decisive element in the fight against poverty , a fight which the European Union advocates and is committed to .
That commitment - made many years ago by the international community - must be reinforced at this time when we are faced with a cut in the funds allocated to sexual and reproductive health by certain governments which take a false and hypocritically moral approach to life .
It is not possible to be in favour of life and then deny women in developing countries their right to information and to controlling their sexuality and reproductive capacity .
In the developing countries female mortality relating to pregnancy and childbirth is 33 times greater than that in the industrialised countries .
Reproductive health services are included amongst the indicators selected for evaluating the millennium development objectives .
Improvements in reproductive health lead to lower pregnancy rates and reduction in dependency .
Bad health leads to higher pregnancy rates and condemns families to poverty .
In 2015 there will be 742 million people requiring sexual and reproductive health services or supplies .
Control of their sexuality is a woman 's right , but this is only recognised in the rich countries .
The illnesses and consequences which women in the poor countries suffer principally originate from their reproductive role .
Feminine health is an essential element if the poor countries are to make progress .
Mr President , this is indeed an issue of the utmost importance .
The relationship between poverty and low levels of development and sexual and reproductive health is very close and makes it incumbent on us to adopt measures that will enable us to end or at least to mitigate the extremely worrying situations we are seeing today in this field which , unfortunately , are growing worse .
Hence the importance of this proposal for a regulation and the report by Mrs Sandbaek .
I must point out , with regard to this report , the rapporteur 's efforts to improve and to achieve a compromise , even at first reading , which enabled a broad consensus to be achieved on the proposals we are studying today .
These efforts are all the more noteworthy because of the vague suspicions and frustrated attempts to include groundless justifications in the guidelines in question .
Fortunately , the rapporteur , the political groups , the other committees involved and also Commissioner Poul Nielson , and everyone who has worked on this issue have been able to focus on the essential and I am sure that plenary will adopt the same approach .
The essential lies in what has been acknowledged by the various international conferences on population and development , in understanding that access to reproductive and sexual health services forms a crucial part of the fight for development and against poverty and consequently the prevention of communicable diseases such as AIDS .
Nor should it be swept under the carpet in this context that pregnancy and childbirth are the main causes of death and disability of women in less-developed countries .
Nor should it be forgotten that a major proportion of maternity-linked deaths in those countries are closely linked to abortions carried out in unsafe conditions .
These are undeniable and enormously serious occurrences that must be ended by means of appropriate measures , such as those now being responsibly proposed .
This is also why means are also necessary and these have been clearly insufficient .
This is why it is essential to make an effort , with the European Union leading the way .
This is also why I believe it is crucial for Parliament , in accordance with its powers and responsibilities , and in the spirit of consensus and balance , to now earmark the amount proposed for this purpose .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Commissioner for what he has said , and also Mrs Sandbæk for so eloquently defining why this is such an important and urgent regulation for us to deal with tomorrow .
The WHO estimates that 88-98 % of all maternal deaths are avoidable if women have access to proper reproductive and obstetric health services .
Recently on a visit to Rwanda I learned that 2 000 women die per 100 000 live births .
In my own country , the United Kingdom , that figure is seven .
Maternal mortality continues to rise in developing countries .
Women die from haemorrhaging , from infections , from high blood pressure , from obstructed labour .
They also die from unsafe abortions .
The last speaker talked about the rights of governments to choose .
I would emphasise that women in these situations also have the right to choose .
If women in a country like mine have that right , then I would also argue that a woman who wishes , because of a variety of different circumstances , to make that choice , then that should be her right .
Providing for reproductive health is not a euphemism for abortion services .
Women have the right to reliable information and to compassionate counselling .
We must at all costs avoid being drawn into debates which are only about us reflecting United States domestic policy .
The reality is that if we do not receive a positive vote tomorrow , there will be no budget line .
We will be guilty of turning our backs on a maternal carnage such as we see in developing countries .
Is that the signal we want to send from this Parliament to the suffering women of the developing world ?
Now the European Union - and I emphasise also the governments of the south - needs to do more on maternal mortality , on HIV , on reproductive health and on contraception .
North and south need to work together on everything from the country strategy papers which we produce with developing countries to prioritising gender issues and reproductive health and rights .
Finally , I should like to say that it is very important that we have an understanding of gender and reproductive rights as a cross-cutting issue .
We must invest more resources and interest to ensure that women can bear children in safety and with the freedom to choose if , when and how often to do so .
( Applause from the Left )
Mr President , I congratulate Mrs Sandbæk and also Commissioner Nielson for his clear political direction on this issue .
His very significant decision to substitute the funding through UNFPA that the Bush Administration wrongly withdrew is a hallmark of his distinguished record as Commissioner for Development .
The European Union and Parliament , this week , have been subject to fundamentally misleading lobbying and publicity concerning the purpose of this regulation .
For example , this e-mail from one of my constituents in Cambridge accuses us of ' obliging EU Member States to fund abortions ' , and adds the labels ' mad ' , ' irrational ' and ' politically correct ' for good measure !
As colleagues across the House have made clear , the regulation clearly incorporates the Cairo Agreement that specifically prohibits abortion as a method of family planning .
Instead , these people , sadly given succour by some in the House tonight , want to prevent good reproductive health for women in developing countries , where 600 000 entirely preventable deaths of women in childbirth still occur each year .
This is also absolutely essential to halt the spread of HIV-AIDS , which currently kills 8 000 people every day .
This is about saving lives , not about losing them .
Men as well as women must take responsibility for sexual health .
As a man , that is why I joined with other men and women in this House to seek extra money this year for the reproductive health programme , in my role as budget rapporteur .
One has to recall that 160 Members denied us the qualified majority , and EUR 6 million was lost .
That money would have helped over 2 million women around the world to have safe pregnancy and birth .
I hope that tomorrow we will be able to reinstate this funding , subject to the agreement of our budget colleagues .
In April my own partner is expecting our second baby .
I hope and pray that it will be a safe birth , knowing , as I do , that in Europe we have access to the best medical facilities , trained staff and health services that minimise the risks to mother and child .
I do not see why any mother , anywhere in the world , should not have the right to the same protection .
That is why I will support this vote and call on others to do so .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission and Mrs Sandbæk have my support when they propose that the European Union should seek greater involvement in the areas of contraception , the fight against sexually-transmitted diseases and improved gynaecological provision in developing countries .
I myself spent some time working as a doctor in Guatemala , an impoverished developing country , where I could see how necessary such aid is .
Throughout these discussions , I have had in my mind 's eye a woman who was one of my patients at the time and who had her eighth child at the age of twenty-four .
I believe that we are under an obligation to bring to these women 's attention what options are available by way of contraception .
We are also , for example , under an obligation to increase the availability of condoms .
Let me remind you , Commissioner , of how Mr Schmid of the Group of the Party of European Socialists proposed - all of two years ago - the establishment in Africa of a factory to manufacture condoms , enabling these to be made available there at low prices .
I would ask the Commissioner to reconsider that .
It is also my belief that ' contraception and birth control ' is not just an issue of concern to women alone .
I do believe that we have to give more support to science in its search for contraceptives for men .
An international consortium has submitted an application in this area to the 6th research framework programme , but the Commission has , unfortunately , not considered it yet .
One example of why I consider this very important is the medical fact that many women have an intolerance to the contraceptive pill , so alternatives are a matter of necessity , and this is one area where men cannot go on holding back .

I do believe , though , that we have to make a very clear distinction between the issue of abortion and that of birth control , as well as the other issues discussed in the report .
Abortion is a sensitive subject , and rightly so .
I do not think it would be a good thing for the European Union to allocate to something like that any of the limited resources we have at our disposal for the support of people in developing countries .
When I was , for five years , a member of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , I constantly heard the Commission saying that there was not enough money .
That was why they rejected many projects put before us by NGOs - projects that were not in the least controversial , and which everyone said we should support .
As a result , I would have preferred it if this report had expressed , more clearly than it had done , that we support a great number of things - things that Parliament does not regard as controversial - but not abortion .
I think Amendment No 53 expresses this very appropriately .
I am glad that this report has been successfully focussed on the prevention of unwanted pregnancy and on the provision of real help for women .
Above all , I wish to thank Mrs Martens for her great commitment .
I would have liked us , however , to have put things in more precise terms - and perhaps tomorrow will find us managing to do that - so that we can indeed be united in our endorsement of this programme and of this report .
Mr President , I am glad that Mrs Scallon is in the House tonight and that she is listed to speak .
I want to hear her apologise to this House for the scurrilous lies that she told in the Irish media about this report : claims that EUR 50 million was being taken from Irish fishermen in order to promote abortion in the world ; claims that Irish taxpayers ' money was going to be used for promoting abortion in the world .
They are scurrilous lies that should be retracted .
We should have an apology here tonight from Mrs Scallon for promoting these falsehoods .
I am pro-choice .
I believe it is the responsibility of every man and woman to choose the number of children and the spacing of their children , as and when they choose .
It is not for me to decide or for Mrs Scallon to decide .
It is for each individual to decide .
If I came across a woman who was pregnant and drowning , I would not ask her if she was pregnant , an abortionist , or if she would likely have her pregnancy aborted , before I threw her a lifeline .
There are 600 000 women this year who will die , who probably have other children , certainly parents and certainly lovers or husbands who want them to live .
We are being asked to deny them the right to life .
Unfortunately , we are not giving enough money in this programme to save them all , but at the very least , we have the right and a duty to provide what we propose to provide and not pretend that we are in some way saving lives by opposing this programme .
The attitude of Mrs Scallon and President Bush is based on heartless , theological hair-splitting which has nothing to do with life .
We should stand up and be counted on this issue in this House and make it clear that we are ' for life ' and ' for the lives ' of the 600 000 women who die every single year .
( Applause from the Left )
Mr President , I am convinced that by supporting this regulation , as agreed by the Committee on Development and Cooperation , Parliament will allow us to fund operations and agencies working to reach the international development targets , to empower women and to reduce infant , child and maternal mortality .
The amendments voted by the Committee on Development and Cooperation have received wide support and strengthen and clarify the text of the regulation , without altering its main objectives .
The Commission welcomes them .
On Amendments Nos 46 and 47 on the financial proposal , I am not able to commit the Commission formally tonight because the broader discussions on allocations have not yet been concluded .
However , I do not see this as something that should lead to a second reading .
I am confident that we will find a solution .
The new amendments tabled in plenary - Amendments Nos 48 , 49 , 50 , 51 , 52 and 53 - skew the focus and the substance of the regulation and are not acceptable to the Commission .
Mr Ribeiro e Castro and a few others have remarked that laws are different in Member States and also said something about the competence of the European Union on these matters .
We are on very firm ground in what is happening here .
We are not discussing abortion policy in European Member States .
We are discussing development policy and we are proposing to do what is clearly in line with what has been internationally agreed .
This is the purpose of all this .
I warn against changing this discussion into something totally different .
Mr Ribeiro e Castro said that Amendment 49 is about clarification .
I disagree .
It is a change of the substance .
We may not have this meeting taking place in full daylight , but I find it light enough in here to make the following remark .
In the existing text , no support is to be given under this regulation to incentives to encourage sterilisation or abortion .
Amendment 49 says : ' no support is to be given under this regulation to sterilisation or abortion , nor to ? ' .
This is not a clarification .
This is a change of the substance .
A spade should be called a spade and a text should be called a text .
In reply to some of the other remarks made by Mr Ribeiro e Castro , I warn against throwing around quotes which are very difficult to verify .
This debate has already had an overdose of that sort of input .
One strong reason to remain with what the Committee on Development has concluded , as expressed by Mr Corrie and others , with whom I agree , is that it reflects the Cairo consensus - no more and no less .
To Mr Ó Neachtain I say that I can subscribe to his observations .
They are a precise account of the reality and the formalities of the issue , as stated .
Anything other than what is now emerging here as the consensus from the Committee on Development and Cooperation represents an unacceptable deviation from Cairo .
I advise that we stay on track .
When following the international discussion on these issues over the last few years , we have repeatedly seen that proposals or attempts to backtrack from Cairo or to go beyond Cairo in all cases have been futile .
That is another good reason for the European Parliament and the European Union to stay on track .
I hope that we will be able to stay on track on this issue .
( Applause )
. ( IT ) We feel Mrs Sandbaek , Mrs Martens and Mrs Ferrer 's work is satisfactory , considering the different starting points .
We should always be mindful of our ability to produce texts which require respect for human rights , inviolability , self-determination and responsibilisation of the individual as a priority .
The violent practice of abortion should therefore be excluded as a general means of family planning .
A regulation whose objective is to protect health cannot contradict itself and attack life , the supreme good of the individual from the moment of conception .
Another general consideration is countries ' approach to these instruments , which reflect the responsibility that every State , every community and every individual should feel to protect life .
With the help of the donor countries , the governments of the developing countries must provide information , education and appropriate instruments and encourage responsibilisation of the individual , to free people from ignorance , taboos , superstition and the archaic practices which go hand in hand with underdevelopment .
My last point concerns the issue of the subordination of women to men .
The culture of the hierarchy of force must be eliminated once and for all during the Third Millennium .
The Third Millennium is characterised by the culture of information and knowledge and , therefore , must provide the conditions for free exchange between minds .
Women must be able to dialogue with men without being affected by any form of sexism .
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0026 / 2003 ) by Mr Harbour , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on the Communication from the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions : 2002 Review of the Internal Market Strategy - Delivering the promise [ COM ( 2002 ) 171 - C5-0283 / 2002 - 2002 / 2143 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , this is a very important topic , one of the bases on which the European Union rests .
Last November , I challenged Parliament to come up with bold new ideas for improving the internal market .
The Harbour report more than meets that challenge .
Ten years of the internal market have given us 2.5 million extra jobs and EUR 900 billion , cumulatively , in extra wealth .
But that is not enough .
Too many barriers are still holding us back .
Enlargement makes it all the more urgent to clear the decks .
As any engineer will tell you , if you add a couple of storeys to a building , which is what enlargement in essence will do , you must make sure that the foundations are sufficiently strong .
Hence the emphasis in the forthcoming medium-term Internal Market Strategy for the years 2003-2006 .
The emphasis in that medium-term Internal Market Strategy - a document that the Commission will present in April - is on going ' back to basics ' .
Foremost among this move ' back to basics ' is the matter of implementation and enforcement .
I welcome Parliament 's support for strengthening the Commission 's enforcement powers in the future IGC .
The Harbour report also calls on the Commission to calculate the economic costs of transposition delays .
I can see the attraction of that idea , but the transposition deficit is a moving target which reflects different directives with different economic impacts over time .
However , I have asked my staff to look into the feasibility of making such a calculation and I will report back to you as soon as possible .
It is not yet as easy to trade within the internal market as it is to trade within a Member State .
Borders still exist , not perhaps in the real world , but certainly in the minds of national officials who often do not yet think or act in a European way .
We may need to put some disciplines in place to get a change in behaviour .
As you may know , the Commission is giving very high priority to making a proposal for a horizontal instrument to remove barriers in the services market by the end of the year .
We are also considering ways of making trade in goods easier .
EU citizens and businesses deserve more and better information about their internal market rights .
Mr Harbour 's report calls for a second Internal Market Forum as a means of connecting with citizens .
I welcome the idea of a second forum and I shall be honoured to take part - if you invite me , of course !
Removing tax obstacles is another key priority .
I welcome Parliament 's support for the Commission 's communications on the taxation of persons and passenger cars , a subject dear to the heart of Mr Vatanen , who spoke to me at length about that .
I respect his energy in pursuing that subject .
The Commission will bring forward proposals this year to modernise and simplify VAT rules so as to reduce the burden on businesses , particularly on SMEs .
This list is not exhaustive .
We all know that the internal market covers a multitude of subjects .
We are still open to ideas .
I should like to work closely with Parliament in the coming months as our strategy takes shape .
I will end by endorsing the opening paragraph of the Harbour report which states that the internal market should be the top priority for this year 's Spring Summit .
I wholeheartedly agree with Mr Harbour on that and call on Parliament to do everything it can to ensure that this comes about .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this is the third time in the space of the last few days that we find ourselves discussing the significance of the internal market .
On Monday , we discussed the fallout from the World Economic Summit in Davos , and today we have already had a debate on the Spring Summit .
Circling around the future of the internal market and the Lisbon targets , both debates made clear how important the internal market is to us .
Both the Commissioner and the ten-year balance sheet documented and demonstrated the benefits brought by the internal market , in terms of growth , employment and competitiveness , to all our continent 's citizens .
Yet , despite these manifest advantages , the internal market is not yet complete and still has a large number of weaknesses .
Allusion was made to the facts that 50 % of the objectives have not yet been achieved , that the progress made is less than what had been aimed for , and that 2.1 % of all the directives on the internal market have still not yet been transposed .
We therefore call on the Commission and the Council to avail themselves of all the options available , including sanctions , coordination and the initiation of legislation , in order to bring to fruition those things to which we have jointly committed ourselves .
The Lisbon targets are ambitious , and we will not achieve them without a successful internal market and without adherence to the Stability and Growth Pact .
The internal market and the Stability and Growth Pact are the essential instruments for achieving the Lisbon targets by 2010 .
Their importance lies in the credibility they give to long-term objectives .
They have an essential contribution to make in building confidence in Europe 's goals on the part of the public , of enterprises and employees .
There is a blatant discrepancy between what is piously promised at summits and what is transposed at home , and so we demand that all the directives on the internal market be transposed into law .
We demand that coordination of this process be taken charge of by the Commission , and that its right to initiate legislation be extended .
This is no longer a matter of apportioning guilt , but of specifying short-term targets - and responsibilities - on the way to the overall objective .
This has to do with fiscal policy , with the various competences involved , which still lead to distortions of competition and to new obstacles . It has to do with studying the effects on small and medium-sized enterprises as we progress towards this great internal market .
Of course , it also affects the internal market in financial services , which would alone account for 1.1 % - or EUR 130 billion worth - of growth , and it has to do with the creation of the internal services market .
There is much for us to do , and , although we see from the balance sheet that we are on the right road , we must not slow down or come to a halt ; instead , we have to discover a new dynamism .
So I thank the rapporteur for having made us aware of these things in such an impressive way and also for defining new objectives .
Mr President , I should like to add my congratulations to the rapporteur for the work he has done on this report .
I always find it somewhat amazing that on this graveyard shift on a Wednesday night , which Mr Harbour and I have shared on many occasions , we have ended up discussing perhaps one of the most important pieces of legislation that the European Union has passed , but the way this Parliament operates , that tends to be the way of things .
It is just over ten years now since the internal market came into operation .
In that time , vast strides have been made towards the completion of the market .
That said , however , there is still a long way to go .
There are still a number of barriers - barriers to trade .
We look at the different tax regimes in the Member States , whether it be indirect taxation or direct taxation - all are used as barriers to trade .
We look at different employment legislation in Member States - this too is used as a barrier to trade .
We look at our own failure to decide upon a Community patent - again that is a barrier to trade , but the solution there is in our own hands .
However , it is not only the free movement of goods that we should be concerned about .
It is also about the free movement of workers , the free movement of labour .
At the moment within the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market we are discussing the mutual recognition of professional qualifications .
The sooner that is sorted out , the sooner another barrier will be removed .
In today 's climate , however , there is another barrier .
It is a barrier of fear and suspicion which has developed since 11 September , but was probably there beforehand .
That is a barrier restricting the free movement of workers .
We cannot allow ourselves to become a fortress Europe by setting up internal walls .
I was interested to hear what the Commissioner had to say .
The onus is on him , however , to take a long hard look at every Member State to see where these countries , while proclaiming the benefits of the internal market , are at the same time blocking its completion by using internal rules to flout it .
Most of the time this is for short-term political gain .
We have an opportunity to bring about the completion of the internal market .
Commissioner , you challenged this Parliament to come up with a hard-hitting report which you have now got .
We challenge you to finish the job - and you have our support .
Mr President , I would like to join others in congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Harbour , on his report , which is very complete and which has been negotiated with a creditable willingness to seek consensus .
I have tried to cooperate with the fundamental objectives of the report - with which I may say I am in total agreement - with certain amendments because I thought it would be useful to incorporate certain points .
The first , in line with what Mr Martin has just said on behalf of the Committee on Industry , is to reject - and this has been done very intelligently by the rapporteur - the equal treatment , undoubtedly hasty on the part of the Commission , of Parliament and the Council with regard to the causes of the delay of certain rules of the internal market .
As we say in our country , ' every candlestick should support its candle ' and we should not all be judged equally in relation to responsibilities that are different .
The second aspect was the need - and Mr Harbour agreed immediately - to incorporate workers ' organisations into the cooperation which were and are laid down in the report between the consumers ' organisations and the employers ' organisations .
For those whose political doctrine consists of a social market economy , this involvement by all social elements seems to us to be significant .
I would like to take up a statement by the Commissioner : as long as all active sections of European society fail to take on board the idea of the internal market , all imaginable rules and actions will be insufficient to make it a reality .
If on the other hand society is mobilised , this objective will be achieved much more easily .
The rapporteur has also accepted my request that greater attention be paid to the existing obstacles to the creation of small businesses and the necessary initiatives to overcome them .
Because , Mr President , we can go on and on about employment in large companies , but the people who really provide work in the European Union , in really huge quantities , are the small and medium-sized businesses .
And we must ensure that they can be incorporated into the internal market without obstacles , as Mr Karas has said .
Finally , I would like to acknowledge the progress made thanks to the efforts of Commissioner de Palacio - it is fair to say - on liberalisation , not ' liberation ' as the Spanish text mistakenly says , in the field of gas , electricity and air transport .


I would like to thank Mr Harbour for incorporating these points , as well as the fortunate way he has incorporated the principle elements of my Amendment No 40 into paragraph 33 ; by the way , Mr President , and for the benefit of the services of this House , I would like to make the observation that this paragraph 33 of the English text does not exist in the Spanish text , and it should also be included in our language .
I will therefore vote in favour of this excellent report , on which I congratulate Mr Harbour once again , and I would also like to thank him for his kind words for Mrs Palacio , not the Commissioner , but her sister and the Minister for Foreign Affairs , who has cooperated so fully in the work to implement the internal market .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 11.55 p.m. )
Decision on urgent procedure
We begin by voting on a request to apply urgent procedure to the proposal for a Council Regulation amending , as regards the exemptions to the freezing of funds and economic resources and for the tenth time , Regulation ( EC ) No 881 / 2002 imposing certain specific restrictive measures directed against certain persons and entities associated with Osama bin Laden , the Al Qaeda network and the Taliban [ COM ( 2003 ) 41 - C5-0048 / 2003 - 2003 / 0015 ( CNS ) ]
I would first give the floor to Mr Hernández Mollar , Chairman of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs .
of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs .
( ES ) Madam President , yesterday , the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , of which I am chairman , did indeed hold an extraordinary meeting to deal with this matter and it was agreed to refuse urgent procedure , and for two basic reasons : firstly , because the urgent procedure is not authorised to be applied on one day for the next ; in the meeting , neither the Commission nor the Council presented good enough arguments ; and , secondly , because I believe we must demand of the Council that it justify urgent procedure and , also , not to treat Parliament as a mere formality , even though it has to be said that , in this case , the content of the proposal also reflects the opinion of Parliament .
In any case , this matter will be dealt with next Monday in our committee 's ordinary session .
If no one else wishes to take the floor , we shall vote on this request for urgent procedure .
We shall now proceed to the vote on the request for urgent procedure .
( The decision was made not to apply urgent procedure . )
The next item is a report ( A5-0021 / 2003 ) by Mrs Malliori , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a Council recommendation on the prevention and reduction of risks associated with drug dependence [ COM ( 2002 ) 201 - C5-0270 / 2002 - 2002 / 0098 ( CNS ) ] .
Madam President , this proposal for a Council recommendation is based on Article 152 of the Treaty , which stipulates that Community action complementing national measures is to cover the fight against the major health scourges .
The Treaty cites drugs and drugs-related harm in the following way : ' The Community shall complement the Member States ' action in reducing drugs-related health damage , including information and prevention . '
May I also remind you that one of its main initiatives in the fight against drugs - the EU Drug Strategy 2000-2004 - includes amongst its three main public health targets one to reduce substantially drugs-related health damage and the number of drugs-related deaths .
The reported number of deaths related to drug overdose in the European Union is approximately 7 000 per year .
Deaths indirectly related to drug use , such as AIDS , traffic accidents , violence or suicide , bring this figure to approximately 20 000 a year .
Preventing the use of illegal drugs is a top priority .
This can be achieved by reducing both the supply and the demand for drugs .
This proposed recommendation particularly covers the demand side and takes over where law enforcement fails to stop the supply of drugs .
Clearly , we should try to persuade people not to use illegal drugs in the first place .
However , when an individual cannot be stopped from taking drugs , it is of vital importance that every effort is made to decrease the damage to the person involved , as well the indirect damage the user can cause to others .
The addicted individual needs to be actively involved in these efforts .
This is called risk reduction - or sometimes harm reduction or harm minimisation .
This is what the main part of the recommendation is about .
The risk reduction methods that feature in the recommendation are well established .
They have been used in most or all of the Member States , but to varying degrees .
Opiates , such as heroin , are the root cause of most drugs-related deaths .
One of the oldest of the risk reduction methods is controlled use of methadone tablets as a substitute for injected heroin .
Methadone first appeared in the EU in the late 1960s in response to emerging opiate use .
The emergence of HIV in the 1980s led to the introduction of needle- and syringe-exchange programmes .
In recent years , the number of acute drugs-related deaths at EU level as a whole has stabilised , in spite of increasing drug use .
Many factors may have contributed to this development .
Injecting drugs has decreased in some countries and medical treatment of overdoses has improved .
However , the risk reduction methods covered by this recommendation are likely to have made a large contribution to this favourable development .
Drug services need to be easily accessible , reaching out to the place where the drug user happens to be , not where we want him or her to be .
These are termed ' outreach services ' .
Such services should also be offered without unrealistic demands - sometimes called ' low threshold services ' .
The aim is to prevent further deterioration in the health and social circumstances of users and motivate them to seek treatment .
The more controversial risk reduction methods are not mentioned in the present recommendation , although they are being used in some of the Member States .
Methods such as heroin injections under supervision , injection rooms , open-drug scenes and on-the-spot anonymous testing of substances require more research and evaluation before they can be generally recommended .
The recommendation emphasises evaluation as a key tool for improving drugs-related measures .
The European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction in Lisbon plays a crucial role in the development of key indicators for monitoring and comparing drug use in the Member States .
It also assists in providing guidelines for the evaluation of drugs-related projects and evaluates different programmes and policies .
The Commission has received invaluable help from the Lisbon agency in preparing this recommendation , which I see as a positive step for drug users as well as public health in general .
Madam President , Commissioner , unfortunately , drug abuse is one of today 's major social problems , meaning that the measures and policies applied so far have been inadequate .
Drug use is increasing along with the other problems facing modern society .
The 2002 annual report of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction shows that the level of drug use is fairly stable , with 2 to 9 users per 1 000 population in the 15 to 64 age group , 500 000 to 1 000 000 of whom are drug injectors , that is , heroin addicts .
That is why , even though the primary objective when dealing with this problem is still and always will be prevention , I think this is a very important initiative and I congratulate you , Commissioner , on your proposal on the prevention and reduction of risks associated with drug dependence .
I make no bones about the fact that I would have preferred this particular proposal to have been a legislative proposal because it is common European policy or at least a legislative approach that makes our policies effective .
Nonetheless , I think that the proposed recommendation is an important step towards protecting both public health and the personal health of users and that we are sending out the right political message ; that addicts are patients in need of medical and social care , not just offenders , as most societies today believe .
Our proposed amendments mainly specify the action needed at local level if we are to achieve maximum possible results in this difficult and sensitive sector .
Raising public awareness in order to gain acceptance of various forms of treatment and other user protection programmes is vital if we are to be able to implement the proposed recommendation .
In other words , when we talk of measures to reduce the harm done by drug use , the main objective is still to cure the user .
However , as we know , a large number of drug addicts do not sign up for treatment programmes , and it is basically this group that has the most problems .
We can only stop dangerous diseases such as hepatitis , AIDS and tuberculosis from spreading if we educate this group on the health risks .
This should also encourage users to be more careful when taking drugs and adopt a healthier lifestyle .
It is also vital to include measures targeting high-risk environments , such as prisons .
The proportion of inmates in the EU reporting having used drugs varies according to prisons and countries from between 29 and 86 % .
Prisoners are highly exposed to illnesses through the use of common syringes and needles and sexual contact .
Inevitably , the prison staff also face an immediate danger and a number of amendments have been proposed in order to reflect this .
As you know , Commissioner , the drug debate has been a topical debate for quite some time now and always gives rise to a great many , usually conflicting views .
Nonetheless , and my thanks here to all my colleagues , especially the shadow rapporteurs for their cooperation , we have managed to table a relatively well-endorsed proposal in plenary today , despite the 103 original amendments .
I think that , if the Member States implement just some of the proposed measures , both users and their families and European citizens will feel that we are determined to do something about this complex and difficult problem .
Madam President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for her report and the Commissioner for bringing forward this proposal .
I think the Commissioner is right at this stage that it should be a recommendation .
There are different cultures in different Member States and we need to respect that , and so recommendations on good practice are probably the way forward at this stage .
I should also like to point out to him and to you , Madam President , that he needs to go through the text of his communication to make absolutely certain there is nothing in it which will frighten people into thinking that this recommendation is in any way promoting drug use .
There is no safe drug abuse , it is a question of how we reduce and prevent the harm that arises from such abuse .
In my country we have 3 million people on illegal drugs , 28 % of them are 16-29 year olds , 14 % of them are 14-15 year olds .
We have 12 000 new notified addicts , 70 000 drug offences and 1 200 drug related deaths per year .
If you look at the European figures from the MCDDA , offences in the EU have doubled since 1991 and quadrupled in some countries such as France , Greece and Spain .
Acute drug related deaths have doubled since 1985 .
There are those who use the same arguments as we sometimes hear on AIDS , saying that we can forget about those people who are infected , but should protect and save the rest .
However , we must not abandon people who are hooked .
Many of them , as those figures show , are children .
We are losing the battle but we must not give up the fight .
Our aims must be to target the growers and manufacturers , the traders and pushers , and to educate , deter and prevent , but also to reduce the harm to those addicted and to those with whom they come into contact .
This recommendation does exactly that .
No Member State is forced to do anything .
This sits alongside measures on prevention .
To my colleague Mr Santini I would say that if his amendments 60 , 61 , 63 and 64 were in addition to the proposals in this report then I would be happy to accept them .
It is only if they replace the proposals that I am less happy .
This is not the occasion for a debate on legalisation and I know there are some amendments on that .
That is why I would reject the legalisation and decriminalisation arguments on this occasion .
The report does not replace harm reduction with other measures , least of all ' JUST SAY NO ' , which does not work .
I know that from having been Minister responsible for drug addiction in my own country .
You have to tell young people in particular the truth .
They have to know the upside as well as the downside .
We had the case of Leah Betts , a young girl who died taking ecstasy , an amphetamine .
Afterwards , her parents very bravely allowed a video of her body to be shown , so that young people would understand the effect of taking ecstasy .
They also joined us in making sure that we issued guidance to night clubs on how to avoid this catastrophe affecting other people .
It is a question of water provision and ' chill-out rooms ' and so on , and not a question of ' shooting rooms ' , which is a completely different matter .
There are so many young people who need and deserve our support .
There are needle exchanges , which protect not just the addicts , but also the people with whom they are in contact .
Prison health needs to be looked at and we need to stop the abuse of drugs in prison , but we also need to ensure there is harm reduction and that we do not incorporate perverse incentives to further drug taking .
I welcome this report .
The whole subject needs to be treated with care , and I know the Commissioner will ensure that this is the case as we move forward to take on good practice throughout the European Union .
I give the floor to Mrs Sandberg-Fries , whom I would take the opportunity to welcome back to the European Parliament .
Madam President , this report concerns the prevention and reduction of risks associated with drug dependence .
From the beginning , we Swedish Social Democrats have held the view that the recommendation focuses to an unduly high degree upon harm reduction .
Our point of departure is that the most important measure for reducing harm is that of preventing dependence itself .
That does not mean that we deny the need for efforts to reduce harm .
Such efforts must , however , form part of a coherent strategy aimed at bringing about lasting change and lives not dependent upon illegal and other drugs .
On this point , the committee has complied with quite a few of the proposals we have tabled .
It is therefore very odd that the same committee in the same report should also have accepted a number of amendments in quite the opposite vein .
I mean the proposals concerning so-called chill-out rooms , drug classification , special injecting rooms and positive information about drugs .
These are proposals that we cannot under any circumstances support .
Such measures would imply social acceptance of drug abuse . Nor , obviously , do we accept proposals that are basically contrary to the UN Convention on Drugs .
The fact that a drugs policy based upon the three components consisting of prevention , treatment and control really can be successful is , I think , confirmed by the latest major survey carried out in Swedish schools .
This survey shows that 92 out of every 100 pupils in Swedish schools have not even tried drugs .
This is a result that , in an international context , is extremely encouraging .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am keen to do again what I did in committee , that is , to express my support for our rapporteur Mrs Malliori on this subject , which is , to say the least , a controversial subject that evokes passion .
The approach deliberately chosen by the committee and by our rapporteur , that of focussing on providing , on a local scale , step-by-step programmes targeting persons addicted to hard drugs , seems to us to be the right one , the one most likely to yield tangible results at grass-roots level and to reverse the current , rather disturbing , tendency .
Drug-related deaths are on the up , and that seems to be the case in most of the Member States .
For all these reasons , the Liberal Group welcomes the amendments that add value to this recommendation in terms of public health .
Our governments must indeed give priority to high-risk environments .
Streets , the penal system , nightclubs , raves , are all places where hard drugs circulate freely and without regard to the minimum standards of health and safety .
We must of course prioritise action programmes on the street , in prisons and also in places of nocturnal entertainment where the simultaneous consumption of more than one drug is prevalent .
As regards this latter practice of using drugs and alcohol at the same time , which is cutting swathes through young people in particular - and they are getting ever younger - it is imperative that , in parallel with one another , schemes for prevention , information , analysis of chemical substances and providing a rapid response in the event of illness or withdrawal , should be operated and made widely available .
The 8000 citizens who are dying every year in the European Union , from overdoses , from adulterated products , or as a result of shared needles , deserve a full-frontal approach to risk reduction on the part of the European Union .
Let me say now that I regret the fact that we have not , in this report , completely succeeded in focussing our attention on this specifically health-related aspect , at the risk of watering down our message and reverting to an ethical and generalised debate , which would again be futile and would attempt to set up prevention and suppression in opposition to each other .
I wish to say that I go along with Mr Bowis ' arguments and that I am unable to accept those put forward by Mrs Sandberg-Fries .
My conclusion , Madam President , is that we need to set ourselves realistic targets if we are to be able to say , tomorrow at least , that the EU 's new action plan on drugs has been a success .
Madam President , I should like firstly to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Malliori , who , as do other rapporteurs in the case of all the reports we prepare , relies on the opinions of the other groups with a view to obtaining a final outcome that we can all accept .
It seems that , in this case , there are some differences of opinion , but I believe that it will be possible for the report to be approved by a majority of this Parliament .
The report and the Commission communication refer to the prevention and reduction of risks .
Every Member will express his or her opinion in this Chamber on how risks are to be prevented and reduced .
Mrs Malliori 's report clearly refers to reducing supply and demand , to integrated policies , to the exchange of good practice and to a concern for social re-integration .
These are the bases of the report .
To achieve these aims , a variety of methods , including prevention programmes , are required , as are assessments of various methods of treatment and rehabilitation , taking into account the work of former drug addicts , their families and the communities that work with them .
In my own region of Asturias , the organisation ' Proyecto Hombre ' operates in this way and obtains results that I can see every day , encouraging local communities to set up , on the one hand , mobile units able to provide information , advice , assistance and first aid in the event of overdoses and , on the other hand - and , in this connection , I do not understand some of the amendments tabled - mobile units to dispense condoms , needles and syringes , something that has been proven to reduce AIDS infection and other illnesses .
Furthermore , it is necessary to support the innovative proposals reflecting experiments carried out with , as one approved amendment states , some success by a number of Member States with a view to preventing deaths and reducing risks .
I know that , on this subject , there are differences , including in my own group , where my Swedish fellow MEPs do not share this position of mine .
In this case , I agreed with an amendment by Mr Davies - defeated in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy - that proposed authorising and evaluating the professional prescription of heroin to addicts so that they might escape the clutches of dealers .
In my own country - and I heard the Commissioner say that he is now ready to approve this option - a pilot programme is to be carried out in one autonomous region , specifically Andalusia , involving chronically ill people who have completed re-integration programmes and entailing controlled doses of heroine being administered professionally only to those drug addicts who have shown that they are unable to give up the drug .
An assessment will be carried out in due course .
One hundred and thirty people chronically addicted to the drug have been selected to see if the programme produces results .
I , for my part , Commissioner , think that this programme is very worthwhile because it may help us all in the future .
I shall conclude by pointing out that the report also deals with the situation in prisons .
Depending upon the particular country , the situation in prisons is very serious , and there are a very great many prisoners infected with a variety of illnesses , precisely because they have taken drugs and used infected needles and syringes .
Madam President , a report like this , on how to deal with drug abuse , will always be controversial in this House .
This is because it touches on our inability to control reality , and that is difficult for us as politicians .
I therefore think that it is courageous and commendable that the rapporteur has managed to keep both feet on the ground .
She says in her explanation , and I quote : ' In an ideal world there would be no drug abuse .
In the real world , drugs have always been a fact of life . ' and that is the way things are .
Zero tolerance or simpler still , closing your eyes , is not a solution .
The question to our politicians is therefore how can we bring about an improvement to a reality that we do not like .
One such possibility is described in Amendment No 24 , which encourages Member States to facilitate the testing of synthetic drugs .
These are drugs that are mainly used by young people at discos , concerts and parties .
A lot of young people use them , perhaps even our sons and daughters , but many of these drugs are not innocent - certainly not if they have been tampered with to increase the profit margin even further .
I am in fact talking about ecstasy , the consequences of which have also just been set out by Mr Bowis .
It often results in fatal accidents .
Testing can reduce the health risks .
It puts social workers in touch with users , and it also helps assess the dangerous substances that are available on the market .
Testing can take place in testing centres throughout the country or in situ at parties or concerts .
You will of course have to be careful and make sure that the approval of a pill cannot be interpreted as a statement that it is a good idea to use it , because of course it is not .
Advice , the provision of information and prevention naturally remain key , but I nevertheless think that it is also extremely important for the government to try to make nightlife a little safer .
The use of these pills by young people is a fact , and I think that it is important for us to prevent fatal accidents from happening in our children 's nightlife .
Madam President , given the seriousness of the drugs problem I find it incomprehensible that Mr Byrne and the Malliori report are recommending a ' beating your head against a brick wall ' policy in this way .
Parliament 's resolution on the Action Plan to Combat Drugs ( 2000-2004 ) clearly indicated at the time that drug abuse results in biological , psychological and social problems , disease , problems with families and at work , committing offences , traffic accidents , and so on .
Drug abuse is also a threat to young people .
For these reasons , in 1999 the same resolution called for everything to be done to give priority to protecting children under the age of 18 and to reduce the number of drug-related deaths .
It is well known that there are differences between different kinds of drugs .
The most serious drug problems affect intravenous drugs users , of whom there are , according to the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction , between 500 000 and one million in the European Union .
Intravenous drug use inevitably results in social exclusion , as it soon excludes the essential elements of normal life - work , family , personal relationships and a permanent home .
That is not to say , however , that there is nothing wrong with other drugs .
It was wrongly stated in the discussions that so-called soft drugs are harmless .
It is partly on account of this belief that the use of cannabis has increased enormously .
It has furthermore been scientifically proven that there is a relationship between the use of these drugs and mental health .
For example , the chance of developing schizophrenia is 30 % to 50 % higher for cannabis users .
I am quoting the British Medical Journal of 23 November 2002 .
What is more , the policy of tolerance of soft drugs - as in the Netherlands - has resulted in an increase in use , particularly among young people .
In practice the switch to hard drugs has also been shown to be much easier ; after all , the use of drugs is already accepted .
The recommendation before us is about the health risks associated with drug addiction .
The European Commission mainly places the emphasis on limiting the risks instead of prevention .
The rapporteur is arguing for additional measures , particularly for the care of drug users at local level , for example by helping drug users achieve a healthier life .
The rapporteur cites the provision of a number of elementary health services such as clean hypodermic syringes and blood tests .
This may perhaps go a little way towards achieving better hygiene , but does not contribute to solving the problems .
I am firmly convinced that kicking the habit is the best way of achieving a healthier life .
The policy of harm reduction does not work , as it has been shown that the overload caused by users increases again after a while and the provision of free methadone seems only to result in additional addiction .
The negative effect of a liberal drugs policy has the effect of drawing people into certain other areas .
Crime , decay and the lack of safety in certain parts of towns and cities have taken on serious proportions .
To dismiss these arguments with the argument that this recommendation is only about the effects on health is misplaced .
The effects on health can best be reduced by means of a restrictive policy .
In addition , I am also in favour of proper help for addicts .
It does depend on how this is done , however .
We do not help drug addicts by only treating symptoms .
If we want to get drug addicts out of the downward spiral , kicking the habit - either voluntarily or otherwise - is the best option .
In the Netherlands there are fortunately examples of so-called hopeless cases who , with the right motivation , have been helped to achieve a drug-free existence .
This approach does most to benefit health .
I cannot accept Mr Bowis ' suggestion for Amendments Nos 60 , 61 and 64 to be regarded as additional ones .
Madam President , Commissioner , it is a matter of concern that the use of drugs is everywhere being treated as unimportant and commonplace .
This phenomenon goes hand in hand with the social acceptance of the marketing of them for recreational purposes , sometimes on a daily basis .
Drugs are not , though , an accident of fate to which one must resign oneself .
They involve serious risk of infection and lead to people being socially excluded in a very real sense .
You have to call a spade a spade .
This report speaks of risks , for the danger is indeed there .
Let me say that I am astonished that the report does not retain the amendment I had tabled in committee with the aim of avoiding the pitfall of trivialising drug use .
How do you combat evil if you start from the premise that it is inevitable or even necessary ?
To do so demonstrates a sad detachment from reality .
The risk will be no less if we sink into politically correct indifference .
Drug addiction is not tolerable .
It is a scourge that must be fought against .
There are no soft drugs .
There certainly needs to be information , but the trivialisation of drug use is a snare and must be combated .
As for a policy of risk-reduction , it could not do other than appear like fatalistic acceptance of the dangers .
This not about marginalising drug users still further , nor about scuppering risk reduction schemes , but about demonstrating at last the will to undertake preventive measures , which must have a simultaneous effect on both supply and demand and on our sense of social responsibility .
The refusal to trivialise drug use means taking up our responsibilities , both as regards our young people , who are most affected by this , and also with respect to social cohesion , which must always unite us all .
Madam President , Commissioner , I am one of those who take the view that , where the global repercussions of drug addiction for public health , crime and insecurity are concerned , it would be preferable , wherever possible , to develop European approaches .
I therefore welcome this proposal for a recommendation and the excellent report by Mrs Malliori .
Our policy for combating drug addiction has proved to be a failure : the prohibitionist approach has given trafficking oxygen , allowing it to thrive and to make ever-greater profits , boosting both organised and petty crime , corrupting regimes and humiliating us for being powerless to do anything about it .
Furthermore , the deterioration of drug addicts ' health is of concern , but also the health risks arising from infection such as HIV , tuberculosis , hepatitis B and hepatitis C , as well as the increasing number of deaths from overdoses and poisoning .
Faced with such problems , it is impossible to be absolutely sure of what approach to take .
We must , however , move in a new direction .
Although I believe that the debate must continue calmly in the United Nations on the impact on public health and crime of the possible decriminalisation of some drugs , I do not think that this should be our priority .
Our priority should be , firstly , to draw up rational prevention policies based on scientific knowledge of each drug and not on an emotional response and on the radical approach which , by treating all drugs equally , ultimately removes the credibility of preventive action .
Our second priority is to develop a risk-reduction policy .
For those infected for whom free drug treatments have not achieved positive results , methadone substitution programmes must be pursued .
It is also important that experiments involving administering heroin under medical supervision to patients with a long history of failure to respond to treatment and chronic illnesses are pursued and implemented in other States .
We must also be able to undertake an evaluation of these results .
Many of these experiments have shown positive results in reducing crime , the number of overdoses by poisoning and the number of those infected with HIV , tuberculosis , hepatitis B and hepatitis C.
Madam President , drug addiction is a complicated problem with significant social consequences for the user and for his or her environment , with risks to health and ongoing crime .
There are , however , not only social consequences , but also social causes .
Our rapporteur , Minerva Malliori , deserves our firm support for her approach .
A tailor-made approach ; as drug users are not all the same , the prevention of drug use and drug addiction must be based on respect for the drug user .
There has been a great deal of disagreement over the years about the approach to the drugs problem , all of which involve firm stances .
The Commission has opted for a policy of risk reduction or damage limitation .
Rightly so , as risk reduction can limit the impact on health .
A policy of monitoring substances and clean hypodermic syringes can save lives .
Naturally risk reduction must not lead to complacency , however .
We cannot relax about the addiction problem .
Conversely , the policy of damage limitation is precisely what makes a convincing approach to drugs crime possible .
There thus does not need to be a huge contrast between the policy of damage limitation and the policy of drug prevention .
We should be receptive to the benefits of each approach . Mrs Malliori 's local approach can achieve a great deal , and the establishment of mobile low threshold help services is a good idea .
We do not , however , have to strive towards a uniform approach , although we must be willing to learn from one another .
We must compare the approaches to see which is effective in countering addiction .
This report is a good opportunity for us to familiarise ourselves with the approach in various countries .
I warmly invite my fellow Members to come and see how it is done in the Netherlands .
My thanks and appreciation to Mrs Malliori again .
Madam President , hundreds of thousands of people die each year from the use of perfectly legal drugs .
Yet we subsidise the growing of tobacco plants while we cut down cannabis plants .
It is all complete nonsense .
The truth is that prohibition lies at the very heart of many of our problems .
Prohibition creates huge profits for criminals , who seek to extend their market .
Prohibition fosters corruption and theft .
Prohibition denies drug users the information about content that is available to everyone who enjoys an alcohol drink in the evening .
If health messages are to work and society is to be protected we must replace prohibition with government regulation .
The criminals must be denied their profits if we are to bring these problems under control .
This paper is an excellent step forward .
It ignores the moral outrage which has been expressed so often in the past .
It concentrates on pragmatic and sensible steps to inform people and reduce harm .
It is in complete contrast to the Swedish approach , which I find utterly appalling .
As Mr Bowis said , just saying ' no ' does not work - it certainly does not work in most of the societies in which we live .
The idea that we should try and prevent needle exchanges , for example , will simply mean more deaths , more blood poisoning , more AIDS .
It is a vicious and cruel approach .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Italian Radicals do not support this report either .
At a time such as this when we have an opportunity to discuss drugs , the Malliori report does not provide Parliament , particularly in the light of the disastrous effects of 40 years of prohibitionist policies and insubstantial endeavours - ' lightweight ' measures - which have failed miserably to control the spread of illegal drugs and , on the contrary , even exacerbated the social effects and effects on people 's lives and health - does not provide the European Parliament - with the opportunity to state some very simple truths : that prohibitionism has failed and that we therefore need to take steps , even one step at a time , to separate the markets , for example , to prevent the black market attracting consumers of hashish or marijuana , which are not drugs , and inducing them to approach the markets of other drugs .
We need to look carefully at the experiments with public injection rooms , at the experiments carried out in Switzerland and other European countries , to find a different path from that of the current policy which has led the European countries , and all the countries striving in vain to combat drugs , to continue with their prohibitionist policies .
This is why , together with other Members and the International Antiprohibitionist League , we have launched a large-scale campaign condemning the UN Conventions .
This is our position and we will therefore vote against the Malliori report , for it contains nothing new and just stresses the severity of the problems without proposing any solution , in some cases even changing the approach for the worse .
Madam President , when we talk about drugs , we clearly mean out-and-out war . We cannot just be content with a few short battles .
The battles we are talking about today are preventing and reducing the damage but , clearly , all these measures are , in any case , dependent upon the success of other measures such as combating drug trafficking and consumption .
It must be pointed out that we need to start by addressing a human condition , the condition of drug addicts .
We need to change our approach : drug addicts must be treated as people who are ill rather than criminals , and so we need to take lines which are consistent with this view and , therefore , employ treatments which bring about the recovery of drug addicts rather than social exclusion .
That is why , out of the two kinds of treatment still being debated , many of us still prefer the more human approach of rehabilitation communities , therapeutic communities , to the administration of chemical substances which are alternatives to or substitutes for drugs .
We do not endorse the use of substances such as methadone , except in extreme clinical cases .
In addition to medical and pharmaceutical care , we need to provide drug addicts with psychological help too .
First and foremost , we need to step up the fight against the network of traffickers who continue , I regret to say , to be on the scene .
Turning briefly to methadone , I would say that it is a substitution substance which does not resolve the problem of drug dependence and , worst of all , does not bring about the recovery of the drug addict : it is a bit like drugging up someone who is ill and administering pain killers without ever giving them an operation .

Mr Blokland and other Members have also mentioned the unsuccessful results of attempts at liberalisation and legalisation in this field : these kinds of approach must be abandoned .
That is why , therefore , I too have taken the liberty of tabling some amendments , which Mr Bowis is kindly going to illustrate during the vote , presenting them to our rapporteur not as replacing but as supplementing the contents of the report .
They are amendments which relate , above all , to prevention .
Amendment No 60 proposes some ideas for freeing addicts from their dependence , striking at the root of the evil .
Amendment No 61 relates to treatments which are not based on drugs but which include a great deal of psychological help for the ill drug addict .
Amendment No 62 recommends great caution in providing access to needles , condoms and syringes .
Amendments Nos 63 and 64 are on the subject of preventive and preparatory measures , first and foremost , for the people responsible for implementing these measures .
Lastly , the other amendments propose measures to combat drugs in prisons , to encourage data collection on prevention and , once again , to discourage substitution treatment , which not only fails to reduce damage and consumption but increases , boosts , the black market .
Madam President , I am deeply concerned , Commissioner .
Listening to our fellow MEP , Mr Davies is extremely depressing .
More and more young people in Europe are ending up in the type of squalor brought about by drugs .
The trend is in the wrong direction .
Mr Davies thinks so too , but more and more EU countries appear to have given up .
In this Chamber too , voices in favour of legalising and liberalising drugs and classifying them as dangerous and less dangerous are being heard more and more often .
Here in Parliament , there is a desire to tear up the UN conventions on drugs .
These are what we have to hold onto , Commissioner .
I am afraid that European drugs policy is on the decline .
The overall tenor of Mrs Malliori 's report is , unfortunately , along those lines , even though certain parts of it are constructive , for example the demand for drugs-free prisons .
That being said , it is quite unreasonable to begin talking about the ' upside ' of drugs and about chill-out rooms and injecting rooms .
Drug policy must free addicts from dependence , not sanitise dependence .
The only way to achieve that goal is through a combination of bans , care , preventive work and international cooperation .
The objective , which has to remain in place , must be a drugs-free society .
We Swedish Liberals will vote against the report because it lacks this overall combination .
Madam President , I would like to use the mere seconds I have been given to speak in to firstly point out to my fellow Members that the government in my own country , Flanders , in Belgium , has , over the past few years and in the most outrageous way , been neglecting the drugs problem and trivialising drug use .
In my country the use of so-called soft drugs has been de facto legalised , and this has also been advertised to young people in television programmes with ministers in office acting as if they were smoking dope .
At this moment nobody in my country knows what is actually legally permitted and what is not legally or socially permitted , with all the extremely serious consequences this entails .
Young people and children in my country currently do not know where they stand .
What we ought to be sending out today is a signal from a Europe that is engaging in the fight against drugs in a serious and consistent way - by means of prevention , certainly , by supporting addicts and their families , certainly , but also if necessary by means of compulsory detoxification programmes for addicts and by means of the toughest possible penalties for drug dealers .
I regret the fact that the present recommendations do not contain these two necessary components , and so I am unfortunately not able approve the report .
Madam President , Mrs Malliori 's report is mainly acceptable in itself .
The main basis of the report is health grounds , but its general tone could be interpreted as permissive with respect to drugs .
For that reason I would stress that we must tackle the drugs problem strictly and that in the EU we must achieve minimum norms in legislation as well as in the penalties we impose .
The credibility of our fight against drugs is weakened by the fact that in the Member States the use of those other intoxicants , alcoholic drinks , is viewed permissively or even idealised .
It does Mrs Malliori 's report credit that it should mention that problems with alcohol are on a par with drug problems .
This is the way we should be going .
The EU must agree to raise taxes on alcohol , hence reducing consumption and the harm it does .
Social welfare and healthcare costs will then come down , so allowing us to cut other forms of taxation .
The Member States must also be able to maintain a protection from imports system that would make possible a national , health-promoting policy on alcohol .
Madam President , initially we denied that the problem existed .
Then gradually we moved from denying that the problem existed to playing down its importance ; it varied depending on the country and the society concerned .
I think that this report now presents us with a more holistic approach .
I find the report positive overall , although it could certainly be improved .
The analysis is very comprehensive and good .
If we consider the five different levels - production , transport , marketing , consumption and consequences - we realise that as a society and as a legislator we are going to have to intervene in various different areas and sectors .
Where production is concerned , I think that we need to intervene much more decisively through development aid , which is a different field , but one that is entirely relevant here .
Because if we are not in a position to share of our own free will now , then we will certainly have to do so in the future .
As regards transport , marketing and the criminality associated with them are concerned , I think that this is where more effort needs to be made , and it is essential that this go hand in hand with tightening up the relevant measures on prevention and care .
Although this is not directly our responsibility , I do believe - indeed I am convinced - that this issue needs to be raised .
Consumption is generally presented as an individual problem .
But it is not just an individual problem ; it is an issue not only for the individual , the family and their immediate circle , but also for the local community and society at large .
The consequences , as it states in detail in the analysis contained in the report , are also a public health problem .
It is then an issue for the whole of society and I believe that this phenomenon - which after being played down is now once again entering a new phase in which a holistic approach is being adopted - can only be tackled through dialogue and with the help and willingness of the entire community - the local community in particular - to provide care .
I hope that society 's attitude gradually changes in this regard and that people become more willing to show greater commitment here , because that is what is required if we are to be successful in combating this scourge .
.
Madam President , I very much appreciate Mrs Malliori 's report and in particular the many wise remarks in her explanatory statement , which demonstrate a profound knowledge in this field and a positive attitude .
Let me first make it clear that prevention will always be our priority .
The scope of the recommendation is , however , focused on risk reduction .
This is not an alternative , but an important other element in the fight against drugs .
Most of the suggested amendments strengthen the recommendation .
I am pleased to say that the Commission agrees with 41 out of the 66 proposed amendments .
A number of those amendments overlap and redrafting may be necessary for other reasons .
Those involving financial commitments should be dealt with according to normal procedures .
I particularly welcome Amendments 12 and 24 suggesting the addition of risk reduction methods related to the use of new synthetic drugs such as ecstasy .
Strictly speaking , this might be regarded as on the periphery of the scope of this recommendation , as most users of these drugs are not actually addicted .
But the use of these drugs is on the increase .
Some users show a compulsive use pattern and they are frequently part of a network where drug use is very common .
As I have said , many of the suggested amendments can be supported , but time does not allow me to mention all of them .
There are 25 amendments that I cannot support , not necessarily because I disagree with the thrust of their content , but because they clearly fall outside the scope of this recommendation .
I have arranged for a list to be handed over to Parliament 's secretariat for inclusion in the Minutes of this debate for greater clarity and precision .
Thank you , Commissioner Byrne .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at midday .
The next item is a report by Mrs Stihler ( A5-0008 / 2003 ) , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the communication from the Commission on community and national measures in relation to breast implants [ COM ( 2001 ) 666 - C5-0327 / 2002 - 2002 / 2171 ( COS ) ] .
, rapporteur .
Madam President , I wish to thank everyone who has contributed to this debate .
Throughout this process there has been a lot of consensus and , for a change , most colleagues agree that action needs to be taken .
That is why I accept all three amendments which have been tabled to this report .
How did we get to this stage ?
Over eight years ago a woman called Margot Cameron attended a surgery held by my colleague , Mr Miller .
She said that nobody would listen to her .
Her story so inspired my colleague that a petition was lodged with the European Parliament which showed that Margot was not alone .
There are many Margots in the UK and across the EU with similar stories concerning problems with silicone .
The petition has led to the Commission reclassifying breast implants as a Class III product under the Medical Devices Directive 93 / 42 / EEC .
Member States are to adopt and publish laws , regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with this directive no later than 1 August 2003 .
If I am not mistaken , this is the first time that such a petition has led to direct action by the Commission .
I hope that more and more EU citizens will find solutions to their problems through this route .
However , much as Parliament welcomes the Commission 's actions , we would like to take this matter still further .
As more women choose to have implants - whether for purely cosmetic reasons , reconstruction after breast cancer or breast deformities - we must ensure that people make informed choices and we must put patient safety first .
My report aims to answer both the legitimate concerns of thousands of women and the need to put patient safety first .
Therefore , the report recommends Member States to take measures to increase and improve information for patients through tracking and surveillance , quality control and assurance .
In this perspective , I particularly want to emphasise three main points .
Firstly , the need for responsible advertising .
This includes all forms of direct advertising , such as in magazines and the use of ' before and after ' pictures .
We must clamp down on this misleading advertising that is fuelling demand and which many women pin so much hope on .
Perhaps ' before and after ' photographs of women who have suffered from ruptured implants would tell a very different side of the story to the readers of glossy magazines .
I would like to see the 18-year age limit applied - apart from where there is medical need - in order to protect young women from making ill-informed beauty choices .
Secondly , the need for information requires proper labelling and marketing , including health warnings explaining the health risks involved .
For instance , women should be aware that breast implants will have to be replaced after a time period .
It is a grave state of affairs that for too long cosmetic cowboys have got away with not explaining these simple facts .
It is for this reason that we require the creation of an international register of accredited plastic surgeons .
Finally , there must be responsible research .
Before breast implants are placed on the market , manufacturers must collect clinical data on the characteristics and performance of their product .
It also means that breast-implant producers need to trace their products .
Therefore , the creation of a national breast implant registration to keep women informed in the event of a product fault is vital .
This issue will not go away .
I hope that in the future more women will be able to make informed choices and they will not have to suffer in the way that so many women like Margot have in the past .
I hope that the Commission will be able to report back to Parliament on how far the Member States have gone in implementing this reclassification , and will continue to monitor the issue of silicone-gel breast implants , always putting patient safety first .
Mr President , I would like to start by congratulating Mrs Stihler and the members of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy for their excellent work .
The same applies to the members of the Committees on Petitions and Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities who also played a part in the process .
The report reflects the policy consensus between the European Parliament and the Commission .
I am pleased to inform Parliament that , last week , the Commission adopted a directive reclassifying breast implants in the context of the legislation on medical devices .
Breast implants are now subject to the most stringent assessment procedures .
More precisely , breast implants have been reclassified from class IIB to class III .
It requires , in addition , clinical data and design attributes , namely on biocompatibility , physical and mechanical properties .
This will increase the level of safety of breast implants .
Furthermore , at the request of the Commission and the Member States , CEN , the European Standardisation Body , is proceeding to an in-depth review of the European standards on breast implants .
The Commission received encouraging information from Member States regarding national measures taken , or further developed , under the recommendations set out in our communication of November 2001 .
This information will be made available to Parliament in a Commission staff working document on national measures adopted or planned to be adopted by Member States in relation to breast implants .
This paper will be finalised in the coming weeks .
The Commission believes that its communication and the production of the forthcoming working document have produced a significant effect .
All Member States have acted by verifying existing national policies and by starting to introduce measures as recommended by the communication .
Both documents will continue to be a useful element that interest groups and national authorities may use , at national level , to promote best practice and inspire further actions .
The excellent cooperation between Parliament and the Commission on this subject should be highlighted , since the overall result has been extremely positive .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , thousands of women have petitioned Parliament to take a stand on the dangers inherent in the use of silicone breast implants .
Breast implants are subject to the standard quality and safety requirements for medical devices , being covered - as you also mentioned , Commissioner - by Directive 93 / 42 / EEC .
It was lobbying from self-help groups of women suffering adverse effects from silicon-gel breast implants that prompted the Commission Communication .
Silicon implants were used for years before there was regulation or surveillance of their use .
The draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , my colleague , Mrs Ria Oomen-Ruijten , who unfortunately is unable to be here today , refers in particular to the need for open and transparent information about silicon implants .
Public health and healthcare issues are for the most part the competence of the Member States .
Together with Mrs Stihler , we now call on all of the Member States to introduce a national register including information about how medical aftercare is provided and how it is taken up .
Personal privacy must be protected .
Access to the registers will therefore have to be restricted and their contents treated as confidential .
Best practice will have to be publicised and then applied Europe-wide .
We need research and further development work to be carried out on safety and implant toleration .
Here the introduction of a passport for implant recipients and compulsory aftercare examinations might also be helpful for gathering data .
Accurate information must not be given in the form of advertising .
Advertising will increase demand for implants .
What is needed , however , is balanced information .
Doctors and nurses - both male and female - have a particular responsibility here to provide patients with objective , complete and scientifically up-to-date information in writing about all the details of their implants , such as the identification number , volume and type .
I should like to thank Mrs Stihler for her balanced report .
Ladies and gentlemen , in my view , breast implants are also an integral part of health .
They are needed to reconstruct breasts .
Aesthetic reasons do often play a role , but if someone thinks that they are inferior then it is their general health that suffers .
With the help of implants their sense of well-being can be restored .

Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it was in 1998 that the Committee on Petitions received two petitions with a total of over 1 000 signatures , which , as Mrs Stihler has said , were those of women concerned about this issue or who had themselves suffered , and who asked Europe to consider the problems presented by breast implants , especially those made of silicon .
The Committee on Petitions , with its ear open to the public , reacted at that time by asking STOA to carry out an independent and intensive study of implants .
Following this , it organised a hearing that attracted wide media coverage , and , as rapporteur , I was entrusted with the task of drafting a resolution , which Parliament adopted unanimously on 13 June 2001 .


It will therefore be evident that our vote today on a communication dealing with Community and national provisions on breast implants is a matter of twofold satisfaction to me ; firstly , because it gives recognition to the action taken by the Committee on Petitions , which was the true initiator of this communication , and then because Mrs Stihler 's excellent work takes up and gives added weight to almost all the proposals made in the June 2001 resolution , especially as regards advertising , the information required to be given to patients , the guarantee of the implants ' high quality , research , the responsibilities placed not only on manufacturers , but also on surgeons and clinics , as well as the invitation extended to the Member States to maintain national registers and to make provision for a consent form .
My only regret is that the idea of issuing a passport to the patients was not retained in the initial report , and it is for that reason that I will be supporting Amendment No 3 to paragraph 10 ( ii ) , resubmitted on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , which aims to reintroduce such a passport .
Although some may object that this is just one more piece of paper , I consider it an effective way to replenish the future European database .
Moreover , such a system would , above all , allow the patient to have real knowledge of the implant 's specific characteristics .
Let me conclude by saying that I rejoice to be able to vote on this resolution , which itself demonstrates how well the Commission and our Parliamentary committees can work together to meet the expectations of Europe 's citizens .
It demonstrates that the Committee on Petitions , which the public tends to use as a means of bringing to light the Community system 's failings , can also play its part in developing creative and positive Community initiatives .
It is also a way in which we can show the petitioners that we do indeed honour our commitments .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Stihler , very much for her excellent report and for the remarkably good cooperation , also on behalf of my colleague , Mrs Ria Oomen-Ruijten , who cannot be here today for an important reason , namely an investiture ceremony in the Netherlands .
She sends her apologies .
Breast implants are covered by the directive on medical devices .
I am very pleased that the Commission - as Commissioner Byrne also explained earlier - has recently announced that it is reclassifying breast implants and is pressing for higher levels of safety for patients .
Broadly speaking , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats can support the Commission Communication and the report tabled by Mrs Stihler .
We have to face up to the following fact in Europe : every year 160 000 women in the European Union suffer from breast cancer .
It affects one in eight women .
In Germany alone , that means over 50 000 women every year .
Parliament is acutely aware of how topical and sensitive this issue is .
In the post-operative care of breast cancer patients , breast implants are often a decisive factor in increasing their quality of life .
Where breast abnormalities and surgical beauty treatments are concerned , the options available must also be explained and safety guaranteed .
We are therefore calling for a number of decisive measures to be taken , above and beyond the Commission 's proposals .
It is essential for a minimum age to be set for cosmetic breast operations .
These should not be carried out on young women under the age of 18 .
Operations for medical reasons would be exempt .
In addition , advertising for such implants that is directed at the general public should be banned along the lines of the French model .
It would then only be permitted to publish objective information in a non-commercial context .
It must be guaranteed that advice and information will be provided prior to the operation by a doctor specialising in plastic surgery .
We think it is vital for this meeting to take place at least four to six weeks before an appointment is agreed for the operation , so as to give the women concerned a cooling-off period to reflect on the objective and reliable information that they have received .
As in other areas , more emphasis needs to be given to providing patients with information .
Before the operation date is agreed , the women concerned should therefore also be given an information sheet .
It is important for this to be based on the content already developed by EQUAM .
It should contain both a warning about the potential health risks and also a clear appeal only to agree an operation date once all remaining questions are fully resolved .
This is also the point made in the amendment that I have tabled to paragraph 9 of the report .
Where silicon implants are concerned , we need high standards of safety and quality at international level .
For this reason , we need cross-border registration of breast implants to be made compulsory at international level .
In this context , the EU Member States should be advised to become members of the international breast implant register .
The scientific research carried out over the last few years has yielded some decisive findings in this field .
We therefore also think it is important to support this research and guarantee that the scientific work continues across Europe .
Overall the Commission Communication , together with the amendments proposed by Parliament , constitutes an important step in the right direction .
It is not a question of making it more difficult to use breast implants , for either medical or cosmetic reasons .
The aim of this initiative is to guarantee the highest levels of product safety , ensure that comprehensive information is provided and ultimately to increase the quality of life of the women concerned .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too should like to thank Mrs Stihler very much for her excellent and , above all , important report .
Time and again , women complain about the damage suffered to their health following the use of breast implants or about operations that have had undesirable cosmetic results .
Incidentally , 80 % of breast implant operations are carried out for purely cosmetic reasons .
The constant physical and emotional suffering caused by the implant operations is often immense .
As a rule this ought to be avoidable , as the cause is not the implants per se .
This has been confirmed in studies , and particularly impressively by the STOA study from the year 2000 .
The causes are more usually the implants not being fitted by specialists , the device not being replaced automatically after a few years and the continuing lack of regular medical aftercare , not to mention the fact that women are still not fully informed about the potential risks , which vary from case to case , before the operation .
That is why there is an urgent need to impress on the Member States that they must finally ensure that women are fully informed before an operation of this kind and , above all , that they must stop a plethora of insufficiently qualified beauty surgeons from working by introducing additional qualification requirements and subjecting their clinics to more stringent inspections .
If we want to optimise quality assurance then this is the second step , now that we have already taken the first step , together with the Commission , of putting in place stricter product safety standards .
I am thinking of the recent decision to reclassify breast implants as class 3 medical devices .
My group is also calling for an implant passport to be introduced , which would give information both about the characteristics of the implant and about the necessary post-operative care and would identify the surgeon .
The passport should be signed by the doctor and the patient before the operation as a clear declaration of consent .
In the light of the many complications that can arise after breast implant operations - which were brought to our attention not least by the petitions sent in by thousands of women in 1998 - I think it is quite frankly scandalous and completely incomprehensible that so far only one Member State has introduced a national implant register .
It will come as no surprise either then to learn that at the moment we do not have either precise figures on the implant operations carried out or complete scientific findings based on the adverse effects suffered by the women .
That is why it is of the utmost urgency to start setting up a national register for breast implants in all of the Member States immediately , and to join the international breast implant register .
In my view , this whole sorry tale also illustrates yet again why we urgently need multidisciplinary breast centres , in which benign and malignant diseases can be treated and beauty operations carried out under one roof , and where quality is guaranteed .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , every year , tens of thousands of women undergo surgery for the insertion of at least one breast implant .
In Belgium alone over the past ten years , over 4 000 prosthetic implants were inserted , with , in 1999 , 313 women needing hospital in-patient treatment because of complications .
So there are at least three reasons to justify this action being taken at Community level : improving information for patients in certain cases ; shedding the maximum possible light on the potential secondary effects of having a breast implant , in particular by means of research ; and , of course , taking into account the petitions presented by citizens ' groups , giving consideration to whether or not their request that silicon implants of this sort be subject to an immediate ban is well founded .
These three aspirations are set out clearly by Mrs Stihler , whom also I wish to congratulate , in her report , the broad outlines of which the Liberal Group endorses .
I am thinking especially of the prohibition of advertising aimed directly at the public , and of the authorisation of prosthetic implants for young women under the age of 18 , strictly and solely for medical reasons .
The Liberal Group does not , however , support all the measures advocated by this report , specifically mandatory entry in national registers , or Amendment No 3 , which proposes the introduction of a passport for wearers of implants , which strike us as being like so many ideas which appear to be good but turn out to be misguided .
Over and above that , primarily , where the cost and feasibility of such interventions is concerned , should we be contemplating the imposition of requirements that go well beyond those in place for other equally invasive and extensive surgery ?
I am thinking , for example , of heart surgery , the requirements imposed on which by the Commission are sufficiently restrictive .
In conclusion , Mr President , what women expect is clear answers to issues that frequently cause them anguish or even traumatise them , when raised in the event of an illness .
It is self-evident that what we owe them is the truth , and the truth is not about imposing a ban that risks simply sending these women across our European borders .
The Liberals therefore give their active support to Amendment No 2 tabled by the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
The truth is that women tempted to undergo this sort of operation which - as has been said - is becoming increasingly common , need to be informed and protected , and that is what we have tried to do .
Mr President , as Mrs Fourtou said very clearly , this resolution stems from the Committee on Petitions and is motivated by the petitions of thousands of women who attended a hearing in the course of one morning at which they expressed their concern and anxiety about the consequences that certain implants had had in terms of their health .
This gave rise to the STOA report , according to which there was apparently no evidence of a relationship between silicone implants and , for example , cancer .
There was , however , a clear indication of the various kinds of inconvenience caused to women who wanted , or felt obliged , to undergo implant operations .
I believe that Mrs Stihler 's proposal acknowledges the suggestions , with which we too agree , that were put forward both in the study made of the STOA report , as well as elsewhere , and that , in general , ask for special measures to be adopted as a matter of urgency , one of the most important being an improvement in the independent information provided to women who wish to undergo implants .
It is also proposed that the information not come from the private clinics that are to carry out the implants ; that the information be exhaustive ; that there be a period of reflection so that the women concerned might consider the pros and cons of having the implants carried out ; that prior consent be given ; that there be follow-up and monitoring where the implants are concerned , as well as a basic investigation into the latter ; and , above all , that the Member States subject all the clinics , especially the private ones , to rigorous controls .
In my own country , there was a case , which gave rise to a national debate , of a hairdresser 's in the Canary Islands that had given implants to a large number of women without providing any medical guarantee .
The problem became public knowledge because one of the women who had been given implants had to have both her breasts removed .
I believe that this is an extreme case , and something which obviously does not usually happen , but it is vital that the Member States exercise rigorous control over all clinics and over all products that serve as implants , so improving the situation of those women who , for one reason or another , feel obliged to undergo implant operations .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mrs Stihler on an excellent report .
One of the key issues is the ban on the direct advertising of breast implants to the public .
The provision of non-commercial information through national public health services is the way forward .
France has already introduced a ban .
All Member States should do the same in relation to breast implants because they always involve certain risks .
The promotion of cosmetic surgery in general is a major problem .
Action should be taken to prevent situations whereby women and indeed men are coerced into unnecessary surgery which may involve particular risks .
It is true that there are , in many cases , health and psychological reasons for breast implants , but we need to be careful in that regard .
I agree with the rapporteur concerning the age limit .
Implants in women under the age of 18 should be authorised only on medical grounds .
Anyone under 18 years of age is extremely vulnerable and could be coerced into something they may regret in later years .
Advertising for cosmetic surgery should carry clear health warnings .
We need to focus more on promoting and securing acceptance of women as they are , rather than allowing the advertising industry to impose some sort of idea of beauty as the norm .
This applies not only to women but also to men .
If you look in the back of women 's magazines you can see a huge number of adverts encouraging women to put extra things into some parts of their bodies , and to remove parts elsewhere .
The advertising industry has a huge amount to answer for .
There are cases where it is necessary on health grounds , but it also needs to be - as the rapporteur has said - very well tracked , and information must be made available to patients .
In terms of implants for purely cosmetic reasons , we need to look at what the advertising industry is doing in relation to coercing people into something that they may regret in later years .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate Mrs Stihler on her report .
As an oncological surgeon and university research scientist , I read the report very carefully and support many of the proposals it contains .
I feel , however , that the tone is excessively alarmist and I will tell you why .
For 50 years or so , silicones have been widely used in products for large-scale consumption such as drinks , puddings , cakes , drugs , paediatric materials , pacemakers , cardiac valves , lipsticks , creams and fabrics - and it has been proved that none of these cause cancer in humans .
For 40 years , silicone breast implants have been used throughout the world for both aesthetic reasons , as in the case of serious psychological problems , and for reconstruction , as in the case of mastectomies carried out to remove breast cancer where there are no age restrictions .
In 1986 , the University of Los Angeles examined 3000 women who had had implants for at least six years and found no risk of increasing neoplasia or to mobility .
In 1992 , the University of Calgary , examining 11 000 women , reached the same conclusions .
The American Association of Rheumatologists also promoted two studies on the risk of autoimmune pathology in women with silicone implants , which recorded good tolerance in all cases .
It was discovered that the average life of implants is between 15 and 25 years and spontaneous rupture is often asymptomatic .
There are therefore no sufficiently serious grounds for preventing the use of implants , except in young women less than 18 years old .
I must point out that the report makes no reference to breast implants inserted as preventive treatment in cases where the results of predictive genetic tests have shown a high risk of carcinogenesis in patients , tests carried out particularly on the children of mothers who have suffered from cancer , which is a practice which will become increasingly widespread .
As regards paragraph 10a , I would like to point out that patient consent forms are already in use in all the States of the Union . It is compulsory for the patient to sign a form after receiving all the necessary information , before any treatment is applied , including implants .
I therefore feel it superfluous to mention a passport .
I also feel it would be useful to set up European and national registers containing data collected on both aesthetic and therapeutic breast implants .
Furthermore , it is important for an annual check to be carried out by a breast specialist and a free echography performed , without the need for invasive examinations such as mammographies or CAT scans , which still subject patients to radiation and are practices which are on the expensive side for national health services .
The collection of data on implants and regulated follow-up would contribute to the production of a valid survey allowing a more precise assessment to be carried out , which would certainly be reassuring for all women .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , with a few exceptions , including the last speaker - perhaps the fact that he is a man has something to do with it - there is significant consensus among the political groups on this subject .
It is for good reason that it is mainly women who are speaking here .
I do not think that this has anything to do with personal experience but rather with the fact that we do , after all , feel a close bond with the thousands of women who submitted the petition to Parliament .
It was not that we woke up one morning and said : we must regulate this .
The question came from grass roots level and on this basis we have already spent a long time working on creating a good Community framework .
I would also like to thank Mrs Stihler very much for her excellent report , and also the Commissioner who I hope will soon present the report from the Member States , as he promised a moment ago .
I hope that he will also work hard on following up what we recommend today .
Without wanting to repeat what has already been said , I would just briefly like to ask what is particularly important , and what our starting points are .
Our main aim is to see patients protected .
We do not want to patronise them ; we want to protect them .
That is crucial .
We do not want a ban ; a woman must be able to decide for herself in good faith whether she wants breast implants or not .
What we do want is to ensure that she is properly informed and that she knows what the disadvantages and potential dangers of a breast implant are .
We want to guarantee that .
That is why we have such a problem with advertising .
This is not the same as selling a coffee machine ; this is about a medical intervention .
We do not want women to be persuaded to change their breasts on the basis of misleading advertising .
Why is compulsory registration so important ?
In Europe we know too little about breast implants , we know too little about the dangers , we know too little about where these women are and what the consequences are .
That is why proper registration is essential .
Finally , protecting the patient .
Yes , protecting young people , yes , making sure that they are given time to think things over .
Mr President , people who have to do without a part of their body as a result of an accident or an operation are generally happy that these days there are ways of restoring their lost functions .
In cases in which they cannot be restored , they at least want to make sure that the external damage caused is made as invisible as possible .
This naturally also applies to women who have had an operation as a result of breast cancer .
They thought it was a good solution to replace the lost part of their bodies with an artificial substitute that has the same suppleness as the original living material .
These days there are disappointed women who find that they have been poisoned after such treatment .
These are the people who are warning against this happening again and are pleading for a ban .
The new material generally lasts only a few years ; after that the silicone may leak or escape into the body .
Those affected by this may have been beautiful for a short time but are ill for a long time afterwards .
A positive point in the rapporteur 's proposal is to prohibit advertising for this solution and to improve advice on the negative consequences and on alternatives .
It may be possible to live with silicone breasts if they are periodically replaced with new material .
This approach takes better account of women who are in danger of psychological problems following an operation than does an outright ban , and prevents these treatments from being performed illegally without proper information .
A possible advantage is still the fact that gullible women who are not able to check out the dangers and who retain old replacement material in their bodies because they cannot afford or are afraid of repeated operations will continue to get into difficulties in the future .
I agree with Mrs McKenna that if it is not possible to severely restrict these practices , a ban may soon be unavoidable .
Mr President , I also wish to thank the Commission for this proposal and to congratulate Mrs Stihler on an excellent report on a very important subject .
It is an area that touches upon many aspects of health and consumer policy .
Thousands of women who have had problems have contacted the European Parliament and want us to express an opinion on the dangers associated with silicone breast implants .
This shows that those who carry out these operations are not always reliable and that there is an extreme lack of information .
The image , often presented in advertisements , of how young women should look - all slim waists and large breasts - means that there is a considerable increase in the number of breast implants carried out on very young women .
The weekly magazines fuel this trend by showing ' before and after ' pictures .
It is therefore high time that , as responsible politicians , we protected patients by beginning to bring some order to this very confused area .
I completely agree with Mrs Stihler that this is only a step in that direction .
I believe that many more binding commitments are required on the part of those who carry out these implants .
What I think is the most important part of the proposal is the ' 18 years ' old ' limit whereby non-medical implants are to be prohibited in the case of girls under 18 years of age .
The proposal that surgeons and clinics must issue guarantees is also important .
Unlike my colleagues , I think that registration at both national and EU levels is justified .
When there is insufficient research , a register is needed .
I am very satisfied with the report .
We , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , fully support the report and the amendments tabled .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate the rapporteur and all colleagues who have worked on this report for keeping this issue in the spotlight .
The rapporteur told you a story about a woman called Margot Cameron who came to see me eight years ago .
She wandered in , nobody would listen to her , and we sat down and looked at the problem she had and started campaigning .
It is a success story , because here we are today looking at legislation that we are putting through this Parliament , which is great .
I would like to tell you another story , which does not have such a happy ending .
As I have said , this all happened eight years ago when Margot Cameron came to see me .
We started campaigning and raised the issue at national level and finally took it to European level .
By that time we had contacted groups throughout Europe and brought the issue to the Petitions Committee in 1998 , though looking around this room and I do not see anybody who was at that Committee .
I remember going to that Committee and arguing , along with the women , for that petition .
However , I also remember the Commission saying : ' sorry guv , nothing to do with us - it is a Member State issue ' .
That delay set us back years .
It was 2001 before we got any satisfaction out of the Commission .
In that period 28 000 further operations were carried out in the UK alone .
It is estimated that 20 000 of those implants have either leaked or ruptured during that period .
What happened as a result of that delay ?
We let down not only the women who had signed that petition , but also a lot of women who had gone down the road of getting implants .
This shows that we have to address these issues and problems more speedily when they arise and not let women suffer in the way they have in the past .
Many Member States have banned trilucent implants and have banned saline implants .
We have got to look in the future at a ban on silicone implants .
Why ?
Because they affect people 's health .
If it were men getting the implants , there would be a ban tomorrow , but that is not happening because men are not getting them .
I would like to make one final point .
This report is entitled ' breast implants ' , but it is also possible to get silicone implants for other parts of the body , and they cause the same damage .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have come here to voice my solidarity with the people who for years have been making efforts to finally get this problem onto the political agenda .
The fact that prostheses are available for the many women who have had to undergo mastectomies is naturally an advantage , and we must not forget that this represents important progress in itself .
It is , however , a real disgrace the way people are brazenly abusing the naiveté of many women these days by convincing them that they will have heaven on earth if they have breast implants fitted in order to improve their aesthetic appearance .
For whom actually ?
And what for ?
I think it is a real scandal that people like my colleague Mrs Van Brempt have had to take reproaches from those who are earning big money from this .
I am therefore happy to endorse the congratulations to Mrs Stihler , the congratulations to the people who started this petition campaign at the time and the congratulations to the people who want to take this matter in hand - namely to impose a ban on advertising and to ensure that young people in particular are not caught in the trap of this misleading advertising , to ensure that products are of course reliable and that medical aftercare is organised efficiently at Member State level .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are , then , well and truly members of a society with wall-to-wall media coverage , one that is inclined to favour certain aesthetic notions that tempt not only many women but also many men to change their appearance .
A number take the plunge and have recourse to cosmetic surgery .
For others , such surgery takes on a reconstructive role and helps them heal their wounds and rebuild their bodies . In the former case , however , it is material external to themselves that their bodies are having to incorporate .
In every case , it is essential that prostheses in the form of breast implants be subject to investigation and regulation and that all surgery be accompanied by safety information and be followed up , over the very long term in the case of women patients .
In the light of all this , we can but agree with Mrs Stihler 's report and approve the changes proposed with a view to better informing and protecting not only female , but also male , patients .
I would note , for my part , a number of areas on which our activity must be focused .
Although silicone implants are highly disparaged and have been subject to many studies , silicone is not the only component of the prostheses .
I therefore think it essential to pursue research and clinical studies in this area , especially where women are concerned , by focusing the research on the long-term risks and on the other components .
Moreover , I think it important that our nations and their health services be able to work as part of a network and to share information and good practice in this area so that all women patients in Europe might benefit from the same information and the same guarantees and so that impetus might be given to research .
Since we are concerned here with the provision of information and follow-up , it is essential that all patients possess all the data concerning their implants and the surgery that they are to undergo .
It is also important that they be warned of the risks , the costs , the advantages and the disadvantages connected with the insertion and wearing of breast implants .
I should think it worthwhile if , for once , Europe were to take its cue from Thailand and perfect measures designed to protect consumers against this advertising and fashion phenomenon and , in particular , to ban very young women from receiving implants .
It is more and more important for all sections of the public to be given clear , scientific and comprehensible information if they are not to be the victims of false advertising and misleading images .
For the well-being of patients and the medical follow-up they require , I would therefore defend the idea of setting up national and European registers and of centralising data and other information in this field .
In compliance with the law on the protection of personal data , such information should of course only be used for the purposes of studies and research in the field of health , particularly women 's health .
Mr President , firstly I would like to thank Ms Stihler for drawing up this report and indeed the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
I first came into contact with this as a political issue in the Committee on Petitions when the long and hard work done by Mr Miller came before us .
We finally got some movement from the Commission on the matter .
I therefore welcome the announcement today by the Commissioner that implants have been reclassified as medical devices , and the effects that will have on how they may be controlled .
Breast implant advertising specifically - indeed implant advertising of any kind - should be regulated .
It is not acceptable that these implants should be advertised as simple and straightforward , with no indication that there are medical risks involved .
There is a particular need to ensure that people under 18 years of age may only have implants as a medical necessity , and their guardians should also be fully informed of the implications of such operations .
There is a particular need to follow up on research in relation to the effect of breast implants and , as has been pointed out by Mr Miller , implants in other parts of the body .
There are question marks relating to silicon implants which have not been answered by studies to date , and I would urge further research on that .
Finally , could I gently take issue with Mrs Van Brempt , who has done a lot of work in this area , and point out to her that my gender certainly did not pre-programme my views on this issue .
I do not think it is necessary to draw attention to the gender of Members who speak on issues in this Parliament .
Mr President , I am intervening to ask the House 's services to arrange for an error that has occurred to be rectified and for the term ' woodland ecosystems ' , used in one of the approved amendments , to be replaced by the term ' woodland ' .
I would ask for this change to be made , noted and taken into account .
I would also request , above all of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats - who are not at present listening - that attention be paid to Amendment No 41 , which has been corrected .
We must vote against this amendment , or else our own amendment will fail .
Mr President , I fail to understand how the voting list was put together , but what has happened is that the second part of Amendment No 49 was exactly the same as the second part of Amendment No 15 .
I do not understand why the majority has rejected the second part of Amendment No 49 , but this is in fact what they have done .
Consequently , having rejected the second part of Amendment No 49 , I fail to see how we can now adopt the second part of Amendment No 15 , which is exactly the same .
. ( FR ) Single market though there may have been since 1986 , no actual common market has been achieved .
Enlargement to include ten new countries will take us further away from that objective , and the 2013 deadline will be put back again .
The difficulty is not so much that of managing to adopt a directive supported by everyone or by the majority , but that of producing a comprehensible document that can be put into practice .
Given the number and significance of the details , there are ever more conflicts of interpretation and procedures to deal with violations .
The strategy must be to reduce such conflicts , not to resolve them by legal force .
Confronted by the economic and social realities , all that matters is the will and the capacity to apply the wordings .
Rather than parade new ambitions , the Commission should have been pulled up for its ill will and bad faith when it comes to assessing the impact of the liberalisation of public services .
With the standardisation of health services as its objective , the report explains that a safeguard clause might undermine uniformity .
That is nothing if not proof of the dangers to which existing forms of cohesion are vulnerable and of the hostility that exists in principle to taking any account of diversity .
We are , in practice , opposed to this report .
. ( PT ) The rapporteur stands firmly behind the philosophy underlying the Commission Communication to speed up the processes of liberalisation now underway and closely follows the proposals of the summary report for the Spring Council , which seeks to speed up the ' Lisbon strategy ' .
This is an attempt to maximise the potential benefits of the internal market , overlooking the high levels of poverty , exclusion and inequality in the EU , the lack of quality in the jobs that are created , most of which are precarious , and the promises given in Mr Delors ' famous White Paper , which predicted the creation of 15 million jobs ; a target that has now been postponed to 2010 .

The rapporteur also overlooks the opportunities for economic growth that have been wasted by implementing restrictive monetary and budgetary policies , with relatively low levels of global investment and real wage increases .
These factors have undermined internal demand and increase risks of deflation in the Eurozone , particularly in Germany .
The most serious aspect is that , given all these problems , instead of rethinking current policies , the rapporteur advocates speeding up the policies of liberalisation , privatisation and deregulation currently in place and even proposes that the Member States should sign a formal declaration in the aim of speeding up the completion of the internal market ...
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
I congratulate Mr Harbour on the excellent report he has drafted on the Communication from the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions : 2002 Review of the Internal Market Strategy .
Delivering the promise , which I fully support , in particular with regard to the need to establish measures and initiatives that encourage the full completion of an internal market for services , particularly measures intended to improve the transposal of measures for the internal market and to eliminate overly complex transposals .
In this context , I wish to highlight the importance of cooperation between Parliament and the Commission in organising a second Internal Market Forum that will enable citizens and industry , especially SMEs , to express their concerns and to study solutions to the completion of this internal market and to define this issue as a main priority of the 2003 Economic Summit .
I abstained from voting on this report on the Commission report on the Internal Market Strategy .
A fully operational internal market for goods and services is an integral part of the Lisbon objectives for economic reform .
I therefore agree with the rapporteur when he states that a fully operational internal market for services will increase consumers ' options and will enable them to benefit from services provided in other Member States .
I disagree , however , with the pressure the rapporteur puts on Member States to limit to the very minimum the use of safeguard clauses , and even urging the Commission to provide for the establishment of adequate guarantees that it will draw up safeguard clauses and oversee them .
Furthermore , the rapporteur even claims that the use of safeguard clauses by Member States is likely to damage the uniformity of Community legislation .
Member States ' sovereignty must be respected when considering the need to establish or improve safeguard mechanisms in certain areas of their economies .
Otherwise , things will be totally regulated by the Community , which would damage the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality .
. ( FR ) We are opposed to the Forest Focus regulation , as we are to the Redondo report , and for the following reasons .
First of all , there is the absence of agreement between those active in this field - foresters , paper-makers etc - who have unanimously rejected the European Commission 's proposal .
Secondly , the change of legal basis causes us concern .
Forests will no longer come under the heading of agriculture but will become a new component of environmental policy .
Are we heading towards a CEP - Common Environmental Policy - in order better to destroy the CAP ?
The definition of ' forest ' at Community level is unrealistic , being too restrictive in terms of surface area when it talks about ' tree crown cover ? of more than 10 per cent and area of more than 0.5 ha ' .
Practically every grove of trees would fall within the scope of the regulation .
Given the diversity of terrain and of geographical and climatic conditions in the EU , there is , moreover , no reason for incorporating forests into the EU 's common policies .
The Commission wants to turn the Forest Focus programme into a regulation complementing the ' Birds ' and ' Habitats ' directives , something we find unacceptable given the difficulties in applying and funding these two directives .
Finally , the Commission forgets the primary function of forests in rural areas : that of economic development .
. ( PT ) While I consider the motion for a resolution to be very positive , there is an issue which I believe should have been dealt with in more depth - the role of forests as carbon sinks .
The United Nations Conventions on Climate Change consider that one of the policies which should be implemented with a view to mitigating climate change is the promotion of forests as fixers of carbon , through forestation and reforestation activities .
The Kyoto Protocol lays down the maximum quantity of carbon sinks which may be used by States with a view to compliance with their objectives for reductions in greenhouse gas emissions .
However , owing to the fragility of the scientific basis for the role of forests as carbon sinks , the European Union was never enthusiastic about considering this measure in the Kyoto Protocol and it was eventually accepted as a concession which was essential for reaching an agreement , particularly with Japan and Russia .
Now that this issue has been decided upon , especially following the Marrakech Conference , the EU should take advantage of Forest Focus to develop a European strategy for the use of carbon sinks .
I voted in favour of this report because of its enormous importance , within the framework of sustainable development , for the adoption of better measures with which to combat the factors contributing to the deterioration of forests in the European Union .
This is of considerable importance to Portugal which , having the highest density of forest in Europe , is every year the victim of the scourge of forest fires .
It is extremely disturbing that 1 % of Mediterranean forest is lost every year as a result of fires .
Establishing new activities to monitor the biodiversity of forests , soil , climate change and the setting of carbon in forests is an essential prerequisite for guaranteeing the conservation of our environmental heritage , which Europe must jealously protect .
Forests are the most complex form of ecosystem and , although large tracts of forest still exist and they enjoy a high level of biodiversity , they have limits , that we have to watch carefully .
Sustainable use of forests is crucial , as we are told by a specialist in these matters Masahiro Saito , in favourable conditions , only after twenty years does a forest producing wood and charcoal regain its original volume , and allowing it to be used again .
We must adopt fire prevention action , bearing in mind especially that these must be in ...
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
Mr President , I support the crucial regulation , and actions to support mothers or future mothers in developing countries , advising on reproductive health , especially through educational and information campaigns .
I want to see the fight taken to poverty and the prevention of appalling human and social situations .
Nevertheless , I deplore the fact that the majority should have prevented a consensus from being achieved and rejected special provisions for mothers in difficulty .
I regret the fact that there was an insistence on not clarifying the language used and that confusion could allow international sponsorship of abortion policies with European Union funds .
The speeches given in plenary yesterday by supporters of the report and by opponents of my amendments speak for themselves .
As a supplement to what I have already said , I shall quote a representative of Marie Stopes International , which I did not have time to read out fully yesterday .
That concludes voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 12.45 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

In the context of aid to the poorest countries , the US cannot impose a development model by implementing measures related to sexual and reproductive health rights .
I am referring specifically to sterilisation and abortion .
Under the guise of altruism in granting aid , the EU cannot promote and even less encourage these practices , for two fundamental reasons : the first is respect for human rights - and in particular to protect the right to life - and the second is due to the limits imposed by the sovereignty of the States and populations who will benefit from our financial aid .
The content of this report is ambivalent and could lead to abuses as a result of its implicit promotion of abortion .
Any options or measures decided on in this field , in the context of health , can only be determined by States in accordance with their national laws .
We can only vote in favour of a report that safeguards the incontrovertible principle of the right to life and of respect for the sovereignty of States .
We have no misgivings about the report 's assertion that abortion cannot under any circumstances be considered to be a method of family planning , and much less a service in the field of sexual and reproductive health .
. ( FR ) This resolution proposes to create a new budget to be used for combating mortality during pregnancy and childbirth in the poor countries of the world .
We have supported this initiative in spite of its limitations .
Indeed , this new budget item is not accompanied by new funding .
The necessary money would be taken from the existing budget .
We , for our part , ask that this aid be funded from the budget for aid paid to companies because , whatever the pretexts invoked for paying this , it is used not to preserve jobs , which continue to be destroyed on a huge scale throughout Europe , but , in reality , to put yet a little more money in the pockets of shareholders .
. ( FR ) I have voted in favour of this report even though , on certain points , my assessment , and even my approach , were in some ways different .
The European Parliament has , in fact , succeeded in resisting the reactionary pressure exercised by the fundamentalist Right .
- ( FR ) It is hard to understand what has turned the Sandbæk report into such a bone of contention , for the need to improve health services and infrastructure in the countries concerned could easily have been the subject of genuine consensus .
It is just that there is terrible doubt hanging over the rapporteur 's and the Commission 's true intentions concerning recourse to abortion , a measure which would therefore be funded by the European taxpayer .
Once such a measure is provided for , it becomes legitimate , whereas stances on this subject are very diverse and , above all , irreconcilable .
To institute at Community level a policy rejected by a number of our Member States , or in other words to impose at European level choices about which our respective populations have reservations , or to which they are even hostile , is unworthy of a democratic assembly .
As for the self-styled compromise that has emerged from the relevant parliamentary committee , one might have expected better than a suspect accumulation of evasions that has conscientiously set aside all attempts to bend the wording in the direction of human dignity , namely compatibility between women 's health and children 's lives .
With only the caricature of a choice before us - either we vote for or against - we choose to embrace what amounts to a simple precautionary principle by voting against this report .
- ( FR ) The Community policy of cooperation and development is designed to promote lasting development and economic expansion in the developing countries , as well as the latter 's integration into the world economy and the fight against poverty .
If the obvious correlation is borne in mind between poverty and the absence of rights where reproduction and sexuality are concerned , achieving such an objective necessarily entails putting in place a Community tool designed to further policies and actions relating to health and to rights in connection with reproduction and sexuality .
It is in fact very clear to me that one of the results of development is a lasting improvement in the health and well-being of populations .
It is therefore a matter of urgency to provide support to the women of these countries , which account for 99 % of the 600 000 women who die each year as a consequence of pregnancy , and , through modern family planning , to provide help and information to couples , so enabling them to decide freely and responsibly how many children they want .
Each year , a third of pregnancies are in fact unwanted or unplanned .
This situation leads women to have recourse to abortions carried out in dangerous conditions , and it causes as many as 78 000 deaths each year .
. ( FR ) It is a good thing that the European Union should help the developing countries take care of their populations ' health .
Aid does not , however , mean imposing our European models on countries with different cultures and traditions .
It is morally unacceptable to make our aid conditional upon denying nations ' identity and upon their having to adopt our conception of family planning .
Moreover , setting abortion up as a new method of contraception is out of the question .
That , however , is what this report is leading up to , even if Mrs Sandbaek says it is not .
Abortion is a crime that kills the child and destroys the mother .
By offering women abortion as their only option , rather than helping them , a further trauma is added to their difficulties .
That is why I am in favour of the amendments aimed at developing a policy for receiving and supporting mothers to be who are in distress , with a view to supporting them in choosing to have their babies .
That is how it will be possible to provide them with the psychological and material aid that they need .
That is also why I shall vote against this report which , far from helping populations in difficulty , will succeed only in adding to their feelings of helplessness .
. The vote on the Sandbaek report today was a clear endorsement of the need for an urgent response at first reading from the European Parliament to the Regulation on Reproductive and Sexual Health and Rights in Developing Countries .
By supporting this Resolution , we have cleared the way for the Commission to fund operations and agencies which focus on the need to reduce infant , child and maternal mortality .
We have acknowledged the right which all people have to care and services , and to choose how many children to have and when to have them .
We have voted to renew and increase funding to EUR 74.95m.
The Commissioner emphasised he could not formally commit the Commission to that figure , but made it clear that this should not deter us from having an agreement at first reading , saying he was confident we would find a solution .
We rejected new amendments designed to distort the focus and substance of the Regulation .
The Development Committee and Parliament have agreed a text which does no more and no less than was agreed in the Programme for Action of the International Conference on Population and Development held in Cairo in 1994 and the Kay Actions adopted in 1999 .
. ( FR ) My colleague 's , Mrs Sandbaek 's , report has given rise to much debate and triggered some passionate feeling .
The report contains only sensible amendments , however .
Reducing the mortality rate among pregnant women and encouraging equal access to care and benefits when it comes to health in pregnancy and to reproductive rights are objectives that I vigorously support and that stem from the 1994 International Conference on Population and Development ( ICPD ) .
In many developing countries , women fight for their reproductive rights and for control of their sexuality .
For these women , achieving these rights and this control entails being able freely to choose the number of children they have , as well as the gaps between the birth of one child and the next .
By opposing this access to information and a situation in which these rights are granted across the board , the door is closed to the fight against poverty and a delay imposed upon economic development , which is closely linked to improvements in the health and health care of the populations of the developing countries .
A number of colleagues have , however , chosen to deny women these basic rights by proposing another route , that of supporting them in choosing to have their babies .
This is a covert way of denying women 's inalienable right to abortion .
For all these reasons , I have , in all conscience , supported Mrs Sandbaek 's report .
. ( FR ) This good report , which is going in the right direction , towards realism rather than a reactionary ideology , has been widely approved .
That is a good thing ! That is why I also voted in favour of the report .
. ( FR ) During the 1990s , the use of cannabis considerably increased in most EU countries .
However , users of hard drugs by injection are a more elusive group that is therefore bound to be condemned to social exclusion , as the report indicates .
We must respond to this .
First of all , it is now essential that we advocate prevention through information channels .
In order to do this we need to set aside financial resources and take action by organising campaigns , mainly in schools , in order to raise awareness among young people .
We need to inform over and over again in order to prevent current standards from becoming blurred in the eyes of the young people of Europe .
Secondly , it is essential that we involve everyone : parents , but also teachers , the police and the justice system , and finally and above all , associations that support drug addicts .
That is why we should welcome the recommendation inviting local groups to help drug addicts to opt for a healthier life .
The report is broadly to be welcomed , and so we voted in favour of it .
Nevertheless , we must emphasise that it is crucial to ensure that intervention in highly risky and complex situations , as frequently happens in the field of drug addiction , adopts a multidimensional approach , so as to create synergies for much greater effectiveness .
For example , there will be situations in which intervention in reducing the risks and minimising the harm entailed by the consumption of illegal drugs must go hand in hand with improvements in people 's living conditions and quality of life , with job offers , social reintegration , the recovery of the urban fabric , with combating drug trafficking and effective action for primary prevention , either in schools or targeting groups of young people in high-risk situations .
This type of situation requires multidisciplinary intervention structures and multifaceted leadership and resource management , to suit a given situation , which is only possible if responsibility is taken by each Member State .
It would therefore be welcome if the resolution were to suggest the creation of structures at this level - genuine response measures for extremely serious situations - where necessary and did not lay down vague and diffuse responsibilities for families and communities in this area .
- ( NL ) I welcome the resolution of the European Parliament on combating the drugs problem in Europe .
It is a good thing that MEPs are at last receptive to the way we treat drug addicts in the Netherlands .
The Netherlands has been treated as a pariah for years , but now we are being praised for the way we are dealing with these matters .
The results of this vote are an endorsement of Dutch drugs policy .
I am pleased with the members ' decision to call on Member States in this report to place prevention and risk limitation at centre stage in our drugs policy .
In this context , we should be offering facilities to help drug addicts kick their habit .
We should also be making better use of the experiences of former drug users in the information we provide in places like schools and community centres .
By providing better information we should be able to give young people a better idea of the consequences of taking drugs .
We will have to pay specific attention to prisoners .
I believe that it is a good thing for Member States to get prisons completely free from drugs .
I have therefore voted in favour of this proposal .
.
( NL ) The debate on drug addiction and its consequences is often hindered , on the one hand , by those who believe that you can simply wipe out drug use through statutory prohibitions , prison cells and the deployment of the police ; and on the other , by those who advocate complete freedom , regarding the opportunities to take drugs that arise in practice as an acquired right in which the government should not get involved at all .
Both points of view get in the way of proper information and the achievement of good health .
Instead , it is much better to distinguish between soft drugs and hard drugs , and to focus the fight against hard drugs on informing a young generation on the very adverse consequences of taking drugs .
In this regard we can learn from the struggle against alcohol and tobacco addiction .
I support the rapporteur because she wants to use the experiences of former drugs users and wants to ensure the provision of advice , support , health care and more opportunities to help people get rid of their addictions .
She is right to call for supervision of the chemical composition of substances like ecstasy , which is unfortunately often used by young people at parties , and to call for a better specification of best practices and lowest risks .
. As an MEP for London , I have a strong interest in combating and reducing drug-related deaths and drug-related illnesses such as HIV , hepatitis B and C and tuberculosis , one of the targets of the EU Drugs Strategy ( 2000-2004 ) endorsed by the European Council in 1999 .
I support the Malliori report with some minor exceptions .
Although it proposes a range of non-binding measures , the stress on the role of local communities , especially police , social workers , local authority healthcare staff and others is the right emphasis .
I am particularly supportive of the call for Member States to pay more attention to high-risk environments , like prisons , and the call for action on new ' drug patterns ' such as ' designer drug ' use , which is increasing in my constituency .
I abstained from voting on this report .
Although I share the rapporteur 's concerns and her ultimate aims , I feel bound to regret the report 's inclusion of points that I believe will do precisely the opposite of what they are intended to .
I also regret that the excellent amendments tabled by Mr Blokland and Mr Santini , because their rejection by the slimmest of majorities suggests a desire to reject the possibility of a balanced text , which enjoys a broader consensus .
I therefore regret the hesitant nature of many of the provisions adopted , which , whilst appearing to be democratic , could lead to failed models and distorted viewpoints being imposed on the fight against drug addiction .
The rapporteur could have gone further in combating the ambivalent discourse on the use of drugs . So common amongst some parts of the European Left , which refuses to see drug consumption as the breaking of each citizen 's responsibility towards their fellow citizens .
The 1997 report by the United Nations Office on Drug Control and Crime Prevention ( ODCCP ) , stated that ' efforts to reduce world consumption will be less effective if programmes for reducing demand are undermined by calls for drugs to be legalised ' .
The truth is that , unfortunately , mistaken policies always result in human disasters on the ground .
. ( FR ) This whole discussion about the best way to kill neatly or to fight a war without killing any civilians is in itself surreal .
Even more so given today 's circumstances , when we are aware that the United States , with the open or hypocritical cooperation of the great European powers , are preparing to start a war against Iraq in the next few days which , even if it ends with the fall of the dictator Saddam Hussein , will kill thousands of civilians .
For our part , we are using this opportunity to protest against the imperialist war against Iraq .
We voted in favour of the few passages that propose banning anti-personnel mines , while being aware that the proposals are quite irresolute and will not become a reality .
However , we voted against the text as a whole because , on the pretext of wanting wars ' that conform with international law ' it justifies past , present and future imperialist attacks .
The texts Parliament has voted on , concerning the ' dangers of the use of depleted uranium in weapons ' , confine themselves , as did their predecessors of two years ago , to repeating accusations that lack any basis in fact or scientific credibility .
These texts distort the problems and damage the credibility of our parliamentary institution .
Depleted uranium , which is present in many devices all around us , does not pose any danger of radioactive contamination , and is even used to provide protection from radiation .
The danger of chemical contamination , especially during combustion , is indeed high and hence the justification for the protection advised by western military manuals available on the Internet .
In any event , when dormant in nature , depleted uranium is no more dangerous than the lead in hunting cartridges or in water pipes .
The use of plutonium / mox ' or other nuclear waste to replace depleted uranium , should indeed be subject to careful scrutiny .
The presence of uranium 236 in blood tests of soldiers who served in Kosovo - as one newspaper has claimed - could indicate that this is the case .
This is what the European Parliament should be discussing and investigating , instead of adopting declarations that are nothing more than demonstrations of prejudice and ignorance , from which I feel forced to distance myself .
. ( PT ) Although I strongly disagree with some aspects discussed in the resolution , specifically its acceptance of the European Security and Defence Policy and of military action under this policy , I think that it contains positive aspects , particularly in the context of the current international situation , such as the unacceptable , illegitimate and illegal threat of military aggression towards Iraq by the US administration .
Amongst other aspects , I value the request to establish an immediate moratorium preventing further use of explosive fragmentation devices and ammunition containing depleted uranium ( and other warheads containing uranium ) , with a view to banning them outright once a study has been undertaken .
As a matter of fact , and with regard to this issue , I must use this statement to give my own feelings , having visited Iraq recently , of disgust at the effects that the use of such weapons have by the US military in that country on the population and most intolerably on the children that I was able to meet .
Lastly , I would highlight the political significance of the parliamentary group of the PPE-DE having withdrawn from the joint resolution and having voted against .
. ( EL ) It is two years since the outcry about the numerous - sometimes fatal - illnesses caused by the depleted uranium weapons used by the USA and ? ? ? ? in the Gulf and Yugoslavia , and still nothing has been done .
On the contrary , there is an immediate danger of these and / or even more dangerous weapons being used again in the imminent war against Iraq , where numerous cases of babies with birth defects and children with leukaemia and other forms of cancer have already been reported .
Greece too has soldiers who have been affected and are now suffering from various forms of cancer and being treated in secret .
These weapons are scattered all over Greece .
The government , having initially lied and denied that the armed forces had any such weapons , has since tried to play down the problem .
As the Greek Medical Association for the Protection of the Environment Against Nuclear and Biochemical Threat rightly stated recently , ' what we have is a small nuclear war that has already irreparably contaminated the Balkans ' .
The good old international community , despite its meddling in terrorist laws and rapid reaction forces , has done nothing to ban depleted uranium weapons .
The European Parliament resolution makes some good points but fails to come down in favour of a complete ban , merely calling for a moratorium pending further study .
. ( FR ) As we read in the explanatory statement , ' The focus on silicone-gel implants since the 1990s has led to many different epidemiological studies that have consistently showed no evidence of serious risk for major diseases ' .
Over recent years cosmetic surgery has made considerable progress and the techniques used have reached a more than satisfactory level of safety .
However , if the danger warnings are increased and consumers are overprotected , doctors could become disheartened .
Let us take the example of Caesareans .
They have dramatically increased , because women are gripped by the idea of a lower risk .
Therefore it is their trust in the medical profession that is called into question .
While we need to protect patients , we also need to preserve the service providers by placing a degree of trust in them .
- ( NL ) I understand the need to provide better information and more quality guarantees for breast implants .
It is , however , going too far for Europe to say that women should protect themselves .
We should not regulate ' self-esteem and other conceptual alternatives to breast implants ' in Europe .
Nor should Parliament urge Member States to ' concentrate on promoting and securing acceptance of the image of women as they actually are ' .
Europe must not prescribe a ' national breast-implant register ' or annual ' compulsory aftercare examinations ' .
This reinforces the patronising image that the European Union already has .
It would be much better for Member States to issue their own legislation in this regard .
I believe that women are perfectly capable of taking decisions for themselves and can be advised very well by their doctors , and that a ban on advertising is therefore not necessary .
We are always getting bogged down in details .
Is this Europe 's business ?
Sometimes you wonder which bureaucrat sitting behind his desk thought this one up .
I have therefore voted against the resolution .
. ( PT ) Given the huge number of accidents with breast implants and the increasingly common use of these , especially in minors under the age of eighteen , this European Commission communication is greatly to be welcomed .
I think that the EP has played a role in improving the initial proposal by tabling amendments that seek to ensure : a commitment to scientific research , better public information , medical monitoring and observation following implants and a ban on implants in persons under the age of eighteen , except where there is a medical need .
The next item is the Commission statement on the crisis in the steel sector and the measures to be taken at Community level .
Commissioner Byrne has the floor .
Mr President , the European steel industry has been through a difficult period over the last 20 years .
There was a need for an overall restructuring of the sector .
Nowadays the European steel industry is very competitive .
In order to maintain their global position , however , companies need to engage in a continuous process of adapting their structures .
The industry is still striving for efficiency , but even if remaining overcapacities are closed down , from an industrial point of view , we cannot talk about a real crisis on the scale that we had in the 1980s , but rather about a social crisis due to new closures .
Restructuring is often a synonym for job losses which can have tragic consequences on the social fabric of any region , but in particular on those regions facing a low job creation potential .
The Commission is acutely aware of the need for citizens and workers to feel secure in taxing times .
We have observed again in recent weeks extremely different experiences and approaches on how to deal with large-scale operations of corporate restructuring .
In some cases , these operations are prepared well in advance , fully involving workers ' representatives , with due care being taken to search for less damaging solutions , and seeking actively and in good time to prepare workers likely to be affected to face the challenge of sudden unemployment .
In other cases these operations were launched and implemented with no care or concern at all for those affected .
On every occasion in the past , the Commission has always highlighted the following basic principles . Firstly , decisions on corporate restructuring remain a prerogative , as well as a responsibility , of management .
This means that when contemplating actions likely to have serious social consequences , companies should always actively search and choose the less damaging solutions .
Secondly , when dismissals prove to be inevitable , the utmost must be done to improve the employability of those concerned .
This requires anticipation and adequate management of those processes .
Thirdly , nothing can justify the absence of timely and effective information and consultation with workers ' representatives .
These basic assertions attract a wide consensus in Europe .
It is , thankfully , increasingly rare to see companies embarking on damaging restructuring operations , ignoring these fundamental concerns , but it does sometimes happen .
The way in which Metaleurop conducted the closure of the Pas de Calais plant is the worst possible example of disregard for the interests , the concerns and the rights of workers , as well as for the health and safety of the surrounding population .
It is , of course , fair and necessary to underline other approaches : at the other extreme , Arcelor is also facing a restructuring process with unavoidable pain for its workers , but is tackling it differently .
The Commission does not wish to interfere in the economic logic behind the management 's intentions , it is the management 's role to do that in close consultation with workers ' representatives .
Arcelor took a number of positive and productive steps , well before the recent announcement measures had already commenced , to anticipate the problems .
Again recently , the management reaffirmed its intention to enter into effective consultations with workers ' representatives at all levels .
The consultation process encompasses : the economic reasoning behind the projected closures ; taking independent expert advice on the whole affair ; taking all possible measures to avoid the closures or limit their social impact ; and seeking to clean the local environment and re-industrialise the closed plants .
This extensive programme is serious and is considered to be so by all stakeholders .
It is the result of a different kind of industrial relations which have led , for instance , to an agreement on transnational information and consultation of workers that is widely recognised as being very advanced and effective .
The three seats on the board for workers ' representatives , although there is currently no legal obligation for this , also illustrate that same positive approach .
This in fact anticipates the European Company Statute .
We have built over recent years in the European Union a wide range of instruments that meet these concerns .
The directives on collective redundancies , transfers of undertakings , information and consultation and the European Works Councils directive are some examples .
The most recent texts clearly promote upstream worker involvement , notably on strategic issues and on the foreseeable evolution of employment within companies .
This is the only way to help the European workforce face the challenges of change successfully in that it allows for the timely development of the employability and adaptability of workers .
The two cases I mentioned before can only confirm those assertions , one positively and one negatively .
It is up to national courts and other authorities to ensure compliance with Community directives .
The Commission will , of course , fulfil its ultimate role of control of the application of Community law if breaches are not effectively sanctioned .
Those aspects will constitute some of the main elements of the forthcoming revision of the European Works Councils Directive .
More importantly , the Commission very much hopes that the European social partners identify and find the means of developing good practices of corporate restructuring throughout the EU , as they decided to do when responding positively to last year 's consultation on this issue .
Those good practices go well beyond the information and consultation of workers .
They cover actions with a view to anticipating the market and technological developments , investing in people on a permanent basis , developing employability , seeking alternatives to closures and redundancies , redeploying , whenever possible , workers affected by restructuring operations and so on - precisely those good practices which I hope will help Arcelor 's workers overcome the present difficulties , and which are dramatically absent in the Metaleurop environment .
It is also useful to recall in this context other initiatives of the Commission relating to corporate social responsibility , social dialogue and the European Monitoring Centre on Change .
Besides those policy aspects , our immediate concern today is the recent cases of restructuring .
The Commission would like to state clearly that , above all , we share your regret and concern on the possible social consequences for those who may be affected .
I sincerely hope that every effort is made to prevent or attenuate them through dialogue between all parties concerned .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I must admit to the Commissioner that I found his speech extraordinarily disappointing .
He gave a series of general considerations on a situation that we are well aware of .
Those considerations were centred around the restructuring of companies in a series of sectors , but did not specifically deal with the problems that we are currently experiencing in several regions .
I must admit that I was very surprised to hear the Commissioner condemning the attitude of a company that everyone considers to have behaved in a particularly scandalous manner , Metaleurop , and at the same time praising another company which has been headline news in recent months , Arcelor .
The decision taken by Arcelor to gradually close its hot-working steel facilities on its continental sites was , of course , received with concern in the regions concerned .
It was also received with anger , in particular in the Liège region , because it is ruthlessly breaking the commitment made by Usinor before merging into the new Arcelor group to invest in the smelting works in Liège , in order to ensure that hot-working production lines were maintained .
Along with this commitment there was a commitment in return from workers to make efforts towards productivity to ensure that the site was competitive .
The workers ' commitments were kept but Usinor 's have now been betrayed and the workers feel they have been duped .
This is why all of the movements in the region and also the Walloon Government and the Belgian Federal Government are now asking Arcelor to explain itself .
I think it is important that the European Commission also takes this stance .
The resolution that we have all put forward together has the prime objective of ensuring that Arcelor keeps its commitments .
There is all the more reason for Arcelor to keep its commitments given that you said - and this is the important element in your statement - that the steel industry was not in crisis , that companies in general were competitive , and that there is therefore no reason for Arcelor to want to go back on the commitments that it made unless it is for purely financial reasons .
We should not therefore envisage first of all restructuring processes with Cockerill-Sambre , and then with Usinor .
The Liège region has already experienced and paid heavily for the steel crisis .
What is needed now to ensure restructuring is time .
What the Liège region does not accept is for commitments to be broken , shortening the deadlines that were set for us , and we therefore clearly ask the Commission to remind Arcelor of its commitments .
We should also question Arcelor 's behaviour , as we are learning that it intends to purchase a number of sites in a candidate country that will be part of Europe in the future .
That raises a number of questions at European level .
Mr President , first of all , in keeping with the spirit of the speech made by Mr Hansenne , I would like to remind the honourable spokesperson for the Commission that it is the heir of the High Authority of the European Coal and Steel Community , which was not created to organise the burial of industrial activity in Europe , nor to catalogue the different ways of burying industrial activity in our regions , or to act as the social Red Cross for workers and regions that have been severely wounded .
What I am saying is how much , like Mr Hansenne , we think that a Commission declaration was more necessary than ever , but we also think that it is largely inadequate .
This is particularly true in my case , because I sent the Commission proof of Arcelor 's desire to set up on continental sites in Poland , while we have just recounted how in three European regions , continental sites are by their nature doomed to disappear .
I will not say any more , Mr President , in order to allow my colleagues to speak .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to highlight an initial point that I think is fundamental : the Commission declaration is a poor one .
The responsibility of the Commission today is effectively to take on the role of the public authority within the powers that it has inherited from the High Authority of the European Coal and Steel Community .
It should also be pointed out that the Commission should not be a spectator , but play an active public role in managing steel at European Union level .
The resolution put forward contains some themes that we see as essential .
I hope that the Commission is able to answer four quite specific questions on these four themes .
First of all , being aware that European firmness is necessary in order for steel production to be fairly distributed at global level , is the Commission going to ensure that the Polish Government cannot intervene financially in the industrial processes to support any of the Arcelor 's group 's plans in Poland ?
Secondly , does the Commission consider that it is still entirely capable of ensuring that the European Union can choose and maintain a steel industry , or is it simply waiting for the industry to disappear ?
In other words , is the Commission aware that it still has a responsibility under Article 3 of the ECSC Treaty , or has it forgotten that article ?
Thirdly , regarding regional restructuring and social support , is the Commission prepared , from now on , to use the resources of all of the European instruments as part of a programme negotiated with the responsible authority , that is , the Walloon regional authorities in Belgium , to ensure that any aid is focused on social support and restructuring , while ensuring that state aid is not paid to other regions ?
The fourth question is : what measures does the Commission intend to take in order to ensure that existing European social law is respected before any decision is made by any group ?
In particular this involves respecting a number of collective agreements .
Along the same lines , is the Commission prepared , as far as company law is concerned , to invoke Article 5 of the ECSC Treaty , according to which the Commission has the task of ensuring that social activity continues as long as general production at European level is not threatened ?
Mr President , today Europe must , through the Commission , show the rest of the world that it is firm on commercial matters and make the industrial choice to be socially pro-active and restructure industry in a useful way .
Finally , the Commission needs to play its role as a public power , to make European employment law and company law a reality .
I am looking forward to hearing the Commission 's response , and I hope that the speech that will follow those of MEPs will not be of a general nature like the Commissioner 's first speech .
Mr President , I think that there is already a consensus emerging from the first few speeches : the Commission 's response and its proposal do not currently respond to the situation .
Indeed , one can only note and condemn the increasing number of companies being restructured , along with restructuring programmes and redundancies with disastrous consequences , of course for employees , but also for entire regions that are devastated as a result .
Many sectors are affected by this , particularly the steel industry .
People say that the context of a slowdown in growth is not favourable .
It is true that the majority of companies wear out this argument that restructuring and closures of sites are necessary in order to deal with international competition .
However , let us state the fact that company management take a fundamentally financial approach and not always an industrial one , far from it , when defining their strategy .
Their aim is to achieve maximum profitability , without worrying about the social or environmental consequences .
That often leads to relocations to third countries where rules on such matters are practically non-existent .
Commissioner , you referred to Metaleurop .
It is true that even though that is about the metal industry and not specifically steel , it is a useful example : this very polluting company is going to shed thousands of jobs without taking any social or environmental responsibility .
I think , however , that the situation raises the broader question of what ambitions Europe intends to have in terms of drawing up a new Treaty ?
Is the European Union going to accept such behaviour from companies which , we should remember , have greatly benefited from European political aid .
You of course referred to existing legislation that needs to be applied .
Nevertheless , I think that new measures need to be taken to inform unions and works committees about the aid received .
Measures also need to be adopted forcing those companies to account for how they have used loans granted and to reimburse them if they do not respect the commitments made .
When it comes to enlargement , which was referred to with regard to another company , Europe needs to equip itself with further resources in order to promote an ambitious industrial policy that will ensure that a strong steel sector is maintained and modernised , incorporating the necessary social and environmental standards within a framework of sustainable development .
If that is not done , Commissioner , we will not move towards a Union of solidarity but towards a Union of terrible opposition between employees and between citizens .
With regard to social governance , we need to legislate even more .
I think that new European legislative texts need to be more effective in forcing companies established in the Union to take on their responsibilities .
The Commission and the Member States need to adopt a more pro-active strategy in response to industrial restructuring and its social impact .
I think that this is also a question of ethics .
In a Europe that seeks to defend the fundamental rights of its citizens , can we stand by and do nothing while thousands of employees are thrown out onto the street as if they were just goods ?
It is precisely the opposite approach that we need to promote in order to have a fresh impetus for industry in Europe .
Employees should have new rights in companies at all levels .
I am of course referring to the legislation on European committees .
However , I think that establishing democracy within boards of directors would prevent many companies from being forced into being restructured and into liquidation by management that is mainly bowing to financial pressure and is far from responding to industrial demands .
I therefore think that the Union should force the companies concerned to do more to take into account the alternative proposals from unions before making any decisions .
Mr President , Commissioner , the steel crisis and , in particular , the recent decisions made by Arcelor , are not a Belgian regional problem , but a European problem .
You do not need to live next to a smelting works in order to feel the whole human impact of the decisions that have been taken , the way in which they were taken , and to be aware of their economic impact , which will reach far beyond the Liège region and even across borders .
That is not the only thing , however , that demonstrates that the type of problem being raised here is not only regional but also European .
The problem is not only confined to the steel industry .
It is part of a business mindset in which financial profitability takes precedence over proximity - which was a genuine attribute - and in particular over respecting commitments made towards the sustainable development of the regions of Europe .
As a result , if we respond to this with relatively weak declarations , we are confirming our inability , on the one hand , to ensure that basic social law is respected and , on the other hand to control or even prevent the use of public funds to create cheap jobs to the detriment of quality jobs that therefore have to be more expensive .
The action that we can take today involves enforcing the right to control the use of public funds , far beyond promises and declarations .
However , currently it appears that the resources that we have are , in my opinion , insufficient .
This raises the question : what is our ambition for the Europe of tomorrow ?
As we approach enlargement , it is vital that we define the social rules that the market will never define for itself , if we wish to prevent unfair and suicidal competition between the regions of Europe .
Let us not forget that the financial rules , which are currently helping to drain certain regions of Europe to the benefit of others , will in the future drain Europe to the benefit of other regions in the world .
This debate is , therefore indeed about the social future , but also about the economic future of Europe .
National governments and parliaments , but also the Commission , therefore urgently need to equip themselves with effective tools to manage both an economic Europe and a social Europe .
Enforcing the right to legislate in order to better manage the future is not a question of ability but a question of political will .
What we need to do first of all is to get past the fatalism of liberalisation and the selfishness of certain regions and countries , entrusting to Europe what will be best managed at that level , so that we can have a strong economy but also a quality of employment that is worthy of the social model that we are always talking about .
Mr President , Commissioner , from left to right in this House , there is a consensus , and this time it is not a weak consensus , but a genuinely strong signal sent out to the Commission .
A resolution on the steel industry will be adopted soon .
We entirely support it .
Having said that , allow me , aside from the resolution , as a socialist from Liège living next to the first site that was affected by Arcelor 's restructuring , to express my anger .
We are all suffering now , as we have said , as the result of the lack of a regulatory framework allowing us to deal with the ultraliberal actions of the multinationals .
I am aware that this phrase might make people laugh , but I stand by it .
We can no longer tolerate decisions that are based on purely financial considerations and which can wipe a region from the world map in one fell swoop , without considering the families that live there , the workers that have built it and the children that will grow up there .
Now it is Liège that is the target , next it will be Florence , Brême , EKO Stahl ; now it is the steel industry , next it might be the hi-tech industry .
There is no end to this arbitrary phenomenon .
Commissioner , you presented Arcelor as the good student of Europe .
In my opinion , this international steel company is doing a dreadful thing , which is both heinous and ridiculous .
Not content with abandoning its commitments to Cockerill - developing technological innovation , renewing tools , promoting employment - Arcelor is making threats .
Its directors are announcing that rationalisation must continue , otherwise they could close earlier , or even straight away .
And the lock-out of nineteenth century capitalism is suddenly re-emerging out of the mouths of its directors .
Moreover , at the same time as announcing the death of the European hot-working sites , the Arcelor group is seeking to purchase Polish companies , but above all it is heavily investing in the Brazilian continental hot-working steel industry .
That it what is heinous , Commissioner .
What is ridiculous , is the image that Arcelor portrays on its web site , a company , and I will quote without laughing , ' that is socially aware and which , conscious of its role in the Community , is supporting and sponsoring science , medicine , sport and the arts ' .
Unfortunately we are not talking about sponsorship , art or sport today , but the future of a region .
And on this subject , Arcelor sees itself as being reassuring .
It is promising a restructuring plan and early retirement .
But who is it trying to fool ?
Because as well as the 1 700 workers that are directly affected , who are therefore benefiting from a restructuring programme , what will happen to the other 5 000 or 7 000 sub-contractors , suppliers , who will be out of a job ?
Commissioner , finally give us the means to support coherent , integrated European policies , bearing the stamp of the economy , no doubt , but also socially convincing .
I ask the Council and the Commission to finally prepare a regulatory framework that will enable us to prevent the all-powerful financial considerations from shattering the alliance between Europe and its citizens .
Because that alliance is fragile and what is the point in Europe being an economic giant if , like the ogre in the fable , it is now eating up its children ?
Mrs Boogerd-Quaak has the floor , and I would like to welcome her back to this House .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it might appear somewhat strange that someone who does not live in the area concerned should be taking an interest in this problem .
In the ELDR Group , however , we have had an extensive discussion on the ability of this industry to compete and in particular on the level playing field within which this sector of industry is supposed to move .
I was therefore a little disappointed with your input with regard to what the European Union could do .
After all , we must realise that the level playing field has not always existed throughout Europe - far from it - and indeed still does not exist in some places .
In particular , the World Trade Organisation and the OECD still offer great opportunities .
For the people in the region , whether we are talking about this industry , which is in difficulties or another region , it will be of great importance that much is done in the field of innovation and research .
We have funds in Europe that we can work with .
It is not as if the Commission is incapable of doing anything at all .
I would like to remind you that when the European Union realised that we had fallen behind in the area of the information society , your predecessor Mr Bangemann brought into being a platform that encouraged European Member States to catch up .
In this area too - in view of our imminent enlargement to include Eastern Europe - we should not be saying that companies must not relocate ; we should be saying that we must try to retain control of innovation , and that means that the research funds can certainly have a part to play and that the European Commission can also be a source of encouragement .
Finally I would like to draw your attention to the European social funds .
It seems to me to be logical that wherever there is a good social charter and where companies make efforts themselves , an additional input should come via the European Social Fund so that if redundancies are in fact unavoidable , people are offered prospects for the future via retraining and are not left out in the cold .
The question that we will be faced with in the future is whether we can work together to give Europe a different aspect from that currently presented to the world by the USA .
I am very much in favour of a liberal Europe , but it must be a social liberal Europe .
I also find that your speech gives too little indication of the incentives there could be both at European and at national level .
Mr President , the factory closures planned by Arcelor are scandalous .
The group , which is the most powerful group in the world steel industry and is collapsing under its profits , coldly announces that it is going to close a total of six smelting works in Belgium , Germany and France , throwing out thousands of workers , condemning their families to poverty and devastating entire regions .
For such a decision to be taken in secret by a board of directors , obeying the demands of a handful of financiers , shows the extent to which the system that you defend amounts to a dictatorship by money .
The fact that this can happen , without even inciting a reaction from the political authorities aside from a few hypocritical groans , shows the extent to which the workers are unable to count on the authorities to defend them .
We are told that periodical restructuring is inevitable in industry , but why is it always the workers that have to pay for that restructuring , and never the shareholders or the owners of the companies ?
I know that the problem is not only with the steel industry .
At the moment in France the airline Air Lib is also shutting up shop and making 3 200 people redundant .
Air Lib is not a steel company , but behind it , two years ago , was the same financial group , Marine Wendel , which made a fortune through the sweat and pain of generations of workers , steel workers , if not their blood .
It is the shareholders of the group and their ringleader , Baron Sellière of the employers ' federation in France , Medef , who , by withdrawing their capital , were responsible for the collapse of Air Lib .
This is why I say to the workers , both in the steel and air transport industries , and those going through the mass redundancies all over Europe , that we need to fight to establish a balance of power enabling workers to impose a ban on mass redundancies , on pain of expropriation .
We need to take from the company profits or if need be from the personal fortunes of their owners and shareholders , in order to provide salaries for all the workers affected by the restructuring .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I also found the Commissioner 's response distressing .
I felt as though I were looking at the list of contents of a first aid kit , when the accident has happened and , of course , we believe it is inevitable .
We should not , however , bury our heads in the sand , because here we are facing a perfect example of deregulated globalisation .
When in March 2002 - almost exactly a year ago , so it will soon be the anniversary - the protectionist measure in the American steel industry was justified by the wish to protect their national steel against an alleged invasion of low-cost products , Europe decided , through Mr Lamy and the Commission , to retaliate .
Commissioner Lamy therefore told us , before this House , that the European Union intended to defend its industries and jobs by taking all available measures .
Mr Lamy also stipulated that these defence measures should take place within the strict framework of the Union 's international commitments , namely within the World Trade Organisation .
In the same speech , Mr Lamy described our steel industry as restructured , productive , strong and competitive , adding that he admitted we had paid an extremely high social and financial price between 1980 and 1990 , but that we could now be proud because the overall result was positive and , in particular , because we no longer needed to fear the future .
Around the same time , he visited the Sidmar de Gand factory , a production unit belonging to the Arcelor group , the same company that is now throwing thousands of workers out into the streets and plunging a region into despair .
It was clearly out of the question for Europe to become a kind of Wild West , where everyone can do what they like , with the strongest inevitably triumphing over the weakest .
The Commission recognised that the lack of legal rules left the field open for power struggles alone , and that is why we reacted by observing the rules and the law .
We are now facing a disorganised world trade system , where Arcelor did not wait for market regulation because in fact that is what this is about .
American protectionism has consequences for all of us , which led Arcelor to impose market regulation , in other words according to its own criteria , with a view to reassuring its shareholders , who were hungry for high profit margins .
At European Union level , we are therefore becoming a real Wild West in social terms .
On a daily basis , multinationals - and I shall spare you the large companies that consider workers and small companies as nothing more than disposable tissues that can be thrown away once they have served their purpose - decide to implement job losses and close factories in order to open others elsewhere .
They force national social systems to compete with each other and drive countries to restrict workers ' rights .
Furthermore , these companies receive subsidies and sometimes even privileges .
They do not respect their commitments , and find every possible loophole , even those that can still be found in the enlargement system .
The legislative arsenal of the European Union on social issues is clearly insufficient and there are still European political leaders , in particular within the Convention , who say that the European Union must not intervene in social policy matters .
Arcelor today , Renault Vilvoorde yesterday , these are the examples that have led us to fight , here in this House , to say that Europe must be a social Europe or nothing at all .
In any case , we certainly cannot continue to infringe workers ' rights as we are doing .
It is essential to ensure that companies shoulder their social responsibilities on a purely voluntary basis .
In order to do so , we need a number of commitments .
Europe is adept at pointing out the rules of an ambitious industrial policy : what can we do to remain competitive in the traditional production sectors such as steel , telecommunications , gas and electricity ?
This Europe could then , with no problems , observe in silence the restructuring and closures , and we , within this House , the elected Members of Parliament , representing the workers and the people , would accept that with our arms folded , opening the first aid kit and wondering how to call the Red Cross !
What is happening in the steel sector could have been anticipated .
The Commission seems to be realising it for the first time , and we could be surprised .
What I would like to say , Mr President , in conclusion , is that if the European integration process was conceived with the ECSC , whose obligations have already been recalled , if we do not want to tell the citizens once again that this Europe is not for them and that it is a Europe of money , I think we should develop a specific intervention model adapted to the steel problem .
Mr President , I have listened with great care and attention and interest to this crucial debate .
One cannot but be moved by the strength and passion with which Members of Parliament have expressed their views on this unfortunate issue .
A number of interesting ideas were developed throughout the debate and the Commission will study all of them with great care .
Most of the points raised were dealt with in my introductory remarks and I will not go into detail on them now .
Let me underline again the basic principle according to which decisions on corporate restructuring are a prerogative of management , but also its responsibility .
A wide consensus seems to exist in Europe on the way to address crises resulting from the need for companies to adapt , from industrial change and from corporate restructuring .
Let me reaffirm again the importance of effective , timely and comprehensive information and consultation of workers ' representatives .
You have nevertheless expressed other types of concerns to which I would like to give you the Commission 's preliminary view .
Before I do that I would like to pick up one or two points that were made .
There were references , for instance , to the European Coal and Steel Community , and I was asked whether Articles 3 and 5 have any application in these circumstances .
It appears to be the case that Articles 3 and 5 no longer have application because the ECSC is no longer operational .
Nor indeed are state aids possible . We all know that .
There is no competence at EU level to deal with many of the issues that have been raised by honourable Members in this debate this afternoon .
I can only quote what Mrs Zrihen said in her contribution just a moment ago , when she said the legislative arsenal is insufficient .
That is indeed the case .
There is not a lot that can be done in many circumstances in relation to some of the issues that you have raised because of the very point that Mrs Zrihen has raised .
I shall now deal with some of the issues you raised .
Firstly , with regard to the trade dispute in the steel sector between the USA and the EU , the Commission is pursuing a very active line with regard to the unilateral measures taken by the US to protect its steel industry .
Those defensive measures include , besides intensive bilateral contacts with a view to solving the conflict , retaliation measures and using the WTO disputes settlement mechanism .
My colleague , Commissioner Lamy , is forcefully pursuing that particular issue .
Another issue that was raised in the debate was the issue surrounding the issue of enlargement .
For the steel industry , as well as for many other industries , enlargement is above all a window of opportunity for them to develop their businesses in the interests of themselves and in the interests of their workers .
There are issues related to compliance with standards in the new Member States , notably in the social and environmental fields .
Those issues are , however , being dealt with through technical assistance to help their industries to adapt , as well as through the assurance that those new members will have to comply with the relevant Community law from the date of accession .
A number of Members made reference to Social Funds and so on , and particularly to the free use of Community funds , notably the European Social Fund , to support the training and professional reconversion of workers affected by restructuring .
I should like to make a few points on that .
After the expiry of the ECSC Treaty , the only possibility lies in the European Social Fund and in interventions from the Structural Funds .
The main goal in the long term must be the reconversion of local industrial activities .
This will have a much greater impact on the regions than direct social aid to the employees , although some transitional measures can be considered .
We should recall that aid for the rescue and restructuring of companies in difficulty remains prohibited , in principle , for the iron and steel industry , as does any investment aid .
The same rules apply to the countries applying for accession and with regard to new aid .
There were also references to making public aid dependent upon the maintenance of employment .
Generally speaking , public aid to companies is already subject to those kinds of conditions .
A number of the existing instruments specifically link the obtaining of state aid funds to the obligation to keep people employed during a minimum period .
The guidelines on national regional aid make it clear that aid for job creation must be made conditional on maintenance of the employment created for a minimum period of five years .
Similarly , the Commission regulation on state aid for employment contains provisions stipulating that such aid can only be granted if the employment is maintained for a minimum period of three years , or two years in the case of SMEs .
Continuous employment should also be granted to workers in the case of aid for the recruitment of disadvantaged and disabled workers .
The Structural Funds regulations do not contain similar conditions , but it is clear that in so far as Structural Funds are used to cofinance state aid schemes , relevant obligations to keep people employed for a minimum period of time have to be respected .
Some reference was made to the alleged ambitions of one of the companies involved to make acquisitions in Poland .
Possible acquisition by Arcelor of certain factories in Poland or other third countries would be the subject of a survey by the Commission , pursuant to Regulation 4064 / 89 on the control of concentrations between undertakings .
The Commission underlines that it only permits concentrations which are compatible with the common market .
In its evaluation the Commission comes to a conclusion only about the competitive aspects without intervening in the industrial policy of a private company .
I should also say that the Commission has no information to the effect that any such plans for acquisition by that company have been successful .
Finally , industrial change has economic implications and an impact on employment and social cohesion .
However , it also provides opportunities when anticipated , prepared for and managed .
Dialogue , transparency , proper worker involvement , anticipation , risk prevention and the development of employability are the key elements of our European response to this phenomenon .
Let us do our best to build the instruments of a legislative or other nature which can promote these principles .
Thank you , Commissioner .
To conclude this debate , I have received four motions for resolutions .
Mr President , I have a request from my colleague , Mr António Mussa , who is temporary chairman of Parliament 's delegation to Kazakhstan and for the countries in the region , for the vote on this motion to be postponed to another time .
The parliamentary delegation was surprised that this motion was not submitted for its consideration .
The situation in the region is apparently quite delicate .
The delegation has followed it closely and the members , particularly the delegation 's chairman , would have preferred to have the opportunity to study the motion .
Forgive me , Mr President , I should have consulted the rules of procedure ; amendments have been made and I am not absolutely sure of the procedural basis for my request , but I am fulfilling the request of a colleague who is chairman of a parliamentary delegation and I submit the decision for the consideration of the Bureau and the Chamber .
Mr Ribeiro e Castro , I fully understand the request made by the chair of your delegation .
I must ensure compliance with the Rules of Procedure , however , which state in Rule 146 that intentions to request the adjournment of a debate must be notified at least twenty-four hours in advance to the President who shall inform Parliament without delay .
As this request did not reach us within the allotted period , the vote will therefore take place immediately after the debate , in accordance with the provisions of our Rules of Procedure .
Please be aware that I understand your request , but I am obliged to apply the rules of our institution .
The next item is the debate on the following six motions for resolutions on human rights in Kazakhstan and Central Asia :
B5-0135 / 2003 , by Mr Van den Berg and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the situation in Kazakhstan ;
B5-0136 / 2003 , by Mrs Morgantini and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on human rights abuses in Kazakhstan and Central Asia ;
B5-0143 / 2003 , by Mr Maat and others , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on human rights in Kazakhstan and Central Asia ;
B5-0144 / 2003 , by Mr Staes and Mrs Isler Béguin , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on the situation in Kazakhstan ;
B5-0147 / 2003 , by Mr Di Pietro , on behalf of the ELDR group , on the situation in Kazakhstan ;
B5-0152 / 2003 , by Mr Belder , on behalf of the EDD group , on the situation in Kazakhstan .
Mr President , both Kazakhstan and Tajikistan are authoritarian regimes or dictatorships where fundamental freedoms are flouted , political activity suppressed and where torture still takes place .
We naturally support the calls to respect democratic rights and freedoms in these two countries and we condemn the executions that continue to take place in Tajikistan .
It should however be emphasised that the Kazakh regime 's failure to respect human rights , which the European Parliament is preparing to condemn , does not bother the large oil trusts at all . These trusts are fighting it out with billions of dollars - 13 million , more than in Russia - for the Kazakh energy reserves , which are considerable .
Nor does it bother the building groups , including Bouygues , which have made considerable amounts of money thanks to the construction of the new capital , Astana .
This means that these trusts , among the main pillars of capitalism in the so-called democratic Western countries , are also the pillars of dictatorships , both in Central Asia , the Middle East , or elsewhere .
Mr President , it is with a certain regret that we are again debating Kazakhstan , all the more because it is a fantastic country with fantastic inhabitants and perhaps even wonderful opportunities if you consider its economy and the fact that a fledgling democracy has been built up .
That does , however , give us in the European Union a responsibility , in our cooperation with Kazakhstan , to talk about each other 's position as good friends , and that is what is now a cause for concern .
Our point of concern is about the development of democracy and the further curtailment of the freedom of the press .
I will quote you the example of Sergei Duvanov , a journalist who was arrested after he had published some critical articles ; he was also accused of an indecency offence on pretty dubious grounds and was not given a proper public trial .
There are therefore quite a few examples of intimidation .
The second important point is that it is , in fact , becoming increasingly difficult to form political parties and to set up social organisations there , as ever more stringent requirements are being imposed and what is gradually happening is that these organisations are only being allowed to exist if they can demonstrate that they really have tens of thousands of members in each region .
This does not promote the development of a democratic constitutional state .
In view of the cooperation agreements we have signed , we , the European Union , are partly responsible for our relations with Kazakhstan .
That point in particular causes us concern , but it also makes us more responsible for the implementation of the agreements and for Kazakhstan 's continued development .
For this reason I am asking the Commission and the Council very explicitly to pay attention to the situation on the basis of these cooperation agreements and to contact President Nazarbayev and the government in Kazakhstan with a view to finding a way , as a true friend , of improving the development of democracy and of paying more attention to human rights .
True friends tell each other the truth ; we must be able to do this in this relationship .
I hope that the Commission and the Council do in fact intend to play this role on the basis of the treaties we have signed .
Mr President , Commissioner , unlike Mr Maat , we are satisfied that today , by means of this resolution , the European Parliament is sparing a thought for Kazakhstan and , through it , for Central Asia .
Although it is true that certain regions of the world are attracting the attention of the European Union , this vast , fragile sub-continent , currently in transition , torn between Russia and China , all too often escapes our vigilance and our requirements .
These countries are far from the eyes of the Union , and therefore far from its control .
The signals coming from Kazakhstan , however , are more reminiscent of a return to Soviet methods than of a transition towards the rule of law , democracy and a system that respects human rights .
How else can we interpret these cases of intimidation and persecution of journalists and the opposition ?
What is the historical precedent for these fixed or arbitrary trials suffered recently by people such as Mrs Petrushova , Mr Abbyazov and Mr Zhakiyanov ?
Does the fact that these phenomena are increasingly common not imply a return to the previous authoritarian regime rather than the inevitable ups and downs of a transition towards democracy ?
More than a decade after the collapse of the USSR , these kinds of misadventures and alibis cannot be tolerated .
Although there are still reservations regarding the European Union 's vigilance with regard to these Central Asian republics over the past few years , the Union must now show genuine firmness in order to promote its principles and its values in this region of the world .
Tomorrow , certain former Soviet republics will join our Union .
Today , already , the Union is concentrating a key economic and industrial force in Europe and the world .
It must use this as a political lever to demolish the non-democratic regimes of these third countries that are so eager to obtain Community investment .
We clearly have ways of putting pressure on Kazakhstan , on the countries in this region of Central Asia which , at a time of globalisation and the enlargement of the European Union , are no longer , and must no longer , be outside our horizons .
We have the power , and it is our duty , to bring the current situation in Kazakhstan into conformity with the international treaties and agreements and in particular with the partnership and cooperation agreement between the European Union and Kazakhstan .
I would like to plead the case of the Kazakh journalist Serguei Duvanov to this institution , as was the case here for Professor Baudajevski of Belarus or Mr Chbih Ould Cheikh Malainine of Mauritania .
I would like the European Union to assess political and human rights developments in Kazakhstan .
Mr President , in recital C of the present draft resolution , this House is also asking for attention to be paid to the increasing intimidation and persecution of religious minorities in Kazakhstan .
This is entirely justified , as the Stichting Friedensstimme Nederland even mentions an unfortunate trend that has been ongoing for the past eighteen months .
Insiders describe the increasing aggression on the part of the government and politicians , which goes hand in hand with disruptions of Christian acts of worship , as being reminiscent of the victimisation during the Communist era .
Two non-registered Baptist communities were attacked at the beginning of this month .
On Saturday 1 February police brutally raided a prayer centre in the municipality of Yevgenyevka in the north-east of Kazakhstan .
Confiscations and destruction followed , with even the pastor 's personal possessions being seized , even though Kazakhstan 's constitution does not explicitly prohibit non-registered religious groupings , and this is not even to mention the underhand official fine imposed on the same community last year .
One day later , on Sunday 2 February , a police officer accompanied by a colleague and two drunken ' witnesses ' disrupted the morning service of the non-registered Baptist community in Leninogorsk .
I call on the Commission and the Council to bring these abuses to the attention of the authorities in Kazakhstan and to urge them to improve the position of Christian minorities in society in that country .
Mr President , I apologise to my colleagues in this debate for not anticipating that the debate was going to be brought forward .
I was expecting it to start at 4.30 p.m.
I had the opportunity to visit Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan briefly with the Central Asian Delegation at the end of September and the beginning of October 2002 .
I have to say that all the signs are that there is a danger of Kazakhstan slipping into authoritarianism .
There is increasing intimidation and persecution of the press .
The case of Mr Duvanov , sentenced to three and a half years in jail is well known and has been mentioned .
The case of Irina Petrushova with Respublika weekly , sentenced to one and a half years in jail is another example .
And there is a series of new criminal cases .
A new law on the creation of opposition parties requires 50 000 citizens ' signatures before they can be registered .
Many of our parties in the European Union would not be able to register that level of support !
Of course , there is the increasing pressure on the opposition .
We still have problems with regard to legislation , particularly the fact that the crime and the practice of torture still exist and there is no clear definition of what torture is .
Clearly , we want a dialogue in Kazakhstan between the government and the opposition ; we want them to respect international law .
In the meantime , we ask the Council and Commission to raise these questions firmly at the next meeting between the Council , the Commission and the government of Kazakhstan .
Mr President , can I reassure you that we have not changed offices for the delegation to Central Asia .
I am still vice-president , Mr Di Pietro is still president and Mr Koukiadis is still vice-president as well .
Mr Mussa very kindly stood in for us at a meeting yesterday .
We welcome the genuine dialogue that we have with the Kazakh Government , parliament , the opposition and the wider community .
Kazakhstan is travelling the road from a Soviet republic to an independent and democratic state .
Our task is to help keep them firmly on that road .
They have our sympathy and support in tackling the many problems they face : pollutants , locusts and AIDS , to name but three .
We understand how far Kazakhstan has already travelled towards democracy and human rights .
They understand our need to air concerns when they arise and when they are brought to us .
To some extent , the tabling of this motion has already brought some answers .
The ombudsman system , for example , could be expanded .
Perhaps the European Union could help them do just that .
But at least it is the first ombudsman system in a CIS country .
Religious minorities were targeted by the government , but I am pleased to hear now that has been vetoed by the president .
Mr Duvanov 's trial was closed to the public .
That is not entirely satisfactory .
The US and Dutch embassies may have been represented but why were not the Kazakh human rights groups ?
The Council of Opposition Parties has now been established , although one of the main opposition parties is not represented on it .
We need to know more about the 19 January presidential law that was brought in on political parties .
It inhibits the ability of some opposition movements to operate legally in the country .
Kazakhstan must not slip on its road .
We are watching , listening and supporting .
The concerns that we have in this motion for a resolution need to be tabled .
We need to ask Parliament 's Central Asian Delegation to put these on our agenda for the PCA discussions we shall shortly be having with the representatives of Kazakhstan , and then report back to Parliament .
Mr President , over the past years , democratic conditions in most of the countries of Central Asia have deteriorated .
However , the Commission understands why the focus of Parliament 's attention in this debate is on Kazakhstan .
Once considered one of the ' hopefuls ' in the region , the past two years have seen a crackdown on political opposition and critical media .
Especially hard hit were those who had the courage to criticise corruption at the highest level , involving the President and his family .
The Commission agrees that the court cases on corruption charges against Mr Ablyazov and Mr Zhakianov , the two leaders of the opposition movement Democratic Choice for Kazakhstan , had every appearance of being politically motivated .
The Commission has furthermore viewed with great concern the campaign of intimidation that has been going on against a great number of critical media in Kazakhstan .
This has included the firebombing of offices , the vandalising of transmitter equipment with a machine gun , a decapitated dog nailed to a newspaper office door and physical attacks against individual journalists .
The perpetrators of these crimes have never been apprehended , and many cases have simply been closed .
A number of newspapers , furthermore , have been subject to judicial proceedings , endless tax and safety inspector visits and heavy fines , in a number of cases resulting in closure .
The Commission also agrees that the recent court case against Mr Duvanov on rape charges was marred by grave irregularities .
We therefore strongly believe that the trial should be reviewed .
It is against this background that President Nazarbaev 's recent statements that Kazakhstan will seek its own pace of democratisation - to be achieved by 2030 - and that western standards should not be automatically applied to Kazakhstan , are to be met with due caution .
President Prodi underlined our deep concern over Kazakhstan 's recent democratic record during the President 's visit to Brussels on 29 November 2002 .
On the other hand , it is important to take a number of positive developments in Kazakhstan into consideration as well .
Prisons have been transferred from the Ministry of the Interior to the Ministry of Justice , and we hope that pre-trial detention facilities will soon follow .
A law on the humanisation of prison conditions has been passed and a serious effort seems to be being made to implement prison reform .
Kazakhstan , as well as other countries in Central Asia , has also established the post of Human Rights Ombudsman , although much remains to be done in terms of strengthening their mandates and facilities .
A ' Standing Council ' for further democratisation and development in civil society was approved by Presidential Decree on 29 December 2002 .
It is to be hoped that its recommendations , for example those on the Law on Political Parties , will be followed up .
The Commission notes that Parliament 's resolution focuses on Kazakhstan only .
The Commission believes , however , that the matter of human rights in Kazakhstan is to be viewed in its regional context .
It cannot be denied that there has been a crackdown on non-governmental media and opposition in Kazakhstan .
But the Commission does not believe that the state of democracy and human rights in Kazakhstan - nor , for that matter , in Kyrgyzstan or Tajikistan - is beyond repair .
We believe that the EU can continue to have an impact on democratic conditions in these countries through critical but constructive dialogue under the Partnership and Cooperation Agreements .
We have deeper concerns regarding Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan , on which Parliament 's resolution remains silent .
Uzbekistan has no independent press , whereas Turkmenistan has no press at all worthy of the name .
Opposition parties do not exist in these two countries .
Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan have been under the close scrutiny of human rights watchdogs for some time now because of the deterioration in democratic conditions .
This scrutiny has certainly been justified .
But let us not forget that in Uzbekistan , and certainly in Turkmenistan , for years there has been no democracy at all left to deteriorate .
In these countries , any opposition activist , critical journalist or simply any Muslim practising his belief , risks ending up in a torture chamber , a penal colony or on death row on charges of terrorism , religious extremism or an attempt on the life of the President .
Opposition and civil society in Kazakhstan , Kyrgyzstan and , to an extent , Tajikistan , are under pressure , but this has , at least so far , not made them less resilient or vocal .
Through constructive dialogue and targeted support , the EU can still make a difference in these countries .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debate .
The next item is the debate on the following six motions for resolutions on Venezuela :
B5-0134 / 2003 , by Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra and Mr Fernández Martín , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on the situation in Venezuela ;
B5-0137 / 2003 , by Mr Miranda and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on Venezuela ;
B5-0141 / 2003 , by Mr Van den Berg and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the situation in Venezuela ;
B5-0146 / 2003 , by Mrs Frassoni and others , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on the situation in Venezuela ;
B5-0149 / 2003 , by Mrs Sanders-ten Holte and others , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the situation in Venezuela ;
B5-0153 / 2003 , by Mr Queiró and Mr Ribeiro e Castro , on behalf of the UEN Group , on the situation in Venezuela .
Mr President , for some time now , the European Parliament has been monitoring the situation in Venezuela with interest .
I should like very specifically to draw attention to the delegation of MEPs that visited the country to assess the damage produced by the floods in the state of Vargas .
When it returned , this delegation drew up a resolution and mobilised considerable financial resources in order to express the EU 's solidarity with those affected .
This Parliament 's most recent official delegation to Venezuela detected the possible risk of an anti-democratic trend whose most important manifestation was the cancellation of the Venezuelan parliamentarians ' mandate before the Latin American Parliament .
Today , the country is undergoing a political , economic and social crisis that has produced many victims , as did similar crises this weekend in Colombia and , in the past , in Bolivia .
Moreover , this is actually contrary to Venezuela 's peaceful traditions .
That is why I believe that the European Union in general and our Parliament in particular have to support the efforts of the Organisation of American States and of the ' Group of Friends ' to try to bring about a situation in which the country is in some way able once again to feel the beat of economic and social development and to embark upon the path of stability , democratic consolidation and respect for fundamental rights and freedoms .
The European Commission must , however , help us in this task and , of course , the measures taken the day before yesterday by the Commission to limit and modify the system of generalised Community preferences are not going to be of much help in handling the situations being experienced by Colombia , Ecuador and Venezuela .
I believe that this Parliament must respond and lose no time in setting out its priorities for helping these countries , which are subject to many threats .
In the case of Venezuela , moreover , we have to obtain a peaceful , negotiated and democratic solution , given the grave situation being experienced by that country .
Mr President , the political situation in Venezuela warrants the greatest possible interest and attention from the European Union .
My group condemns the instigators of the coup of 11 April who irresponsibly attempted to overthrow the country 's democratic , legitimate constitutional institutions .
Most of all , we condemn the Council of the European Union 's complicity with the instigators of the coup at the time .
We have not yet forgotten that the Presidency of the Union immediately sent a message of support to the instigators of the coup , a black day for European diplomacy .
It is important to respect the Venezuelan Constitution , which was drawn up by a democratically elected assembly and equally democratically ratified by a huge majority by the Venezuelan citizens .
Indeed , the anti-governmental action against the government instigated by the part of the opposition known as the Democratic Coordinator lies completely outside the framework of the Venezuelan Constitution and , moreover , only served the economic and commercial interests of forces outside Venezuela which had no hesitation in reducing the entire country to poverty in order to continue to enjoy privileges and pursue specific goals .
This does not , of course , mean that we blindly support all the actions of the legitimate Venezuelan Government .
We support the moderating action of the Mesa de negociaciones y acuerdos working in Venezuela and we support the mediating work of the Carter Foundation , based on respect for the will of the Venezuelan people , which has several times been expressed democratically .
It is important to remember that President Chavez has , on a number of occasions , declared that he is willing to respect the provisions of the Venezuelan Constitution and to submit to public consultation half way through his mandate .
Respecting the political experiment in Venezuela means respecting the dignity of a people that has decided to take its fate into its own hands .
We too have a responsibility to further this process and to ensure that the complexity of the situation in Latin America , not least , does not become such as to constantly jeopardise the autonomy of its people .
That is another reason why our group calls for the motion for a resolution we have drawn up together to be adopted without amendments .
Mr President , Commissioner , Venezuela is an Andean Pact country which has a broad democratic tradition , has demonstrated generosity throughout its recent history and has experienced the advent of many new citizens in search of a better life who have made efforts to contribute to a prosperous Venezuela .
This is a Venezuela that , in the past year , has experienced two completely new events in its domestic life that , in institutional , political , economic and social terms , have changed the ways in which the country can be governed .
Firstly , there was a mini coup d 'état on 11 April to oust President Chavez , who had been elected in 1998 in accordance with the Venezuelan constitution .
Secondly , there was a civil strike , initiated at the beginning of December , which constituted a significant breach of the social fabric .
Nor ought the issue of oil to be forgotten .
Given this scenario of socio-political confrontation and crisis , government and opposition have turned to the international community in search of support in finding a negotiated democratic solution .
To that extent , the European Union cannot remain on the margins because , over and above the response of democratic solidarity it needs to offer in the light of this serious problem facing Venezuela , it must take account of the fact that hundreds of thousands , not to say millions , of citizens of EU Member States reside there .
That is why I think it right for this Parliament to get involved and actively help Venezuela to emerge from the crisis it is experiencing while , of course , respecting its sovereignty and independence .
To that extent , I should be grateful if we were all to support the motion for a resolution .
I should also like , however , to see support for the amendment tabled by Mr Ribeiro e Castro , asking for the European emigrants living in Venezuela not to be forgotten .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to begin by thanking the previous speaker for his words because this is actually a point that we consider to be extremely important in this context .
We in Portugal have been extremely sad and distressed to see what is happening to Venezuela ; a country that is a friend of ours , where hundreds of thousands of Portuguese citizens live , especially from Madeira .
The ties that bind us to the Venezuelan people and State run very deep .
It distresses us to see the destruction of what was one of the most solid democracies and one of the most prosperous , stable and peaceful societies in Latin America .
The unfortunate mandate of President Chavez , who it is true , was elected , bears enormous responsibility .
It appears that he wanted to pursue a policy of inflaming Latin America , which is what unfortunately happened a few decades ago , with terrible consequences , including the violence that still besets so many Latin American countries that are friends of ours .
We therefore support this resolution , but would like to make some clarifications , not only on the amendment we tabled , but also on a split vote that we requested .
We believe that our role is to encourage moderation , dialogue , the progress of democracy and respect for human rights .
Our expression of respect for the Constitution , as included in the text , could be used improperly in Venezuela by one of the parties involved .
We are , of course , in favour of respect for the democratic Constitution , but we know that with regard to the issues concerning Venezuela currently being discussed , this is an argument that President Chavez has used improperly to block or to attempt to block the course of democracy in his country .
Consequently , if we use the argument improperly in this context , we could be sending out the wrong signal .
This is why we have requested a split vote for which we would also ask the Chamber 's support .
Mr President , the crisis in Venezuela 's two-party regime led to a solution 's being sought in terms of what we might call the populist panacea .
What had happened is that , after 40 years of relative political stability , the two-party regime had been discredited as a result of accusations of corruption and malfunctioning of the democratic institutions .
The solution took the form of a regime that , to most intents and purposes , was plebiscitary in character , with a new constitution and with a president possessing considerable popular support but in which the democratic institutions did not operate properly .
In actual fact , this is not a phenomenon exclusive to Latin America .
In Europe , too , there is a certain tendency at the present time to look for solutions in this type of populism , involving the discrediting of parliamentary and representative institutions .
I believe that we can say , like Winston Churchill , that ' parliamentary democracy is the worst political system ? except for all the others ' , and I think that the Venezuelans will now have to reflect upon the new type of constitution they want .
It is not , however , for us to tell the Venezuelans what to do .
The motion for a resolution is not designed to recommend one course rather than another to the Venezuelans .
It is the result of a compromise between various political forces , and that is why we , at this time , are rejecting the proposals for split votes on some aspects of the resolution tabled by Mr Ribeiro e Castro , even though we do in fact support his amendment about acknowledging the situation of immigrants .
What would be required would be for the European Parliament , together with other Community institutions , to intervene to help create a climate of understanding between the Venezuelans themselves .
This Parliament already has experience of intervening in crises , for example in Central America - more specifically , El Salvador , Nicaragua and Guatemala - as well as in South America : more specifically , Chile and Paraguay .
Such an intervention , made in conjunction with parliamentarians from Latin America , could be useful in creating this climate of confidence required by Venezuela if it is to function properly .
Mr President , the situation in Venezuela continues to give great cause for concern , at precisely the time when the election of President Lula da Silva and President Gutiérrez is raising great hopes of democratisation and recovery for the continent .
We hoped never again to have to discuss attempted coups d 'Etat or situations in which the democratic institutions might be overturned .
Moreover , we would point out that the same President Chavez who is now under threat and was in danger from a coup d 'Etat in April 2002 had himself attempted a coup d 'Etat .
It is clear , therefore , that these types of methods have , in any case , not yet been completely eradicated from the continent .
In our opinion , the worst is now passed .
We welcome this fact and we therefore support the resolution to this effect .
We welcome the increasing attempts at dialogue which are taking shape and we are also convinced that the international role , the positive role being played by the Group of Friends and the Organisation of American States , is certainly a positive innovation in Latin America , where mediation in internal affairs is by no means the norm .
We also feel that the crisis in this country , consisting principally of the strikes and boycotting in the oil sector , has led to destabilisation which is not entirely coincidental .
I wonder what the European Union can do in this regard and I fully endorse what Mr Salafranca has just said .
Mr President , if I am not mistaken all of those who have drafted motions or spoken in this debate so far are from the Romance part of Europe .
This shows the particular solidarity that they feel , but I actually also want to make it clear that this problem of Venezuela concerns all Europeans to at least some degree .
Venezuela is a country that plays a significant role , and not only in economic terms thanks to its raw materials , oil and many other natural resources .
It is a country that has made a very considerable contribution to the political stability of the Andean region over a very long period of time .
That is why I welcome the efforts that Europe is making to help this country to recover its internal stability by intervening here .
I should particularly like to thank Mr Salafranca and others for being so ready to take on this task time and time again , and I believe that there are two points in this motion that are very significant .
Firstly , emphasis is placed on the role of the Friends of Venezuela , this group of countries that is making a particular effort to offer mediation here .
Two countries in the European Union , namely Spain and Portugal , belong to this group and have a special responsibility here , which they are responding to magnificently .
I should like to thank them for this and say that the European Union hopes that Spain and Portugal really can play a pivotal and positive role here , and I am convinced that they will do so .
Secondly , the motion stresses how important it is for the European Parliament itself to have a presence on the spot .
I should like to underline this request and say that the European Parliament certainly does not want to interfere in politics the world over , but it does wish to offer good mediation services wherever a reasonably well-functioning democracy is in danger because it is under threat from populism on the one hand and fear and uncertainty on the other .
The various different political forces need to be brought together around one table , because only by strengthening the rule of law , only by strengthening the institutions , but also only by strengthening pluralism in this troubled country will we once again be able to avoid a serious crisis there , and the lasting damage that this would do to that country and the region as a whole .
As I said , I would therefore appeal for the European Parliament 's offer to act as a mediator to be accepted .
I do not mean that we want to go around telling other nations what to do .
We do not have the right to do that , but we do have the duty to make our good offices available and to act as mediators .
Mr President , the worst thing about this situation in Venezuela is that the two sides have stopped talking to each other .
Their inability to enter into a dialogue is causing society , and even the State itself to fragment , leaving behind a vacuum that other undemocratic groups are only too eager to fill .
At this stage I should therefore like to draw your attention to the fact that an initiative has emerged from the Latin American Parliament and the European Parliament to form a joint group , to establish a dialogue with Members of Parliament on both sides in Venezuela and in this way also to support the efforts of the Group of Friends of Venezuela to bring the two sides together .
I hope that it will eventually be possible for us to build this bridge .
Incidentally , I suspect that given the current crisis in Iraq , the longer this conflict lasts the more likely it is that the oil involved will lead the United States to call for action to be taken .
The fact that well over 10 % of America 's oil comes from Venezuela is not without its consequences for them , or for the other countries of Latin America either , because rises in the price of oil are due , at least in part , to the situation in Venezuela .
The man in the street in the countries of Latin America is the one who will pay .
Apart from getting the two sides talking , what else is to be done ?
I think that sooner or later we will have no alternative but to let the people decide .
Here , though , I think it is important to keep the constitution as a basis , because despite all of its shortcomings the validity of this constitution has not been contested .
Latin America 's reputation for not respecting constitutions goes before it .
This is all the more reason for us to ensure that where a constitution is actually recognised at international level , we do stick to it .
If it is to be amended then it should be with the agreement of both sides to perhaps enable elections to be held at an early stage .
But as I see it the only way out seems to be for the people to decide , and no one else !
Mr President , on behalf of the Communist Party of Greece , I welcome the victory of the people of Venezuela against the local and foreign forces undermining their democracy and constitution .
A year after the failed American-backed coup , which was tacitly tolerated by the European Union and openly supported by Spain , which then had the presidency , the enemies of progress , democracy and social justice have again tried to overthrow President Chavez and the constitutional order .
However , all the striking businessmen managed to do was to cripple the country 's economy before retreating in disarray .
The days of imperialists setting up dictators everywhere are over .
The people of Venezuela , Colombia , Ecuador , Bolivia , Brazil , Argentina , Uruguay , of Latin America as a whole , are stepping up their fight for democracy and social change and we offer them our solidarity and undivided support .
the Commission remains deeply concerned about the current crisis in Venezuela and has emphasised the need for a democratic and peaceful solution through dialogue and with due respect for the constitution of Venezuela , human rights and democratic values .
The EU fully supports the OAS , together with the UNDP and the Carter Centre in the tripartite working group , in their efforts to facilitate a national dialogue between the government and the opposition .
The Commission has welcomed the creation of the Group of Friends of Venezuela ( Brazil , Chile , Mexico , Portugal , Spain and the US ) and hopes that it will contribute to the OAS efforts to find a solution to the current crisis .
The Commission considers that former US President Carter 's proposal - suggesting , alternatively , a constitutional amendment that would lead to early elections or revocatory referendum on President Chávez 's rule on 19 August - is a good basis for the negotiations between both parties .
The Commission has approved a project to assist the OAS in its efforts to implement possible agreements reached between the parties of the OAS mediated dialogue .
In addition to facilitating the ongoing dialogue , it has three main components : support for free and fair elections ; investigation of the events of April 2002 ; and disarming the civilian population .
The three components are included in the agenda of the ' Negotiating Table ' .
In addition , the Commission hopes that the freedom of expression of the media , used in a responsible way , could help overcome the current climate of verbal confrontation in Venezuela .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place shortly , when we have concluded the debates .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions on human rights in Zimbabwe :
? 5-0112 / 2003 by Mr Van Orden , Mr Corrie , Mr Deva , Mrs Foster , Mr Parish , Mr Tannock , Mrs Banotti , Mr Gahler , Mrs Korhola , Mr Lehne , Mrs Maij-Weggen , Mr Posselt and Mr Sacrédeus , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on Zimbabwe ;
? 5-0138 / 2003 by Mr Sylla , Mr Cossutta and Mr Miranda , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on Zimbabwe ;
? 5-0142 / 2003 by Mrs Kinnock and Mr van den Berg , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the human rights situation in Zimbabwe ;
? 5-0145 / 2003 by Mrs Maes , Mr Rod , Mrs Lucas , Mr Lannoye , Mrs Schörling and Mrs Isler Béguin , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on the human rights situation in Zimbabwe ;
? 5-0148 / 2003 by Mr van den Bos , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the human rights situation in Zimbabwe ;
? 5-0151 / 2003 by Mr Belder , on behalf of the EDD Group , on the situation in Zimbabwe .
Mr President , I speak on behalf of my friend , Mr Van Orden , and the British Conservatives .
I also speak on behalf of the oppressed people of Zimbabwe who are crying out for justice .
Yet again we find ourselves having to discuss Zimbabwe .
Why , one might ask , are we doing so now ?
The situation in Zimbabwe has gone from bad to worse , with enforced starvation and continuing human rights abuses and political oppression .
However , the most urgent issue at this moment relates to action to be taken by the EU itself .
It is unbelievable that there was a need for a lengthy Council discussion on the renewal of sanctions , which must take effect by 18 February .
Who would believe that their renewal would depend upon the Council 's agreement to Mugabe visiting Paris !
Mugabe is the prime instigator of the oppression and misery of the Zimbabwean people and the supposed main target of EU action .
The problem with EU sanctions has been their lack of rigorous enforcement .
Now the plan is to allow Mugabe and his entourage to travel to Paris .
No wonder that the EU is not taken seriously .
After all , we should not be trying to find ways of helping Mugabe to evade our own sanctions .
Instead we should be trying to make sanctions more effective .
If anything , they need to be widened in their scope !
We should not be surprised if African leaders are half-hearted in their support for international measures when the EU is seen to lack resolve .
The EU 's weakness is in marked contrast to the brave stand taken by the Zimbabwean cricketers , Henry Olonga and Andy Flower .
Prior to taking the field for Zimbabwe 's opening match of the World Cricket Cup , they said : ' we cannot in good conscience take to the field and ignore the fact that millions of our compatriots are ( ... ) oppressed . ( ... ) we are making a silent plea to those responsible to stop the abuse of human rights in Zimbabwe .
In so doing , we pray that our small action may help restore sanity and dignity to our nation . '
They have put their lives and their livelihoods at risk by their courage .
They deserve all the support we can give to them and to the suffering people of Zimbabwe .
I call upon Members to support the resolution without amendment .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that this is an example of exactly what we must not do .
What Mr Deva has just said is the opposite of what must be done in this type of case .
I think , on the contrary , that we have made a serious mistake .
Recognising human rights abuses in Zimbabwe is one thing , but assisting the opposition and doing all we can to establish a democracy is quite another .
Lastly , the increase in sanctions proposed by Mr Deva is inappropriate in a country riddled with famine and pandemics , because these sanctions will not affect Mr Mugabe , but the people .

I still believe that our serious mistake was precisely cancelling the sitting of the equal ACP-European Union assembly .
When Belgium grants a visa to nationals of a country , when the delegates concerned are present , when others then have the right to take part in a meeting and when we unilaterally and dictatorially refuse them access to this building , we deprive ourselves of the possibility for Africans and Europeans to adopt together a resolution that condemns what is happening in Zimbabwe .
Instead of that , we have strengthened all those who support Mr Mugabe .
We have provided him with superb publicity .
What is not responsible is for you to say that France has no right to prohibit a man from taking part in a Franco-African summit in which he is involved , precisely because that would enable us to tell him what we think face to face .
If we want lasting peace in this region , if we do not want discrimination and violence against the poorest to become even more widespread in these countries , we need to involve the regional organisations , and in particular the African Union , in our action .
In order to do that , we need to sit down with them and hold discussions with them .
What you are doing here is forgetting the colonial past of a country in which there is certainly violence today against white farmers , but which is currently also paying the cost , it should be recognised , of that colonial past where , for many years , the vast majority of the black population did not have access to land , whereas today the country is the subject of agricultural reform .
We cannot , therefore , solve the problems by trying to attack Mr Mugabe , but by sitting down together around a table , and I completely disagree with you and your method .
Mr President , there has been a little confusion .
Mr Sylla was not one of the authors of the resolution .
He is opposing the resolution .
I do not know how that mistake was made .
We in the PSE Group are supporting the resolution and will be opposing the amendment from Mr Posselt , because it waters down the criticism of Mr Mugabe .
Zimbabwe is no longer a democratic country .
Parliamentary , presidential and all local elections recently have been characterised by intimidation , repression , voting fraud and state-sponsored political violence .
We have a situation where over 7 million Zimbabweans - over half the population - are on the brink of starvation .
If you want government-controlled food , you are required to have a ZANU-PF membership card .
Unemployment is running at 70 % , inflation is at over 100 % and 50 % of the land is no longer being farmed .
We also have the usual African problem of AIDS .
Parliament has consistently called for a widening and rigorous enforcement of sanctions , as well as other measures , to make international action against the Mugabe regime more effective .
This resolution condemns the lack of coherence in EU policy and calls on the Council and governments of the Member States not to seek exemptions from the EU 's own sanction regime , which can be misread .
Sanctions against the Mugabe regime should continue without interruption and without exemption .
The charges against the opposition , against Morgan Tsvangirai , are spurious and unsubstantiated .
We want to extend the existing sanctions to make them stronger and more effective .
We want the Council and Commission to provide more information on the freezing of the bank accounts of those subject to sanctions .
We want wider sanctions against the Zimbabwean regime , including an international sports and culture boycott . That would not increase the suffering of the population of Zimbabwe .
We praise the courage of the Zimbabwean cricketers - Andy Flower and Henry Olonga - for wearing those black armbands to symbolise the lack of democracy and human rights in Zimbabwe .
We support the belated stance of the England cricket team which has now refused to play in Zimbabwe .
It is time for further action to be taken and for the sanctions to be strengthened and reinforced .
Mr President , let me say , for the sake of precision , that I am not one of the authors of the joint resolution , I am an author of one resolution .
The resolution we submitted was intended to vigorously denounce the human rights situation in Zimbabwe and specifically to emphasise the risk to which an unfair trial , exposes Mr Tsvangirai , the man who , under normal circumstances , would have been president of his country if the elections had not been tampered with .
Nonetheless , I cannot use my remaining seconds to denounce the human rights situation even further , because our Parliament prefers to repeat everything again and to place the emphasis on tightening sanctions again , while all the Member States of the European Union , including Britain , keep on invoking Article 3 , paragraph 3 of which states that exceptions should be made for international meetings that have to be accommodated .

In the way it applies this article and paragraph 3 , the European Union has once again decided that Mugabe should come to Paris for the summit next week to speak on the human rights situation that is on the agenda there .
How in God 's name can we get out of this ambiguous situation ?
This matter is once again dividing us , even though together we want to condemn the sanctions .
We cannot , however , have a situation where we in the European Parliament systematically want more sanctions than any of the Member States to which we belong , if the whole Council , which is again , incidentally , absent , does not intervene and does not opt for an unambiguous solution .
My group resolutely argues in favour of maintaining the dialogue , and of promulgating sanctions that can be imposed , but not of invoking sanctions that rule out any dialogue .
We have just heard how things are in Venezuela , where there is no dialogue .
They are asking for a dialogue there ; in this case a dialogue is actually necessary !
There are many paragraphs in our resolution that we would like to see approved .
It follows , though , that you should not expect heroism from countries whose economies are so strongly intermeshed with that of Zimbabwe , which is bigger than that of our own European Member States , who do not even have the courage to get together to ask a UN representative to investigate the human rights situation in situ in Zimbabwe .
We will therefore be voting against several of these paragraphs , and we will also not be able to approve the resolution in its entirety , but we will be continuing to fight the same fight in favour of human rights and against this pernicious regime .
Mr President , there will never be a European foreign policy as long as Member States continue to follow their own agenda .
Not even a Convention will help bring one about .
The European Union is not even capable of pursuing a consistent , vigorous , clear policy with regard to Zimbabwe .
The scandalous human rights situation , political repression , the economic decline and starvation ultimately count for less than French interests in Africa .
We must not forget that our severe sanctions are the only alternative to punishments that affect the population .
The people of Zimbabwe are already suffering far too much .
Yet France is riding roughshod over the agreements by inviting Mugabe , and in doing so is putting the credibility of the European Union on the line .
It now looks as if the Council is intending to relax the sanctions by introducing exception provisions .
The opposite is , however , urgently needed .
Rather than being interrupted , the sanctions against the regime must be extended and intensified , with absolutely no visas at all for Mr Mugabe and his henchmen , and with cricket teams who want to play in Zimbabwe being declared all out before they even start .
Fortunately our Parliament is consistent , or at least most of the parties are , and we must keep it that way .
If Europe is not consistent , how can we expect African countries to be ?
It is most unfortunate that South Africa and Nigeria seem to be standing up for Mugabe and want the Commonwealth 's sanctions to be lifted .
Free , honest elections are needed soon .
Show trials against opposition leaders must be stopped immediately , and the United Nations must appoint a special human rights rapporteur .
Only unconditional actions against the regime can release the people from their suffering .
The starving , terrorised victims of the former resistance hero must be able to count on our support .
It is time Member States put their own commercial agendas aside and pulled out all the stops for human rights on a European level .
State terrorism combined with corruption and drought are converging to create a national catastrophe .
The situation in Zimbabwe once again calls for an urgent debate .
Some 7.2 million Zimbabweans , more than half the population , are living on the brink of starvation .
The shocking aspect in all of this is the fact that the government is abusing the distribution of food as a weapon in its fight against its political opponents .
Fear currently prevails in the country .
As the economic crisis worsens , government repression is plumbing new depths .
Increasing numbers of cases of torture are being reported , including such things as the administration of electric shocks , poisoning and rape .
Being a supporter of the MDC is in itself life-threatening .
This is true of its leaders even more than of its sympathisers .
Morgan Tsvangirai , Welshman Ncube and Renson Gasela were recently accused of high treason for spurious reasons .
Against this sinister background , it is absolutely shocking that France has now invited this dictator to the Franco-African Summit conference in Paris .
The excuse that the summit starts on 19 February while the sanctions were originally in force until 18 February sounds lame .
On the basis of paragraph 12 , therefore , I vigorously condemn this unilateral element in French policy .
It is not , at the moment , the only one .
Finally I would like to endorse the agreement that has at last been reached within the European Union on the extension of the sanctions by 12 months , but not without putting on record my protest against the French approach .
I call on the Council and Commission to unanimously implement the renewed sanctions in full without tolerating any opt outs .
Mr President , I might inform you that purely coincidentally the German Parliament is also debating Zimbabwe at this very hour today and I believe that , from a political point of view , it is important for us not only to discuss this issue here in the European Parliament - or perhaps also , for historical reasons , in London - but also in other parliaments in Europe , so as to raise public awareness of the situation .
Regrettably , it is necessary to extend the sanctions imposed on the Mugabe regime .
The use of democratic means has , unfortunately , not enabled the people there to rid themselves of a potentate who bears more responsibility than anyone else for the decline of the country in economic , social and political terms and also in respect of human rights .
I have to take issue with what Mr Sylla said .
The sanctions that we introduced do not actually affect the general public .
The only people that are hit by them are those who in any case have the money to travel .
But when , for example , the ' propaganda minister ' , Mr Moyo , went to South Africa on a shopping spree over Christmas , it caused a public outcry in that democratic society too that someone so close to the regime should be behaving in this way .
I very much regret the fact that the discussions about extending the sanctions degenerated into political horse-trading , because France would only agree to the extension if Mr Mugabe was allowed to come to Paris for the Franco-African summit .
I do not like to criticise a government whose political views are so close to my own , but in this case I would urge the French Government to consider whether it is in the interests of Africans to engage in African politics in this way .
Unfortunately , in previous decades for many European countries one single criterion has been decisive in determining whether they have got involved in African politics : whether it served their own economic interests .
The result is clear to see in countries such as Côte d 'Ivoire and Congo .
On the contrary , it is important for Europe to present a united front .
I therefore welcome the fact that Portugal would rather postpone the EU-Africa summit than allow President Mugabe to travel here .
Moreover , at the 59th session of the UN Commission on Human Rights , the Europeans must carry out early consultations so as to ensure that any draft resolution on Zimbabwe does not fail to go through , as happened last year , but that it is removed from the agenda beforehand .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this is not the first time I have spoken about the enduring and unhappy saga of Zimbabwe and its dictator Robert Mugabe .
Our position has not changed : we strongly condemn Mr Mugabe 's regime , the extremely violent , ongoing and shameful breaches of human rights , the way in which he is destroying his own country and condemning his people to poverty .
This is intolerable and our condemnation is unswerving .
I would simply say , however , that we must now act intelligently .
A policy of sanctions has been in place for a year now .
It is too early to tell whether the outcome of this policy will be positive or negative , but whatever the outcome is , we all know what has been going on .
We also know that these policies of sanctions always require a process to be in place .
The question in my mind is this : given the difficulties that have arisen and that we ourselves have felt , with the suspension of the Joint ACP-European Union Assembly , which have also been felt in the Commonwealth , and which are also currently dividing Europe , would it not be better to act somewhat more intelligently ?
I wish to propose an alternative plan , even though I have seen that a majority in this House has already been achieved !
Why do we not adopt a three-month moratorium , at the end of which , if Robert Mugabe 's regime has not adopted serious measures to respect human rights , we would then decree a truly unanimous system of sanctions ?
In the meantime , we could explore opportunities for EU-Africa dialogue , once again pulling the carpet out from under the feet of Mr Mugabe , rather than giving his propaganda sustenance ...
Furthermore , we should launch a massive movement of positive solidarity towards Morgan Tsvangirai , who is being unjustly and seriously persecuted in his country .
We in this House have the ability to do this and to mobilise European public opinion .
Mr Tsvangirai has , as you know , already been nominated twice for the Sakharov Prize , which Parliament awards each year .
Launching a massive movement of support for Morgan Tsvangirai to receive the Sakharov Prize at the end of this year would be much more effective than any policy of sanctions .
The Commission closely follows the human rights situation in Zimbabwe .
It is aware that the conditions remain volatile and is deeply concerned regarding the increased incidence of politically motivated violence observed recently .
In view of the gravity of the situation , the Commission proposed to the Council the extension of the measures against Zimbabwe under Article 96 of the Cotonou Agreement , which were adopted in February last year .
These measures redirect funds to social sectors and to areas which benefit directly the population .
This is for a renewable period of one year .
The Commission agrees with the Presidency 's proposal for a new common position amending and extending sanctions , such as the visa ban and freeze of assets against Zimbabwe , for the same additional period of one year .
The Commission is informed that approximately EUR 770 000 have been frozen in accounts in Member States or their dependent territories in accordance with the Council 's position .
Community assistance continues to contribute to projects which directly support the population in the field of democratisation , respect for human rights and the rule of law ; the European Initiative for Democracy and Human Rights includes Zimbabwe as a focal country .
The Commission is particularly concerned about the food crisis in Zimbabwe and has been very actively involved in responding to the situation .
Between April and December 2002 , we committed about EUR 80 million in emergency aid and humanitarian aid .
The Commission believes that all avenues for dialogue should be explored to improve the situation in Zimbabwe .
We will support any peer pressure that the international community , and the heads of state in Africa in particular , may put on the Zimbabwean Government in the area of respect for the essential elements of the Cotonou Agreement : human rights , democracy and the rule of law .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
The next item is the vote on the crisis in the steel sector
. ( FR ) On behalf of us all , Mrs Laguiller expressed opposition in her speech to the business closures and redundancies planned by Arcelor .
The only way to prevent finance groups from acting is to prohibit mass redundancies and guarantee workers ' salaries by taking funds from profits .
The compromise text , whic