Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 28 February 2002 .
We now move to the order of business .
The final draft agenda , as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday , 7 March under Rule 110 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed .
Wednesday :
I have received a request from the Socialist Group to bring forward to Tuesday the report by Mr Trentin ( A5-0062 / 2002 ) on the broad economic policy guidelines currently scheduled for Wednesday .
Mr President , this proposal is based on your wise counsel , on your proposal that Parliament should organise debates that are comprehensible .
And the logical thing would be , if we are holding a debate on budgetary guidelines , to also debate the broad guidelines for economic policy .
However , in the current situation , it seems that the debate on the Trentin report has been squeezed in and I believe it would make much more sense to hold it on Tuesday .
This is the only reason , Mr President .
Mr President , I really did not understand that .
I really do crave your indulgence .
The outcome , according to the translation , was that the subject is going to be debated on Wednesday , but , if I understand rightly , it is meant to be debated on Tuesday .
Could we perhaps clarify this again ?
It was not , in any case , entirely clear in the German translation .
The request is to move it from Wednesday to Tuesday .
Mr President , the reason for this request is not a political reason , to do with any one group .
The President , as Mr Poettering well knows , since he was with me in the seminar that he invited us to , insists that we should hold comprehensible debates .
Well , if we are going to hold a debate on the Union 's budget , the obvious thing is also to debate the broad guidelines for economic policy .
That is the only reason .
There is nothing else behind this proposal .
I hope Mr Poettering does not have a cold , since he is well wrapped up at the moment .
I hope he is feeling alright .
Mr President , for the sake of clarifying the proceedings , let me say that our group is very committed on the issue of Chechnya , and if , today , we support the motion to remove the topic from the agenda for this week 's part-session , that does not mean that we are not going to continue to be committed on the issue .
We want first to await the visit of a parliamentary delegation to Moscow and then return to this topic in an in-depth debate in May at the latest .
I would like to make that explicit today .
We remain committed on this issue and our attention is entirely focused on Chechnya .
If , then , we are in favour of removing this topic from the agenda for this sitting , that does not mean that our commitment to the issue is any the less .
Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank you for calling me two weeks ago , on the third day of my hunger strike for Chechnya .
This is now the 18th day of my hunger strike .
I think that the reasons that Mr Poettering has just given do not hold water .
I think that Parliament is being held hostage to a few Stalinists , who always take a strong line with those who are weak and are weak in the face of those who are strong .
We would like to withdraw the resolution on Chechnya from the agenda because the delegation to Russia is due to visit Moscow in April to meet the Russian members of the delegation .
I think that the delegation must go there armed with an extremely clear and strong position on an issue which has been dragging on for two and a half years , during which time 150 000 people have died and 400 000 refugees have been created out of a population of one million .
I therefore urge my Socialist friends , and I do have some , not just Mr Sakellariou , and my friends in the Group of the European People 's Party not to indefinitely prolong a tragedy that is very much a tragedy of the present and the past but not necessarily of the future .
Mr President , I want to tell Mr Poettering that I am in absolute agreement with the proposal he has made .
I do think that , if we want to have a proper debate on Chechnya , we must not have it as a matter of urgency with one or two minutes available , but in the context of a statement on this issue by the Council and the Commission , so we could have a serious discussion about it .
Apart from that , I do not wish to respond to the constant attacks by Mr Dupuis and his crowd , such as , for example , Mr Pannella and the rest of them .
Mr President , in my opinion , saying that there are other ways to deal with a matter besides holding a topical and urgent debate is a fundamental problem , for every time we say this - and who knows why - the committees responsible do nothing at all .
I feel that it is very important that this topical and urgent debate , already agreed on previously by the groups , be held in this particular part-session , in which , not least , a number of initiatives on Chechnya are being presented by different groups , and concurrently with which 400-500 people are on a hunger strike for Chechnya .
Moreover , I do not feel that this decision to hold a topical and urgent debate now means that we will have another opportunity to discuss the matter in a month or so .
If that were the case , we might perhaps be able to agree to the debate being cancelled now , but , I am sad to say , according to past precedent , that is extremely unlikely , which is why I strongly urge the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats to fulfil their undertaking given last week .
Mr President , on a point of order I would have appreciated being given the floor before you called the vote .
It is extraordinary that the plenary part-session should allow these appalling ethnic clashes last week in Gujerat to pass unremarked .
They are one of the worst examples of ethnic violence , certainly in India , for a considerable time .
They raise very worrying issues about India as a secular state .
They also raise side issues which could affect Kashmir .
It is quite extraordinary that Parliament has refused to take the opportunity to mark its views on this issue .
It is quite extraordinary that we are debating clementines rather than ethnic violence in India , given the huge importance of that subject .
I should like to inform the House that Mr Balfe is now a member of the group of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats with effect from 6 March 2002 .

I would like to raise a point of order in relation to your announcement that Mr Balfe has joined the EPP Group .
Rule 17 of our Rules of Procedure provides that ' when a Member changes political groups he shall retain , for the remainder of his two and a half year term of office , any seat he holds in the Bureau or the College of Quaestors ' .
Clearly , on the basis of this Rule , Mr Balfe is entitled to retain his seat in the College of Quaestors , even though it says nothing about changing political groups twice in the space of two months .
However , Mr President , Mr Balfe stood in the election as an Independent .
I did not vote for him , but many Members of my Group did in the belief that , while he stood as an Independent , he was still committed to socialist principles .
In view of his recent and unexpected conversion to the Conservative cause , could I ask Mr Balfe , through you , Mr President , whether it would not be more appropriate for him to do the decent thing - which would be to resign from the College of Quaestors and stand again as a British Conservative ?
( Applause )
Mr President , on a point of order , can we assume from that intervention that all the other Members of the British Labour Delegation believe in socialist principles ?
( Laughter and applause )
Mr President , on a point of order .
I am always pleased when my fellow graduates from the London School of Economics get up to make clever speeches .
I would point out that I am here in this group to assist Mr Blair , whose main allies in Europe , according to the Labour Party press , are Mr Aznar and Mr Berlusconi .

I will be able to help Mr Blair far more from this group than I could from the other group !
And anybody who imagines that I have been putting forward socialist principles in the Socialist Group for the last two or three years has clearly not listened closely to the nuances of my position .
I stood as an Independent and I am still an Independent - as everyone who has had to deal with me realises !
Mr President , on a point of order .
I would like to respond to Mr Perry 's challenge and confirm that all the Labour members in the European Parliament are committed to socialist principles !
Mr President , I would like to draw attention to a matter which is of direct relevance to this House , namely the situation of near anarchy that exists around the entrances to the Channel Tunnel at present at the freight depot .
Since Saturday night , rail freight has been prevented completely from going through the tunnel .
This is a direct consequence of the activities of illegal migrants coming out of Sangatte .
The tunnel was closed last Wednesday .
It has been effectively put on quarter-time since November 2001 .
This is affecting jobs in the UK and elsewhere .
It is affecting businesses .
Nobody seems to care about what is happening here .
The authorities in France are not doing anything ; the Commission is not taking action .
I have asked the Commission to address this situation .
What about the single market and the free movement of goods between France and the United Kingdom ?
No-one seems to care .
This is a matter which requires immediate attention .
We discussed this during the previous part-session .
I will contact the Council and the Commission in light of your remarks here today .
. ( DE ) Mr President , I had announced my intention of attending the session on 20 March , in order to make a formal protest against this session , which had been arranged at short notice .
When such a session was arranged in December following the Laeken Summit , we were told this was not a precedent but an exception because of Laeken 's importance .
Now I see that evidently such an additional plenary session is to be interpolated after every meeting of the Council .
That , at any rate , is the impression I get , and I wish to protest against it , as I see in it a systematic dislocation of the rhythm of the sessions decided on by the plenary , with the Thursday afternoon programmes being eroded at the same time .
First the debate after the matters of urgency was abolished , and then the vote after the matters of urgency as well . I see this as a systematic dislocation of the rhythm of the sessions and I ask that it be changed , or that it be clarified for the remainder of the year whether we now want to hold such a session after every summit , as then the remaining mini-plenaries in Brussels could be done away with and everything sorted out by being deferred to the week after the summit in question .
Mr Posselt , we can view the availability of Prime Minister Aznar after Barcelona as a problem or we can view it as a political opportunity .
It is my belief that the Conference of Presidents clearly indicated a will to seize the political opportunity , to have a politicians ' debate at the earliest available moment after Barcelona .
Therefore we agreed that we would hold a special session on 20 March .
I think that is sensible and I commend it to the House .
Mr President , on a point of order .
Today 's Spanish press widely reports the adoption last week of a memorial in the House of Representatives and Senate of the State of Idaho , in the United States .
They unanimously approved a joint memorial which calls for peace in the Basque country .
The Idaho legislature - and I quote : - " stands with the Basques in opposing all violence in the Basque Country and calling for the immediate convocation of a process [ between the governments of Spain and France ] to bring about lasting peace ( ... ) this memorial expresses Idaho 's support of the right of the Basques to self-determination . "
Mr President , I am sorry to draw your attention back to more prosaic matters , but politics can also be affected by matters of organisation .
I would point out that , for the first time , the September Parliamentary part-session is going to coincide with the Council of Europe meeting and , as a result , many of the Members have already been refused hotel accommodation .
I would ask you , Mr President , to discuss the organisation of this part-session with your colleagues or else many Members will not be able to stay long enough in Strasbourg to follow the work and attend the sittings .
Thank you for that early and timely reminder of what a crowded space Strasbourg will be for the September part-session .
We are assured by the city authorities that they will assist us in every way to minimise the inconvenience .
But I suggest you follow the example of Mrs Napoletano and book early .
Mr President , at the weekend I was disastrously misquoted in a German newspaper .
Had I really said the things that were printed , I would have made myself liable to prosecution .
Checks have been made , and have established that the newspaper certainly did not act out of malice .
The error is due to a circuitous chain of communication , which itself results from Parliament being walled off to an exaggerated degree .
Mr Kuckelkorn wrote to you as long ago as 17 January to point out the problems brought in its train by Parliament 's alleged need for security , which has been taken to the point of absurdity after 11 September , and he counselled common sense .
With others of my fellow MEPs , I associated myself with this letter by signing it .
To date we have received no reply .
It may be that translating it is taking time .
So , today , with the help of immediate interpreting , I ask you directly : When will we stop caging MEPs for their protection from their immediate surroundings and from the public ?
I understand that the matter is currently before the College of Quaestors .
I will look into it myself and either try to have an interim reply for you or the final substantive reply , as soon as that is possible .
Just to confirm , President , that it is on the agenda this week and we will no doubt communicate directly with Mrs Gebhardt .
Mr President , in this connection , I should like to point out that the College of Quaestors decides on these matters , and that these matters also have political implications .
I find it disquieting , however , that the College of Quaestors is now largely made up of PPE-DE members .
Mr President , the College of Quaestors seeks to be neutral in terms of expressing political opinions and I can assure you that it will continue to be so .
Mr President , the slaughter unleashed by the Sharon government on the Palestinian people leaves no room whatsoever for optimism as to the outcome of this conflict .
The purpose of Israel 's escalating its attacks appears to be to overturn all previous agreements between Israel and Palestine and wipe out the Palestinian authority and its leader .
Last week was the bloodiest since the second intifada began .
The dead number over one hundred Palestinians and thirty-five Israelis .
The climax to the bloodshed came during the last twenty-four hours ; Israel did not let up in its merciless attack from the air , sea and land , flattening the headquarters of Yasser Arafat .
Palestine is on fire from one end to the other , blood is flowing and there is no end to the mourning .
We call for international protection for the Palestinian people , for the genocide to stop at once and for the UN resolutions and the agreements on creating an independent Palestinian state to be respected .
Mr President , I would like to point out that , just when we are going to debate and vote on the ' Women and fundamentalism ' report by Mrs Izquierdo Rojo - and if we do nothing to prevent it - a thirty-year-old Nigerian woman , accused of adultery , will be put to death by stoning .
On the 18th of this month - and I repeat , if we do nothing to prevent it - we will once again see barbaric television pictures of a person buried up to their waist and then stoned to death .
This is an unjust , discriminatory and savage way of applying the Sharia , the Islamic law .
I would therefore ask you to address the appropriate representations , pressure and initiatives to the Nigerian government and the President of Nigeria in order to prevent this murder and safeguard the fundamental rights of Nigerian women .
I have already been in direct correspondence with the President of Nigeria about the most recent case and voiced Parliament 's concern .
I rise as a member of the Mashrek Delegation , to mention to the House that since the last part-session there has been an announcement by His Majesty , the King of Bahrain , that the national parliament , which was suspended in 1975 , will at last be reconvened later this year .
I wonder if you , Mr President , would write to send fraternal greetings and to say that this Parliament looks forward to establishing direct contact with it at an appropriate time .
Meanwhile , to share with colleagues another piece of news about that , I am sure that everyone would be delighted to hear that , in these very first elections in October , women will be entitled to stand for the first time .
Mr President , on behalf of my group , I would like to ask the Commission and the Council - and subsequently , Parliament - to issue an opinion at this part-session on a fact that has only recently been brought to our attention .
As you are no doubt aware , this weekend the New York Times revealed that the Pentagon has a secret plan to authorise the use of atomic weapons against an ' axis of evil ' , which has been considerably extended on this occasion to include countries such as China and Russia .
This constitutes one of the most unprecedented , irresponsible strategic about-turns since Hiroshima and Nagasaki , an almost inconceivable fact , which has , nonetheless , been confirmed by the American authorities .
That is why we believe the European Union must react very firmly , at the required level , in response to this absolutely unacceptable shift by world 's leading military power , the only country , in fact , that has ever dared to use nuclear weapons .
Mr President , I also read the American newspapers this week , particularly those published at the weekend .
Ten thousand Cubans have demanded , in accordance with the Cuban constitution , a referendum on democracy in Cuba .
This is a quite extraordinary piece of news that was not reported in Europe , but has been covered in the American press .
I urge the President and the European Parliament to seize this opportunity , which demands our attention .
I wonder how the Cuban government will respond to this , but I urge the President to encourage this initiative to bring an end to a forty-year dictatorship in Cuba by sending a telegram on behalf of the European Parliament .
Mr President , I should like to raise the same point as Mr Wurtz , that is , the new American programme to develop nuclear weapons , and to point out that this is not merely the next stage in the nuclear weapons competition , with incalculable consequences for mankind .
The intention is to change the traditional perception of nuclear weapons , with the very real possibility of their being used in a first strike .
Similarly , countries which have no nuclear weapons of their own are being threatened with nuclear attack and the Pentagon report even suggests that conventional weapon systems should be given a nuclear capability .
Those who call themselves the guardians of civilisation are proving once again to be barbarians and the most dangerous terrorists of all .
If the nations of the world do not stop them in time , our planet may well cease to exist .
To those colleagues who have raised questions about US policy , I remind you that our debate on Wednesday morning with the Spanish Foreign Minister and President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Piqué I Camps , will deal with transatlantic relations and will , I am sure , raise our priority concerns in foreign policy .
The next item is the Commission statement on world governance , following the World Social Forum in Porto Alegre and the World Economic Forum in New York .
Mr President , one in five world citizens is denied access to clean drinking water , basic education and basic health care .
The neo-liberal model has not provided any answers in these areas , nor has it made the world a safer , or more sustainable , place .
We are now looking for an alternative , not as a blueprint , but as a line of thought and action , in order to give shape to our ideals of social justice and security for everyone .
Porto Alegre and the World Forum in New York were both venues where at least the sense of urgency and the necessity to act in a more socially responsible way were on the agenda .
Porto Alegre appears to be more original , more up-to-the-minute and more creative , and also involves civil society .
It could serve as a good model for Prime Minister Aznar to promote social dialogue within Europe , which is what Belgium did .
We , as Socialists , are convinced that globalisation offers enormous scope for poor countries and excluded groups to gain access and to combat social exclusion .
Free trade should then , though , be coupled with rules and with supervision - by regional competition authorities - of concentrations of power that have grown far too big .
Protecting and supporting weaker regions and drastically opening up richer markets to developing countries fit in well within this framework of rules .
What does not , however , fit in well is protecting the strongest by introducing a network of social supervision of transnational businesses , although such a network would in itself be a good idea .
Neither is there any room for unilateral action by transnational businesses or superpowers such as the United States or for a unilateral focus on a new arms race at the expense of public provisions including education and health care .
Failure to honour the pledge to halve poverty by 2015 does not fit into this framework either .
However , this framework does offer room for fair trade with rules , democratic supervision of the global rules and social and good behaviour of transnational businesses .
It has room for respect for human values and societies in preference to commercial interests .
It allows for a modern and open world , and interest in , and respect for , each other 's differences on the basis of a common , recognised rule of law .
This rule of law comprises the right to an opportunity to shape one 's own life .
I should now like to return to the subject of Monterrey and the Spanish Presidency 's failure to translate the specific agreements of our Ministers for Development and Cooperation last week into an agreement to take practical steps towards achieving a contribution of 0.7 % of GNP .
It is not acceptable that we should first act as a satellite to the United States , which puts money and its own values first , before closing the poverty gap .
We want broad-based security , worldwide , and demand that the pledge to ensure that by 2015 all boys and girls can attend school while being healthy and well-fed , be honoured .
We , as Socialists , demand in the European Parliament that the Spanish Presidency honour this pledge .
This is our contribution to world peace , and this is how we want to translate the lessons of Porto Alegre and New York in this world into a new role for Europe .
Six months on from the tragic events of 11 September , now must be the time to reassert the need for effective global governance .
While I welcome the Commissioner 's statement , I regret the fact that the Commission 's work has not been more balanced - recognising , for example , that there is a dark side to globalisation , too - and has not been more ambitious .
Why did the Commission not take up Mr Verhofstadt 's suggestion that we should have a G8 not based on wealth and composed of the richest nations , but based on population and composed of the world 's major regional bodies , thereby involving the African Union , Mercosur , the South Asian Area of Regional Cooperation ( SAARC ) and so on ?
Globalism has led to a world of interconnected communities .
Technology and language learning have transformed our ability to communicate .
Trade and investment have changed our economic perspectives and vastly increased our wealth .
Travel has opened up new horizons and new opportunities for human contact .
And yet all this has not come without a cost , because criminals have organised themselves into global networks ; humankind 's damage to our natural environment threatens the future viability of life on our planet ; and powerlessness and alienation are restricting opportunities for far too many to develop their own abilities and to improve the lot of themselves and their families .
History , Mr President , suggests that if the world were truly a global village , many more would be shocked by the misery of the poor .
Of 6 billion human beings , half are living on less than EUR 2 per day and 800 million are going to sleep hungry every night .
I say , therefore , to our friends on the Right that yes , the market economy , if intelligently regulated , is the most powerful instrument known to mankind to lift people out of poverty .
That we have not yet learned to use it properly , however , is shown by financial crises , by environmental degradation and by the continued spread of preventable disease .
Moreover , our failure to reach 0.7 % of GDP in development aid is depriving the poor of EUR 100 billion per annum .
I say to the Left that we need to reform our trade policies because aid and debt relief for developing countries without access to our markets can be nothing more than a palliative .
To the Greens I would say that access to scientific progress is also important .
It is the key to better nutrition , to improved health and life expectancy and to rising living standards .
We must not starve the developing world of the benefits of innovation .
The challenge to humankind is to establish effective instruments of international government .
The United Nations , the international financial institutions , NATO , etc. have not succeeded as much as they should .
Yet , in the European Union we may have a model for wider global governance .
We need from our current leaders vision and commitment such as that shown by the founders of the Union .
It involves the self-confidence to engage with the world economic forum , the world social forum and others and the self-confidence to say to our friends in the United States that their legitimate sense of vulnerability after 11 September should not lead them in a unilateralist direction - whether in matters relating to military or economic security , the environment or fighting crime .
Global problems require global solutions .
Mr President , the title of the World Economic Forum in Davos / New York was ' Leadership in difficult times ' , and that of the World Social Forum in Porto Alegre was ' Another world is possible ' .
People said that the former was a forum for a ruling class with no mandate , a sort of shadow cabinet for the globalised economy , and that Porto Alegre was nothing more , indeed , than a colourful , inconclusive jamboree .
I , however , feel that , this year , some small degree of rapprochement was achieved .
The world 's leaders felt less sure of themselves and included subjects such as debt , poverty and sustainable development in their debates .
The 51 000 people who took part in the Porto Alegre forum want to do more than just protest and are drawing up proposals in an attempt to influence decisions .
This rapprochement , this loss of confidence in one-dimensional , pre-established solutions - and I would like to say here to Mr Watson that we Greens are not blinkered but are in favour of innovation - should be a major opportunity for an initiative from the European Parliament and the European Union in general .
We are the only supranational directly elected legislative house in existence .
The European Union is the only example of potentially innovative governance .
Well then , the European Union must address both the 51 000 Porto Alegre protesters and the exclusive Davos club .
As a Union , we must take an innovative , non-conformist approach to at least three issues .
The first is the issue of sustainable development .
The Johannesburg Summit is approaching : we are not satisfied with the initiatives the Commission is pursuing in this regard and we are concerned by the fact that sustainable development will not be discussed at all at Barcelona , or only very indirectly .
The second is the age-old , pitiful question of development aid .
It is very sad that we will not be going to Monterrey with a unified European Union position , and we are concerned - and displeased - by the failure to improve on the probable 0.4 % of GDP in development aid .
That is not the way to consolidate global governance .
The third and final question is democracy .
We know that there are entire States which are controlled by multinationals and that politics is yielding increasingly to pressure from the business world , and the Bush Administration is a daily testimony to this .
As Europeans , how can we find another way ?
I believe it is our duty to do so .
Mr President , I welcome this debate because I believe that Porto Alegre requires a firm response from the European Union .
First of all , many people attending the world forum expect the European Union to cut its ties with the ultra-liberal model that provides a structure for the current form of globalisation .
At the same time , however , Mr Aznar , in his capacity as President-in-Office of the Council , summed up his profession of faith for Europe in three meaningful words , which are - and I quote - ' liberalisation , privatisation and competition ' .
We are still a long way from the requirement of sustainable development , from the requirement of promoting human abilities , in both the north and the south .
Clearly , a consensus reached by the Fifteen to this effect at the forthcoming Barcelona Summit would constitute the most negative signal that the European Union could give to those I call ' the people of Porto Alegre ' .
We can obviously disregard them and prefer to believe , like the President of Sun Micro Systems at the World Economic Forum in New York , that globalisation is a good thing and that nothing needs to be changed .
I doubt , however , that he will be proved correct over time .
Every era has provided such examples of short-sighted policies pursued by the ruling classes , who are too convinced of their beliefs and interests to allow a rebellious division to emerge that challenges its dogmas and status .
We are all familiar with the episode in history where Louis XVI , King of France , wrote ' nothing to report ' in his personal diary on the page dated 14 July 1789 .
I hope that the European Union will demonstrate rather more insight .
Porto Alegre is also focusing the European Union 's attention on its responsibilities , in the face of the heightened and dangerous unilateralism of America under President George W. Bush .
We cannot , firstly , expect the whole world to express its solidarity when one falls victim to a savage act of violence , and then , secondly , act according to one 's own agenda , and disregard every rule , principle and scruple .
In a globalised world , the more powerful one is , the more responsibilities one has towards others and towards the planet .
Ignore these responsibilities and globalisation becomes a minefield .
I believe that the European Union 's primary duty is , in fact , to combat this very real danger .
Yet , when it comes to its relations with the United States , one often has the impression that Europe is scared of its own shadow .
For instance , on 8 February 2002 in Casares , the Fifteen had only just declared their clear position on the situation in the Middle East , when its major allies in Washington pathetically changed their stance a mere two weeks later .
We must deal with this in a mature fashion ; in other words , act independently and responsibly .
This is what some of those who are legitimately challenging a predatory and inhuman system still expect of Europe .
This year , at last , Porto Alegre firmly expressed a third demand which , despite the fact that its primary target is a military superpower , also concerns the European Union and its Member States .
We cannot allow war to once again become a way to solve the world 's problems .
We do not always know how war begins to become a part of everyday life , but we all know what it can lead to .
From this point of view , I refer to what I said at the opening of today 's sitting on the incredible revelation in the New York Times regarding the existence of a secret plan at the Pentagon to authorise the use of atomic weapons .
This extremely serious strategic about-turn goes hand-in-hand with the already exaggerated increase of the US military budget , an increase equivalent to the total amount of official development assistance of all the OECD countries .
Mr President , Europe must respond , not by attempting to imitate the model , but by working openly with its fellow citizens on bringing to life the now emblematic slogan of Porto Alegre : ' another world is possible ' .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I feel that Porto Alegre and the initiatives which preceded it have revealed only the tip of an iceberg .
It is a very complex subject which it would be impossible to analyse here , but I would like to focus on what is , in my opinion , the most interesting aspect .
I feel that , after the collapse of the socialist model in Eastern Europe , we are witnessing the beginning of another collapse , the collapse of unbridled neo-capitalism - which does not take account of the new factors troubling modern society .
The initiatives of the Porto Alegre protesters do not , indeed , take the same approach as certain - nonetheless useful - initiatives being pursued by the Commission : rather , they are essentially opposed to a vision of life which does not take account of the fact that these two models - both relics from the nineteenth century - have become obsolete and failed and that our Europe , our world , must now search for a third way which does take certain factors into account .
Nowadays , technology leads to unemployment , whereas once upon a time it created employment .
Nowadays , we research ways of making life easier for certain neo-capitalist classes , for example by liberalising energy , but we do not study how to resolve the problems of the southern hemisphere .
Now , the axis of history has shifted , and after 50 years of war between east and west , we are currently experiencing a world crisis revolving around north-south relations .
Therefore , if we are to take heed of the message of the Porto Alegre protesters , we must restore the dreams , values and points of reference to Europe , and , above all , we must endow it once again with an awareness of how complex our society is and the ability to find the most modern solution , the most modern way forward for our society between two models which are both limited and inappropriate .
Mr President , Commissioner , for several hundred million people , the world is still a very unpleasant place to be , full of woe , hunger and unspeakable suffering .
Without the globalisation of the past 20 years , the exponential increase in the movement of people and capital for commercial purposes , it would have been an even worse place to live .
One billion two hundred thousand people live below the poverty threshold - which , I would point out , is a mere USD 1 a day - and I feel that this is the matter weighing on the civil and political consciences of all of us here , and it is right that it should .
Development aid has been mentioned , and that is all well and good .
A dollar a day is what a cow lives on in Europe : I repeat , every cow in Europe receives one dollar a day .
Well then , provided that the aid has a greater effect than it has done in the past , I feel that it is right to discuss increasing the contributions of the individual wealthy States to 0.7 % of GDP for aid .
However , in my opinion , there is something else we must do first , and that is to open up our borders to goods from the poorest countries .
Commissioner , you mentioned the ' Everything but arms ' initiative , and rightly so .
I would remind you and all the Members , however , that , for products such as rice and bananas - to put it plainly - the barriers will not be removed until 2004 and 2009 respectively .
I would point out that , at Doha , the United States and Europe decreed in the WTO that the barriers should not be removed for two sectors which are fundamental for the developing countries : textiles and agriculture .
These are precisely the sectors that are in need of liberalisation .
I understand what Mr Watson is saying : as I see it , we should avoid a one-dimensional solution or solutions , but I do feel , nevertheless , that there is so much to do in terms of liberalising trade to help the poorest countries that it may well be there that we should focus our efforts initially .
In 2000 , Sub-Saharan Africa received EUR 14 billion of aid from those same countries whose customs duties cost those countries , those communities and those people EUR 20 billion of trade opportunities .
In my opinion , that is the initial action Europe should take , and it must take it even before increasing development aid .
Commissioner , you mentioned Tobin tax .
I am glad to say that , as you are quite aware , Tobin tax is impossible to implement and , even if this were not so , we must not forget that trade is stimulated by lowering tariffs , not raising them , and that capital investments in developing countries increase when taxes are removed , not when additional taxes are applied .
These countries need fresh investment , just as they need legal infrastructures , the legal infrastructures of the rule of law ; this was pointed out in an excellent book by Hernando De Soto , a South American economist who explains that the greatest problem of the poor and developing countries is that their assets are dead capital : capital which is prevented by the absence of the rule of law from being used for the welfare of the people , economic growth , development or , where desired , redistribution of wealth .
Mr President , Commissioner , I believe that Europe must find solutions to these issues , not shift the debate away from them .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Fidel Castro said that opposing globalisation is akin to questioning the force of gravity - both are futile .
Globalisation is certainly the direction that history is moving in .
In an increasingly interdependent world , we can do nothing but support this development which is the only thing that will eventually enable us to create a fairer world , a world where there is more solidarity , a less dangerous world .
The problem is that globalisation in its current form can not bring this about .
It is asymmetric , limited to a few rare sectors , such as transport , communication and finance and in fact only concerns the OECD countries plus a dozen more or less developing countries , whereas the majority of third world countries remain under-developed .
Two-thirds of world trade is carried out between the countries of the ' triad ' , which also absorb the majority of direct foreign investments .
The remainder goes to a few large countries , such as China , India , Brazil and sometimes a few others .
The majority of the 190 countries of the world are not party to either world trade or international investments .
The multinationals are , in fact , not interested in the great majority of developing countries and are particularly disinterested in the least developed countries . However , their integration in the world economy requires , by necessity , more investment and the transfer of technology to allow endogenous development .
Such endogenous development sometimes demands protection for emerging industries or services .
All the developed countries have experienced periods of protectionism , although protectionism is , in the long run , detrimental to development .
The opening up of markets of developing countries and their integration into a truly global economy must be carried out in a strictly ordered manner .
First of all , we need internal consolidation in each country , followed by a gradual opening up to the global market .
Globalisation , liberalisation and deregulation are not synonymous .
Liberalisation calls for new rules - and I agree with Mr Watson on this point - it calls for better rules , particularly for international financial fluctuations .
During the second half of the twentieth century , world manufacturing increased six-fold and global trade increased twenty-fold , showing that international trade is necessary for development .
Mr President , I see that I am running out of time .
I would like to end by emphasising the world 's main concern , namely that of finding a solution to the problem of third world debt .
If we do not find a solution for this persistent problem , we will never achieve sustainable development .
Mr President , Commissioner , the situation highlighted by the World Social Forum in Porto Alegre , in a country as extraordinary as Brazil , has contributed to undermining a determinist concept of globalisation - the ultraliberal capitalist concept - in which the will of individuals and of peoples , as expressed by the political , social and democratic institutions , is submitted and subordinated to a supposed rationality which , in practice , tends to widen the gulf between the rich and the poor and between opulence and poverty .
It is we Europeans who should be concerned about this new reality , and we cannot play down the social demonstrations that express this concern , which , disgracefully , Mr Aznar has just done with regard to the demonstration that is due to take place this week in Barcelona .
The countries of the Union already form the greatest economic power in the world , but on its path to becoming a universal political body , the Union must not express its economic power by dominating the sectarian and blind ultraliberal market or by simply imitating the military hegemony of the United States , and these are temptations into which some European Prime Ministers are falling .
What we should be doing instead is defending the values and the social and democratic achievements that form the best part of our history , and we should maintain a presence in the world as a factor for peace and for progress , in an action which , as Commissioner Solbes knows , must be a great deal more ambitious than the action presented today by the Commission .
We must put forward a concept of global relations that inspires the forthcoming constitution of the European Union .
Mr President , the second world forum at Porto Alegre revealed the peaceful nature , first and foremost , of this movement , and its political nature .
I would remind many of the Members that , in the 1970s , the feminist movement used to be described as a social jamboree whereas it was actually highly political in nature .
One of the striking things about this movement is precisely the involvement of many women and young people .
Secondly , I feel that there is cause for concern in the fact that , after the initial reactions to 11 September , American politicians seem to be light-years away from that heightened state of general awareness that had appeared to make them more open to the world in respect of a number of issues such as the environment , Kyoto , food safety , trade , arms issues and also the form of action to be taken to fight terrorism , which has proved to be chiefly military .
I feel that we must convince American society , and American politicians too , that this line will not get them anywhere : that is Europe 's mission .
Apart from anything else , it is surprising that no United States congressman attended the forum . We must persuade them to be more open .
Thirdly , I feel that Commissioner Solbes is right to say that the ' Everything but arms ' initiative is not enough and I believe there is another question to be raised , in addition to that of the opening up of trade .
We cannot continue to be so racist in our treatment of these countries .
We must start to take into consideration the fact that agriculture is more than just an export for them too : it is part of their market , their environment and their way of living and provides their food .
I do not think we will get very far if we do not change our approach .
Europe has the potential to do a great deal , but those Members may be right who say that it needs to carry out a considerable amount of self-analysis : not only in terms of what it fails to give as regards development aid , but what it fails to give by refusing to change its policies too .
Commissioner , in the same vein as my fellow Members , I would like to draw some comparisons between New York and Porto Alegre .
At the same time as a weak and unimaginative summit was being held in New York , attended by financiers and decision-makers , the so-called winners , in short , all kinds of wealthy people , three lively forums were being held , for the second time , in Porto Alegre which was the true alternative to Davos . The three forums were attended by people from towns , from civil society and by parliamentarians , who cast a critical eye over the whole world .
And this is how - and I sympathise with my colleague from the Liberal party , as the Greens are very happy to do this - the inventiveness of future governance is being created .
On the one hand , therefore , everyone in New York was shedding crocodile tears over the attacks of 11 September , not so much because of the unfortunate people who lost their lives but because of the resultant economic downturn . On the other hand , in Brazil , everyone was genuinely turning their attention to the real risks of terrorism and the poverty-stricken situation of poor countries to try to find helpful solutions .
If I have to mention some of the highlights , ladies and gentlemen , I would choose a debt tribunal , which is lending support throughout the crisis in Argentina , which outlined the extent of the devastating effects caused by the structural adjustment policies and the burden of debt .
This is a subject to which Europe should give greater attention .
Europe must assist the countries of the South in making their voice heard at the UN , so that the interests of debt-ravaged countries are finally taken into account , and not simply the interests of the creditor countries .
We are still waiting for the European Union to unilaterally abolish the debts of the countries of the south .
This would be a strong signal , which would be meaningful .
Commissioner , I believe that you could send this signal .
Most importantly , I attended the parliamentary forum for the second year running and was pleased to see that many Members of the European Parliament had travelled to Porto Alegre to build up this global network of parliamentarians who support social movements .
The more of us who gather from different political and geographical backgrounds , the better we can convey the message of the people ; the more of us who already have the legitimate right to universal suffrage , the easier we can influence governments that are all too often more concerned about taking up a seat at a New York-style Davos Summit than about understanding the legitimate ideas of the world 's population .
Rest assured , then , that we returned inspired by our discussions and by the contacts we made at the social forum .
We shall therefore continue to press the Commission and the Council on challenging subjects such as the feasibility of the Tobin-style tax , the overwhelming responsibilities of the rich countries in the area of climate change , the right of the Palestinian and the Israeli people to live in freedom and in dignity , the right of everyone to a basic aspect of safety , food safety , which is the right to sufficient food and to have access to drinking water .
Mr President , I think that , at Porto Alegre , we witnessed the emergence of a global civil society that had already begun to express its views in Seattle and on other occasions .
It is essentially a civil society that is challenging current forms of globalisation and the forces that dominate it .
I do not believe , however , that we can describe the majority in this movement as anti-globalisation .
Quite the opposite . This is a movement that aspires to a different kind of globalisation , which is beginning to create a globalisation of solidarity and which is calling for a globalisation of rights .
Secondly , this movement is diverse and , as previous speakers have said , we can make ironic comments as to its diversity , as we have done with other social movements .
Ultimately , however , it is diverse because society throughout the world is diverse and this may be exactly why it is interesting in comparison to Davos , where one has the impression that the approaches taken are somewhat unilateral .
It is diverse , but it increasingly expresses a convergence of views which are taking shape in the form of a number of common aspirations . These include an environmental aspiration versus the risk of the blind destruction of natural resources , the biosphere , biodiversity ; an aspiration for north-south solidarity versus growing inequality in development ; a social aspiration when faced with the submission of all economic and social life to a solely market-driven and financial logic , as well as an aspiration for democracy and transparency towards international institutions which play an increasingly important role in global affairs .
Europe must lend support to this emerging civil society , to this movement , in order to put forward its ideas .
After the events of 11 September , we were told that nothing would ever be the same again .
And we thought that the belief would take hold that we should use the same energy and the same force to combat unbalanced development in today 's world that we used to combat the terrorist groups .
Unfortunately , as you have said , many industrialised countries , including some Members of the European Union , will arrive in Monterey empty-handed - full of promises to finally respect their commitments - but without any new instruments .
That is why I believe that we must look carefully at the new proposals .
Let us take , for example , the taxation of international financial transactions .
Professor Span of Frankfurt University , a former IMF consultant , has presented a study to the German government .
I think that the committee which examined it should consider the possibilities which , according to this expert , would enable us to organise redistribution from a Tobin-type tax , which would make it possible to begin to finance access , throughout the world , to global state assets , the right to water , the right to clean energy for all , the right to education , the right to a future .
I think that we should encourage the idea of global cohesion funds , as we do within the Union when we welcome countries lagging behind in their development .
We do not simply tell them to participate in a larger market .
We tell them to participate in a common undertaking .
The vision of competition alone cannot prevail .
There must also be the vision of ' living together ' , of solidarity between rich regions and poorer regions , and of access for everyone to a number of fundamental rights .
This is what the European Union should be promoting , as well as a multi-polar world . We should help Mercosur to be a democratic entity and more independent of the United States , and establish this regulation for citizens in view of the risks of the abolition of civil societies crushed by sheer market forces .
Mr President , although we held a very interesting debate , it was still somewhat one-sided , to my mind .
Reference was made repeatedly to both New York and Porto Alegre .
In my opinion , both forums are one-sided .
If you only had ears for what was said at New York , then too much attention would go to the Enrons of this world , to the detriment of the poor .
If , on the other hand , you were to focus on what has been said at Porto Alegre , the economy would soon grind to a halt , for people would then forget to conduct business and that not everything can be solved with Tobin Taxes and magic potions of this kind .
That is simply impossible .
The majority in this House has therefore repeatedly rejected the Tobin Taxes .
This is why we are pleased with the Commission 's conclusions on this score .
So are there no problems at all ?
There are , but we should not overlook the fact that governance in the countries themselves forms one of the crucial problems .
At the moment , we have two examples to illustrate this .
One is Afghanistan , where we noticed that the Taliban did not particularly contribute to the development of that country , or their environment .
But in Zimbabwe , where elections are currently being held , Mr Mugabe does not contribute to the development of his country either .
It is , of course , impossible to expect the international community to rectify the errors of the Taliban and Mugabe overnight .
That is a big problem .
Unfortunately , the majority of the leaders in this world are still dictators or quasi-dictators , and it saddens me that this is sometimes overlooked .
If , therefore , local government fails to deliver the goods , if the rule of law in a specific country is not respected , then it is simply impossible to expect economic development .
This is absolutely out of the question , and anyone who thinks differently believes in fairy tales , in my view .
In this connection , quite a few fairy tales have been told here , not by everyone , of course , but by quite a few .
Well , if you accept that , then you can also appreciate the restrictions that are simply inherent in international governance .
National governance must be in order , including our own national governance and our European governance .
This is why so much is riding on Barcelona .
If we achieve good results there , we will enhance our contribution .
This does not mean that things will automatically improve globally , but it does mean that we can , at any rate , make our contribution .
It is in this light that we should see this , and miracle remedies such as the Tobin Tax would not be effective , because we would then be automatically funding the Mugabes of this world , which would be totally unacceptable and a waste of taxpayers ' money .
Mr President , I would like to thank all the speakers this afternoon for their contributions .
I will try to make a few comments , which must be general , on the various contributions which have been made today because we cannot go into more detail given the time available .
Firstly , I think we all agree that the current model we are following is creating a drift towards totally unacceptable unilateral models .
We must insist on this point .
Globalisation has rules which absolutely must be respected ; otherwise , any globalisation process is obviously doomed to failure , and unilateral movements will have serious problems promoting the advantages of globalisation .
Secondly , the process of globalisation - I think we all agree - has brought benefits to economic development ; the problem is that it also has drawbacks and consequently our work does not consist - or should not consist - of attacking globalisation , but of attacking a certain model of globalisation or the negative aspects of a certain model of globalisation .
When the Commission analysed these issues - which is the reason why I have jointly presented its three reports - it reached the conclusion that the concept of globalisation must include , as a minimum , the elements which relate to the existence of an international financial system which works efficiently , development aid systems and the elements relating to the environment and sustainable development .
Having heard your comments , I am going to refer to each of these issues : firstly , development aid .
We all agree that we should concentrate on the fight against poverty as a fundamental element of development aid and that the problem of development aid is not only a problem of quantity but also of quality .
In this respect , I am completely in favour of the ideas for improving governance in some of these countries , which is a key element in improving the functioning of that development aid .
Nevertheless , improving the quality of development aid must not lead us to forget its quantity , and we must acknowledge that it is still insufficient .
It is true that we may run the risk of the Commission 's relatively pragmatic proposal of reaching a minimum of 0.33 % for the countries of the Union by 2006 not being accepted .
In any event , other third countries do not accept this proposal .
We are forgetting an issue which is fundamental to the whole process of future development : capital investment .
Direct investments are playing a fundamental role in the whole process of development , and elements such as governance play a key and fundamental role in it , as do - as some of you have said - all the elements relating to better transfers of technology and any other element which allows for more appropriate development in these countries .
I would like to make a very specific comment on debt : it is true that the European Union has made a fundamental effort in relation to the cancelling of ACP countries ' debts .
At the moment , the Union 's contribution has been greater than EUR 1 000 million and therefore the initial objective is heading in the right direction .
Is this sufficient ?
Possibly not .
We probably have to consider more ambitious elements .
In our report on globalisation we consider what are the possible systems for finding more resources with a view to dealing with the development processes .
I absolutely agree with those people who have said that the solutions must not be simplistic .
Unfortunately , we have not found any one single solution which would solve all the problems .
The Commission believes that , on the aspects relating to globalisation , support for development and the environment , we must move ahead together and at the same time , without forgetting one fundamental approach : the one stemming from the Doha commitments .
Trade plays a fundamental role , as does the transfer of investments , in development aid , and it must be carried out in a more equitable way in the future .
For the negotiation stemming from Doha it is not only essential to defend our points of view as the European Union , but the developing countries must also defend theirs .
Therefore , as well as the ' Everything but arms ' initiative , the Commission has proposed technical aid initiatives for these countries , so that they can better defend their interests and ultimately achieve a fairer system .
All the elements combined will allow us to improve , but in a few years time we will continue to discuss the necessary challenges of globalisation .
We must implement an approach which leads towards a fairer society , although that is a long-term objective .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0051 / 2002 ) by Mr Andreasen , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on a new framework for cooperation on activities concerning the information and communication policy of the European Union .
Mr President , the European Union faces great challenges over the next few years , challenges which all demand greater involvement on the part of the public .
With a view to enhancing knowledge and understanding of what the EU really stands for and what it does , the EU must therefore develop a new information and communication strategy for its citizens .
The objective of such a policy must be to see information and communication from the citizen 's point of view and , in this connection , two factors must be taken into consideration . Firstly , people do not , in general , distinguish between the institutions of the EU : the Council , the Commission and Parliament .
Instead , they see everything in terms of Brussels .
Secondly , people want to receive their information from the sources closest to them , including those that are physically closest . Therefore , the key messages in this report are those relating to coordination and decentralisation .
What is required is coordination between the institutions where information to citizens and communication with citizens is concerned , together with the highest possible degree of decentralisation in all information and communication activities of the European institutions .
It is very gratifying that the Commission and Parliament have resumed and strengthened their cooperation in the Interinstitutional Group on Information and , when the group meets tomorrow , we can also feel very pleased that the Council is participating for the first time in this important coordination of the work .
When it comes to decentralisation , it is important that the Member States participate more actively in the work .
Decentralisation means that the tasks of providing information are delegated to the representations in the Member States , together with the responsibility for these and the necessary financial resources . In this way , the tasks are carried out as close to the people as possible and in the manner required by the people in the particular country , region or local community .
At present , far too much information about the EU is provided in too general a form with , for example , the same brochure being translated into 11 languages .
However , people in Lapland and Sicily may not necessarily have the same requirements , in terms either of the content of the information or in the way they receive it .
Coordination is understood as overall high-level planning , that is to say at the level of the Interinstitutional Group on Information .
In the report , the European Parliament asks that the Commission draw up an annual report on activities as a whole - including those that take place in the respective Directorates-General , for there is apparently no one who has an overview of what happens there .
This report concerns the frameworks for information and communication .
In a few months ' time , the Commission will be producing another statement on the content .
Where the frameworks , or tools , are concerned , we know that more than 60 % of people want to receive their information from the television .
We must therefore consider whether we should create a European Union TV channel dealing with European Union politics .
The ' C-SPAN ' model from the United States , ' BBC Parliament ' in Britain and the German parliamentary channel , ' Phoenix ' , as well as DK4 in Denmark are various models that can be considered at European Union level .
The Commission and Parliament have combined in setting up a service called ' Europe Direct ' , through which people can very quickly obtain answers via the Internet or over the telephone about where they should apply in order to obtain the information they require .
This is a service that has already been very well received by the people of Europe . It is a splendid initiative .
When we turn to the content of this policy , we must also proceed on the basis of what people want , and what they want is information about those matters close to their everyday lives , such as food safety , employment , the environment , traffic , human genetics and so on .
We must be very careful about preventing any propaganda from the institutions of the European Union .
Information must be as reliable , unbiased and pluralist as possible , and those who provide it must be accountable . Where pluralism is concerned , people could , of course , be made aware of points of view other than those of the institutions by means of Internet links from European institution web sites to the web sites of Eurosceptics , NGOs and others .
It will cost money to turn this report into a reality .
We would ask the Commission how much .
On the other hand , the task is enormously important for democracy and , at present , the information budget in the EU is approximately a quarter of a euro per person per year .
It is a small amount , given the task concerned , especially in comparison with the amounts spent in the Member States on information provided by national and local authorities .
I have many people to thank for assisting in the preparation of this report : officials of the Commission , Parliament and the Council , many experts and a large number of NGOs but , first and foremost of course , my colleagues in the Interinstitutional Group on Information and in the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport .
Many thanks .
. ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Budgets has for some years been closely following the Commission 's public relations , and I think that it has succeeded , by means of various instruments that budgetary law , thank God , puts at our disposal , in making a distinct improvement in the information policy of the Commission and of all the European institutions .
This shows us on the Committee on Budgets that we are , on the whole , definitely on the right road as far as the Commission 's information policy is concerned .
At the same time , though , we also have to strike a critical balance .
Looking at the great need for public information occasioned by the introduction of the euro , being aware also of how much money the European Union made available for this purpose , and , still repeatedly reading surveys that show that many citizens feel themselves to be badly or inadequately informed or not informed at all , questions have to be asked about the effectiveness of our information policies .
We will have a great common task on our hands in the coming months and years .
We on the Committee on Budgets will also be very closely monitoring the process of accustoming the public to the fact that this European Union of ours is going to grow , that it will have more members , and that we will have new challenges to face together .
Hence the request by the Committee on Budgets - and I know that Mr Andreasen and the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport will not let us down - that it is together that we should press on with this change in strategy that we began together many years ago , so that the European Union 's information policy may do what it claims to do and satisfy the public demand for objective information about current problems and developments in Europe .
Everything else , I think , can adequately be dealt with via Parliament 's groups and individual Members .
They , too , can safeguard Europe 's diversity ; I do not believe that to be a task for the Commission .
Mr President , first of all , I start from the premise that information equals power ; and , quite frankly , we need to empower our citizens .
Let me also congratulate Mr Andreasen on an excellent and innovative report , looking at the problems , but , I believe , bringing fresh and new solutions .
May I thank him for his support and may I also thank the LIBE Committee for its support for my opinion which it voted upon and adopted unanimously .
It is a sad reflection for me that I did not gain that same support from my own Group within the Culture Committee , for various reasons which I hope will become obvious at some point in the debate .
Let me turn to Mr Andreasen 's report .
The implementation of existing policies and future development of the European Union needs to be based on active and informed participation of its citizens .
I particularly welcome moves to coordinate the information activities of the institutions and as far as possible provide information in a one-stop shop so that it is not necessary for citizens to understand the institutional structure of the Union in order to obtain the information they require .
Another key aspect of information policy of the EU institutions is access to documents , and as I repeatedly noted in connection with the adoption of Regulation No 1049 / 2001 on public access to documents of the institutions , documents - and I stress this - cannot be separated from the information contained in them .
It therefore follows that the information and communication policy of the institutions should be coordinated with the activities for the implementation of the aforementioned Regulation .
It is therefore sad that we fail to grasp the political opportunity to have the interinstitutional group on information which is responsible for cooperation on information activities working and taking on board the activities in Article 15 of Regulation 1049 / 2001 .
I hope we will revisit this and take this wonderful opportunity to combine the information policies , transparency and access to documents .
Mr President , the PPE-DE Group is in full agreement with the rapporteur , Mr Andreasen , on what we regard as an excellent report .
The communication from the Commission calls for cooperation , and that is the key word : there has to be cooperation in communication .
We will be proposing a very slight amendment suggesting that the Committee of the Regions and the Economic and Social Committee should be allowed to sit as observers on the proposed institutional group .
We all know the present dire state of citizens ' knowledge about the organisation and policies of the EU .
Eurobarometer showed that only 6 % of EU citizens thought they knew a lot about the EU .
83 % said that they know a little , or even very little .
This influences the low and declining turnout in European Parliament elections - down to 49 % at the last election .
That is a problem for democracies all over the world , and not least the United States of America , but it is a real problem for the EU as well .
When the people of Ireland rejected the Treaty of Nice in the recent referendum , the most telling slogan was : " If you don 't know , vote no " .
That was precisely what the people did .
I would be the first to admit that my own country , the United Kingdom , is probably one of the worst examples .
According to Eurobarometer again , we are bottom of the list in terms of knowledge , but not surprisingly top of the list in having reservations and objections to the EU .
Mr Andreasen is absolutely right to say that the EU must concentrate on factual information .
Diverse and balanced information must be free of propaganda ; but the people of all countries are crying out for information and explanation of what the EU is doing .
According to Eurobarometer 66 % , that is two out of every three European citizens , want more information .
That has to be within proper cost constraints but again , as has already been said , at present we are spending just 25 cents per annum - for English ears , that is 15 pence per citizen per year .
Citizens will also judge us more by what we do than what we say .
This report calls on the Council of Ministers to be more open in its decision process .
Its secrecy does a profound disservice to Europe .
We in Parliament need to ask ourselves whether we are getting value for money .
We are always delighted to see visitors in this Parliament , but 43 % of our budget goes on the Visitors Service .
Are we really getting value for money ?
We certainly need to target the media and information formers .
We need to be more positive about Euronews .
We should also not neglect radio as a good way of getting information .
IT is properly addressed in the report .
All I would say is that the EU has created a stable and prosperous continent .
Half of Europe is queuing up to join the EU and yet 48 % of present citizens wonder whether it is a good thing .
This report is not before time .
It must not be allowed to gather dust .
Mr President , I would like firstly to congratulate Mr Andreasen , not only on the timeliness and necessity of his report , but for the quality of his work which has impressed us very much .
This report supplements , strengthens and , in a positive sense , counterbalances the communications which we have received from the Commission since Commissioner Vitorino took up this post .
I am sure that the Commissioner will agree with me that the Andreasen report comes at a very appropriate time to improve the future communication which the Commission is going to present to us in June .
At the moment , without wishing to be over-optimistic , I believe that we can say that the information and communication machinery of the European institutions is well-oiled , the defects have been detected and the instruments fine-tuned .
What we must do is act according to the guidelines indicated in the Commission 's documents which have now been so wonderfully complemented by the Andreasen report .
Commissioner , I did want to mention a worrying aspect on which I agree with the rapporteur : the budgetary forecasts for the coming years show a decreasing trend in this area .
And , while it is true that the euro campaign has turned out to be very successful and that its entry into circulation is a great boost , there are other great challenges such as institutional reform and enlargement , which will still demand a great effort over the coming years .
And I therefore believe that both the Commission , which is responsible for preparing the draft budget , and Parliament , as the budgetary authority , should be very attentive to these needs .
Mr President , information and communication are key elements for the success of European construction and I believe that we must communicate the idea that the Union is a community of values , a legal and political entity which has no historical precedent , which defines a new concept of transnational citizenship , to every corner of the Fifteen countries and all future Member States .
This is the message we must communicate and , if we manage to deliver it to its destination , we will make Europe a principal player which is respected on the world stage .
There is no doubt that Mr Andreasen 's report is an excellent contribution to this task .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to congratulate Mr Andreasen on his excellent report , which provides an opportunity to consider the development of our new information policy .
The report that you have just discussed directly mirrors the work that the Commission is doing to urge all the institutions to draw up a global information policy of the European Union .
The Commission can see that its work is being supported and it welcomes this .
I would like , in response to the Andreasen report and to the debate that has just taken place , to present the broad objectives of our strategy , and then to elaborate on some aspects of its implementation .
In addition to the framework for interinstitutional co-operation set out in the communication of 27 June 2001 , the Commission is now considering what should be appropriate objectives for a genuine information and communication policy of the European Union .
Interinstitutional co-operation is not an end in itself , as the Andreasen report quite rightly stresses , but must essentially enable us to develop a better understanding of the citizen and of the existence and role of the European Union as it stands .
In order to achieve this , we need to do more than just disseminate factual information .
It seems to me that our aim must be to develop a genuine communication policy that will enable us to enter into dialogue with the general public in the Member States .
I also think that a genuine global information and communication policy of the European Union should also attempt to increase citizens ' involvement in European debates .
These questions encourage us to be aware of the European Union 's need to have better control of its own image , which involves drawing up its own set of messages .
This should be able to be adapted to its various information activities , whether they are urgent or specific .
As the rapporteur points out , these messages must be changed according to the local situation or specific concerns of the people .
This involves defining targeted local information which is as credible as possible .
The Commission fully supports the principles mentioned by Mr Andreasen , the first of which is decentralisation .
This must not only apply to the implementation of the strategy , but also to the adaptation of messages to the requirements of the various sectors of the public , whether this involves adaptation to different national situations in the 15 Member States or adapting messages to the various target groups of the information and communication policy .
This also , however , requires our institutions to be better coordinated and to have better guidance .
In this respect , I fully support the rapporteur 's idea to strengthen the coordinating and guidance role of the Interinstitutional Group on Information , chaired on behalf of Parliament by Vice-President Vidal-Quadras Roca , whom I would like to acknowledge and thank for the comments he has made on the efforts to co-operate with the Commission .
My second point concerns interinstitutional cooperation .
This should eventually develop into a multi-annual action programme , providing better prospects for our work on information and communication .
The Commission can only welcome your proposal to organise a debate , to be held every year in Parliament and in which the Council takes part , on the information and communication policy . I also welcome the fact that the Council has decided to take part in the meetings of the Interinstitutional Group on Information .
I hope that other bodies will also participate in the work of the IGI , as observers .
My third point relates to partnership with civil society .
As you quite rightly point out , if we wish to strengthen this partnership , we must make more rational use of the networks and relays that we have established with the Member States at national , regional and local level .
As you can see , it is useful and necessary to think about the strategy itself , but this must go hand in hand with improving the organisation of our resources , and this is why the Commission is currently in the process of assessing the real ability of the tools that we have available .
It goes without saying that the coherence of our message depends on there being greater synergy between our various resources .
The rapporteur stresses the need to establish common European Union Houses in the candidate countries as well as in all the Member States .
As you know , the policy of the Commission is to do exactly this .
Your idea to develop a ' one-stop-shop ' in each country for European citizens is very much in line with the concerns of the Commission .
In this connection , the Commission is interested in achieving greater coordination , which you have been hoping and praying for , between the institutions and the Member States , which should bring about greater complementarity between their respective activities .
In the same respect , the Commission is also seeking to create greater synergy between the networks and relays and the external offices and the representations of our institutions , which you refer to as ' European Union Houses ' .
I think that , today , this coordination is already a reality on the ground .
Furthermore , to respond to your concern regarding the visibility of these ' common Houses ' , the Commission is considering ways of making information from the European Union more easily recognisable by its recipients .
In addition to drawing up common themes and messages , should the European Union not seek to develop its own identity using a logo or a unique way of conveying its image through its various channels ; a branding of some sort ?
My final point is that you are right to stress the need to develop a more global and more systematic audio-visual policy as a prime source of information and communication for the European Union .
First of all , if I may , I would like to stress that the responsibility for this falls to the Member States themselves .
The Council itself acknowledged this .
The Commission will also carry out an in-depth assessment of this area in order to bring its partnerships into line with all national , regional and local audio-visual media .
As far as Europe by Satellite is concerned , the Commission has always seen this as a leading source of interinstitutional information , which it will strive to develop in line with the budget provided .
With regard to the budget , I would like to draw your attention to the fact that we are currently bringing an end to the campaign on the euro , which will free up some financial resources .
In the future , I believe that we should agree on the priorities for the forthcoming years ; the future of Europe will certainly be one of them , and globalisation , as well as the continuation of the campaign on enlargement .
I hope to be able to count on the support of the European Parliament in establishing the budgetary priorities that are required to fulfil the new tasks of the information and communication policy of the European Union .
The Commission also takes careful note of your desire to discuss setting up a European public television channel , the specific aim of which is to provide the public with continuous , relevant information on the initiatives and work of the European Union .
The Commission will do all it can to present you with an initial analysis on the feasibility of this project by the end of the year .
To sum up , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this venture that we are embarking upon together is of enormous scope , but it is also very exciting .
The Commission welcomes the political will and the awareness that is driving our institutions today .
This shared political will will enable us to develop a coherent and global information and communication strategy of the European Union that will benefit our citizens .
I welcome the excellent spirit of cooperation that prevails as we go about drawing up our new information strategy .
There will be a further communication on this strategy , due to be adopted by the Commission towards the end of June .
It is a pleasure for me , following the debate that will be held tomorrow within the interinstitutional group - a debate which will be a brainstorming session on the essential priorities of the substance of the information and communication policy - to return to present our conclusions to you at Parliament 's part-session in July .
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0070 / 2002 ) by Lord Inglewood , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation on the application of international accounting standards ( COM ( 2001 ) 0080 - C5-0061 / 2001 - 2001 / 0044 ( COD ) ) .
, rapporteur .
Mr President , in the aftermath of the Enron scandal , it is tempting simply to say that these proposals for the introduction of international accounting standards into the Community are an idea whose time has come .
But it is wrong to see it simply in those terms , because there is more to it than that .
If Europe is to match the United States economically , we need to create a single capital market ; otherwise borrowing will also be more expensive here , which in turn inevitably favours the United States .
One of the over-riding imperatives of Europe 's economy must be to compete in the global market , and this change is a necessary precondition to that end .
In its consideration of these proposals by the Legal Affairs Committee , a very wide-ranging rewording of the text has been carried out which I understand is acceptable to both the Commission and the Council and which also meets the concerns of the committee .
I therefore hope that if Parliament as a whole agrees , we may be able to deal with this proposal in a single reading , which will in turn convey a significant message around the globe .
In particular , some important elements have been introduced and a number should be mentioned .
These include the following : firstly , following President Prodi 's statement to Parliament last month about the comitology aspects of the Lamfalussy proposal , the Commission has agreed that the relevant and appropriate principles contained in it will be applied pari passu in this instance .
I would therefore be extremely grateful if the Commissioner will be able to confirm this to the House now , since it is an important and crucial point to Members .
Secondly , in the special case of European Community companies filing their accounts in U.S. GAAP on a regulated exchange in a third country , they will be able to defer implementation of the relevant provisions of this Regulation until 2007 as opposed to 2005 .
Thirdly , it has been clarified that the agreed international accounting standards will be published in their legally binding form in the Official Journal in all the official languages .
Fourthly , this proposal expressly excludes the mandatory application of international accounting standards as far as SMEs are concerned .
It is of course open to Member States to apply them nationally , but that is a matter for them and not for us .
In any event , as a result , I understand , of a Community initiative , the International Accounting Standards Council is going to consider the whole question of accounting issues and SMEs , which of course is something which is entirely separate from what we are discussing now .
It is also important to explain to the House that this Regulation is in any event contained within the parameters of the existing European Community accounting code and that the standards themselves can only be adopted by the International Accounting Standards Committee after a rigorous and transparent process agreed by the IASC in its own properly adopted and legally enforceable constitution .
It should also be made quite clear that the Commission plays an important role - as do the Member States ' standard setters - in the formulation of the standards according to the IASC 's due process procedures .
In addition , a wide range of affected sectors in Europe have a formal relationship with the Commission in this regard through EFRAG , the European Financial Reporting Advisory Group , which has been established for this purpose .
As I said in my opening remarks , in the aftermath of the Enron collapse in the United States , this proposal is timely because it is highly unlikely that such a debacle could have occurred under this approach to accounting standards , which is purposive or teleological as opposed to prescriptive .
But of course , in itself , that is insufficient to avoid fraud and misfeasance .
Proper enforcement , as is always the case with all legislation , is essential ; and elements to achieve that are distinct from but obviously associated with standard setting .
In a world where accounting standards generally register low on the Richter scale of political newsworthiness , they have a much higher profile now than is normal .
For Europe to pass this legislation and apply international accounting standards would be a major step towards establishing a worldwide set of accounting rules and , what is more , a set of worldwide rules in the establishment and creation of which Europe will play an important part .
Mr President , this is the prize .
It is now , I believe , within our grasp .
If we in Parliament support this proposal , it will mean that Parliament is seen to be serious about business and commerce , and it will show the world that Europe means business about business . And that is the goal of the financial services action plan .
Mr President , if , in the plenary sitting , our fellow MEPs follow our vote in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , and adopt this proposal practically unanimously , and if all others stand by their agreements , I believe that we can conclude this proposal at first reading , which is nothing short of a small miracle .
There were many bottlenecks , most of which , fortunately , we managed to resolve .
For example , we managed to arrange for the approved standards to be translated into each of the official languages and to be published .
The proposal was totally unacceptable on this score .
If we can put this right , this will constitute a huge step forward .
In addition , as Lord Inglewood has already mentioned , thanks to various other amendments , we also managed to delineate , and better stipulate , the way in which comitology was to be applied .
Time constraints prevent me from elaborating upon other improvements , but I concur with what the rapporteur of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market has said in this connection .
I would like to confine myself to asking the Commission the following . Small and medium-sized businesses do not yet know whether , and when , their national governments will extend the scope of this Regulation to include them .
They feel a little neglected .
However , I am of the view that it is certainly not a pointless exercise , immediately following the Council 's approval , to devote attention , in an organised manner , to the implications of the various options which the Member States can take by applying Article 5 and thus making an attempt to achieve coordination .
In the absence of the harmonisation of taxation legislation , it is certainly useful , in my view , to enter into consultation about the new relationship , which is to be established in various Member States , between yearly accounts law , company law and tax law and to find out whether some of these issues could be coordinated at European level .
Could the Commission tell me whether it intends , with these issues in mind , to set up an SME consultation , and to start a debate to find out whether European initiatives are necessary ?
Secondly , I should like to appeal to the Commission to ensure that , if accountancy law is to be changed , this is done in such a way as to take the interests of the SMEs into consideration in an appropriate manner .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would just like to start by thanking both the rapporteurs most warmly for the way that their approach to this topic , one that has thrown up many problems in this House , has been marked by a great willingness to compromise .
The Commission 's original proposal aimed , more or less , at the transfer of all the competences for IAS rules outside this House in the guise of a general authorisation , thus letting decisions be taken by other institutions and private international bodies .
This was something about which many in this House had great misgivings .
I am , then , very happy that it has been possible to travel along the track laid down by the von Wogau report in the form of proposals on the Lamfalussy reports , and find here a solution and a genuine compromise which , on the one hand , makes use of the opportunities offered by IASs , whilst on the other , though , the maintenance of Parliament 's rights is also guaranteed .
I can only say that I welcome that inordinately .
I also wish the Commissioner the best of luck on his forthcoming trip to America and his talks with the Securities and Exchange Commission on how the Americans use IASs .
It would be a great relief to our enterprises , and also a great step forward , if he were to succeed in getting the Americans , too , to accept IASs .
Such occurrences as Flow Tech , Holzmann , or , most recently in America , Enron , make one thing clear , one thing that I will give the Commissioner to think about on the journey : I believe that even if we decide on IASs in this form , there is still a very great deal left to be done in the auditing field .
I do not believe it can be right that there should be a few major international firms that , on the one hand , do highly intensive consultancy work and , on the other , themselves audit what they have advised the enterprise to do .
I think that what is necessary here - and this is one of the lessons that , for example , the Bush administration in America has learned - is further legislation to ensure that consultants do not audit and that auditors cannot be consultants to the same company .
My plea to the Commission is that they do some thinking along these lines and approach Parliament with early and definite proposals , so that the financial markets really do improve and become safer .
Mr President , from the previous interventions of the rapporteur and the draftsperson of the opinion , and the intervention by Mr Lehne , on behalf of the European People 's Party , it appears that there is a degree of unanimity which the Socialist Group shares .
We believe that the Commission 's proposal is appropriate and that Mr Inglewood 's report goes into detail on certain aspects , in particular the reference to the commitology procedure and the explicit reference to the commitments made by the President of the Commission during last February in relation to the participation of Parliament in the development of the legislation on the financial markets .
Secondly , as Mr Lehne has said , the adoption of international accounting standards by the Community involves a second part , the negotiation with the competent authorities in the United States - not with the government of the United States , but above all with the Securities and Exchanges Commission - of standards which prevent European companies from having to conform to dual accounting requirements in order to operate in Europe and in North American markets .
Mr Inglewood has introduced a series of amendments which , in our opinion , are aimed at improving the text of the directive , within the framework of the spirit of cooperation between this Parliament and the Commission .
As Mr Inglewood has said , our hope is that an agreement can be reached soon between the Commission , the Council and Parliament so that the directive can be adopted very quickly without having to go to conciliation .
In principle , therefore , the Socialist Group will vote in favour of all the amendments .
We have certain difficulties in relation to some amendments and we will still have to examine whether they are compatible with our position and , above all , we await the Commission 's opinion with regard to certain aspects of them .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate the rapporteur and the draftsman for the consensus that they have drawn together .
When this report first appeared it seemed to cover a small technical matter , but this is in fact a small technical matter with the ability to make a huge difference .
It is of great importance , as has already been said , to the financial services action plan and to the better functioning of the internal market .
As Lord Inglewood has already said , it is a proposal that , politically speaking , has come at the right moment .
The collapse of a corporate giant like Enron and the reverberations of such a collapse for employees , for small investors , for pensioners , convince us that , if there is a way of helping prevent such misery for some of our citizens , then we should of course pursue it .
These international accounting standards seem to hold out such a promise , both within and beyond the European Union .
I hope that is so .
I hope also , as other speakers have said , that the system involving a regulatory committee - a technical committee set up within our institutions - will provide the openness and , most importantly , the democratic accountability that this Parliament seeks .
Our society , our citizens , have a huge stake in the success and health of our large corporations .
It is clearly our duty to ensure that the standards by which they are governed or regulated attain the best levels of corporate governance .
This report is an important step in achieving that and I can assure the rapporteur that he will have the full support of the ELDR Group in this House .
Mr President , thank you for giving me the floor on this subject , which is of the highest importance , even though it may not attract publicly the attention which it deserves .
I should like to start by thanking Parliament for the interest it has shown in this report , and in particular the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market and its rapporteur , Lord Inglewood , and also Mrs Thyssen , for their excellent work .
Rapid progress has been made and I hope that the present proposal may be adopted in a single reading ; several Members have already referred to that possibility ; and the Commission hopes that indeed will be the case .
If we succeed in this it will give a strong political signal that the European Union is not only serious about achieving an integrated capital market by the year 2005 , as requested by the European Council in Lisbon two years ago , but also ready to lead on the development of international accounting standards .
Comparable , transparent financial reporting is an essential building block for the realisation of integrated , competitive and attractive EU capital markets to complement the single currency and so strengthen the European economy .
That will also show , in particular in our relationship with the United States , how determined we are about the way we want to see things develop in future .
It should pave the way for the United States to accept international accounting standards for listing purposes .
I shall certainly be pressing the case when I visit Washington in the second half of May .
After the collapse of Enron , concern has grown , certainly in the United States but also in Europe , about the quality of financial reporting by listed companies .
One must of course avoid knock-on effects that might lead to a loss of confidence among investors , shareholders and other stakeholders , including employees , in the functioning of our capital markets .
Long before Enron started to make headlines in the press , Europe made the choice of international accounting standards of high quality with the potential to become truly global standards .
High-quality accounting standards are the bedrock of good financial reporting and the principles-based approach of IAS will ensure that accounts reflect economic reality , thus restoring investors ' confidence that things are really the way they look .
The aim of the International Accounting Standards Board ( IASB ) to minimise detailed rules and exemptions will defeat a culture that boils down to " where does it say that I cannot ? " , one which the many thousands of pages of rules-based standards of the U.S. GAAP have fostered .
IAS will also provide the relevant and reliable information which investors and other stakeholders need to make meaningful cross-border and cross-sector comparisons throughout the European Union .
Listed European companies have long been awaiting the signal which this Parliament is now ready to give , and for EU companies it clearly means that things have started in earnest and that they must start preparing a switch-over to international accounting standards without wasting any time .
This major achievement also demonstrates that our institutions can work closely together when the time comes to deliver , and I greatly welcome this .
In this respect , and in response to the remarks made by Lord Inglewood and Mrs Thyssen and also , I believe , by Mr Lehne , may I underline that the commitments undertaken by the Commission on 5 February , 2002 in President Romano Prodi 's declaration to this Parliament on the implementation of financial services legislation fully apply to the present proposals as well .
That is the case and will remain so .
Those commitments apply as well to the present proposal and a clear reference to this is made in Amendment No 4 as adopted by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market on 26 February 2002 .
The Commission can accept all the amendments adopted unanimously by the Legal Affairs Committee , notwithstanding the repeal of Amendment No 6 , which amounts more or less to the repetition of a recital .
Before I conclude , may I reply to three specific points made this evening .
Firstly , on languages , it is indeed important that the IAS endorsed by the European Union are made available in all official languages - at the moment 11 , but pretty soon 19 - and then become part of Community law .
Secondly , with regard to SMEs , a point raised in particular by Mrs Thyssen , the Commission will engage in a debate about the accounting requirements for small and medium enterprises in the context of the modernisation of the accounting directives , for which the Commission will officially present a proposal before the summer .
Lastly , there is the question of the consequences of the Enron debacle .
I am planning to engage in a debate about the consequences of that debacle for auditing and we are , at present , discussing with Member States a document on auditor independence which I am sure Mr Lehne will be interested to read .
As soon it is available we will make it available to Members of this Parliament .
In conclusion , Mr President , a strong vote in favour of this proposal would constitute a major contribution to international and European harmonisation in the accounting field by promoting a single set of accounting standards , namely the IAS .
Adopting IAS for Europe would offer increased comparability of financial information to investors and shareholders and would contribute to a return of confidence in the efficiency and effectiveness of our financial markets .
It is an opportunity for European leadership which I am sure Parliament will want to seize , as do the Commission and Council .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday at noon .
The next item is the debate on the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0058 / 2002 ) by Mr Ferber , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council directive amending Directive 97 / 67 / EC with regard to the further opening to competition of Community postal services ( 14091 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0642 / 2001 - 2000 / 0139 ( COD ) ) .
. ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , yet again - but not at quite as late an hour as otherwise in Parliament - we are able to debate the further development of postal services in the European Union .
In recent years - one might almost say decades , when I think back to when the Commission presented the first Green Paper on the further development of postal services - we have in fact managed , step by step , to open up the European Union 's markets in postal services .
The path we took together in the past was a good one for the public as users of postal services , but also for the service providers , who were enabled to develop themselves as competitive enterprises .
We are here today to debate , and come to a decision about , the Council 's Common Position of last October .
At First Reading , we very intensively grappled with the Commission proposal on the development of postal services , and were able to convince the Council of the rightness of our arguments on many points .
I would just like to point out that the deletion of the definition of special services , including express services , was Parliament 's idea and was taken over by the Council , and that the retention of price and weight limits for outgoing mail in the Council text was something Parliament had demanded , and thus a great success for us .
I would also like to enter on Parliament 's credit side the fact that we were able essentially to get our way on special tariffs , cross-subsidies and the further timetable .
The greatest controversy in recent weeks and months has , of course , been about the weight and price limits .
I think that the Council has found a fair compromise between the Commission proposal and the outcome of First Reading in Parliament .
The Commission had proposed 50 grammes , Parliament 150 grammes , and the Council decided in favour of the mean value , that is , 100 grammes .
I think that is a fair compromise towards further opening up postal services .
In committee , we very intensively grappled with the Council Common Position .
I think , across all group lines , we achieved a good result , which amounts to this : Further liberalisation of the post will not be delayed .
I hope that my proposal , as adopted in committee , will be confirmed by the plenary on Wednesday , and , as things stand , there is no conciliation procedure , which means the markets have a clear road ahead , as do the national legislatures to transpose the European norms .
I wish at this juncture to express my gratitude to the Belgian Presidency of the Council , under whose aegis this compromise has been achieved ; to the Spanish Presidency of the Council , which has worked very constructively with me in order to reach a solution which obviates the need for a conciliation procedure , and of course , to the Commission and to you , Commissioner Bolkestein .
I think that the achievement of our very intensive discussions over recent weeks and months has been that the Commission has guided onto a sensible track Parliament 's justified concerns and the political possibilities in the Council .
I think it makes sense for us , as with telecommunications , to be informed on a two-yearly basis how the postal sector as a whole appears to be developing .
It was a matter of great concern to my fellow Members , and I , as rapporteur , am very glad to take it up , that we should closely follow what happens in this sector , which is of course an important part of all our lives , for everyone is happy if , as is to be hoped , he gets agreeable post and not just bills .
It is important that the maintenance of postal services should be safeguarded throughout the European Union , in remote and rural areas , rather than just taking the pickings of an interesting market , so that all citizens may have full access in the long term to postal services .
We must constantly remind ourselves of this , to which we want to commit the Commission , by obliging them to submit to us a report on the subject every other year .
I also attach great importance to our desire to be involved when the post is developed further .
The Commission will be carrying out a study in 2006 .
That is going to be stated in the directive , and our concern is that we be involved in the run-up to it , when the issues and topics to be considered and studied are to be worked out .
For that , too , many thanks to the Commission , for its readiness to go down this road together with Parliament .
I think we are on the right road , and I hope that , at the end of this decade , the postal services will have achieved their objective of being competitive enterprises providing their services for the benefit of Europe 's citizens .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Ferber for a job extremely well done , for his patience and good will and for his willingness to work with all sides of the European Parliament and with the Council and the Commission .
Thanks to Mr Ferber 's hard work , we have what I think is a first class result with what appeared to be an exceptionally tricky issue .
When the debate started and during the first reading , we all saw huge problems in store , with major differences between the various political persuasions in the House .
The vote , in committee at least a few days ago , demonstrated that a large majority in the European Parliament agreed with the positions put forward just now by the rapporteur .
What we were looking to do was to reconcile two needs : first , the need to safeguard the universal service , a universal service in island regions , in mountain regions and in remote regions of the European Union and , secondly , the need for a free , competitive market , the need to guarantee a single market in this sector by widening consumer choice .
And I think that , in the end , we managed to find a creative way of reconciling these two needs .
So we have a good result , both for those worried about losing the universal service and for those who wanted to advance the single market and widen consumer choices .
And of course , in doing so , we have carried out the instructions of earlier European Councils , such as the Lisbon Council , which talked of the need to push ahead and extend the market in the postal services sector .
I think that the three amendments proposed by our committee improve things still further and are , I believe , acceptable both to the Commission and the Council .
Mr President , firstly I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Ferber , for all his work and , indeed , thank the Commissioner for his work .
Some of you might find that a little surprising , as it is well known that Commissioner Bolkestein and I have not seen eye to eye on this matter all of the time .
However , what we have from the Council is the result of some good work all round .
I want to highlight what we as a Parliament asked for in the first reading and what we actually got .
We asked for controlled and gradual liberalisation .
Did the Council agree with that ?
Yes , they did .
We asked for codecision for the European Parliament for any future steps to full liberalisation .
Did we get that ?
Yes , we did .
We asked for special services to be taken out of the directive .
Did they agree with that ?
Yes , they did .
We also asked for the universal service to be guaranteed .
Did they give us that ?
Yes , they did .
The one thing they did not give us was the starting point of 150 grammes for that controlled and gradual liberalisation .
As the rapporteur said , they came up with a compromise of 100 and then 50 grammes .
That is not bad going for a European Parliament to put five demands to the Council , get four of them in full and half of the other .
Therefore , I would like to make those people who wish to stick to the 150 gramme level aware of what their actions will lead to should they pursue that particular policy .
If we go for 150 grammes it will lead to a failure of the agreement .
The Council common position will unravel , and collapse .
All our gains , including codecision on future moves will be lost and the Commission will then move in under Article 80 - as I am sure they are keen to do - and give us full liberalisation sooner rather than later .
If ever there was a classic case of cutting off your nose to spite your face , it is that of those people advocating 150 grammes .
Finally , through this Chamber I wish to make a plea to Postcomm , the British postal regulator .
You now have an opportunity , through this directive , to end your self-declared war on the British Post Office and the British people .
We have all been impressed by your macho image , clearly learned from watching too many World Wrestling Federation bouts .
But Europe has showed you how to maintain a viable post office offering a universal service of excellent quality at an affordable price .
So for God 's sake , Postcomm , get off the battlements and see sense !
I should like to thank the rapporteur , partly for the fact that he referred to the Belgian Presidency .
I am proud that someone from my group , Rik Daems , thanks to his negotiating skills , managed to get this common position on paper at the time , which was certainly not an easy task .
It is a very even-handed position , in my view .
Mr Simpson too has already referred to it .
There may still be other people out there who believe that the postal services should remain a national government monopoly .
I am not one of them .
There may be people who believe that public services should not be a topic of discussion .
I am certainly not one of them either .
The common position is somewhere in between .
It takes account of the wishes of the customers , the people who use the postal services , which is what should be our priority , in my view .
We must ensure that postal companies are able and obliged to carry out this task .
We have received agreement from fifteen Member States and fifteen postal services .
This is very important .
This means that we will be able to modernise services of this kind very rapidly , and that we can ensure that they become first-rate businesses , if they are not so already .
There are also people who want to go faster or slower than the common position , or those who want more grammes , etc .
This is not wise , in my view .
As Mr Simpson said before : if we now loosen the string , the entire package will unravel and collapse , which would be a bad outcome .
We must prevent this happening at all costs .
Our group will therefore adopt the three amendments tabled by the rapporteur , but not the others .
The proposal that is now before us provides postal companies with the opportunity to become modern businesses within a realistic timeframe , by no later than 2009 , with a clearly defined set of tasks and with transparent accounts , businesses that put the interests of their customers before their own and fulfil a social function at the same time .
This role is , I believe , crucial in sparsely populated and remote areas and helps the weaker in our society .
We also provide a directive in which each Member State and each postal service can acquit itself of this task .
In my opinion , if we follow the rapporteur and if we manage - as I believe we shall - to obtain the endorsement of the Council and the Commission , we will have created something which is very valuable and in which we can take pride .
Mr President , we think that the revision of the postal directive is untenable , from the point of view of the general interest of European citizens , and it would be politically irresponsible to take a vote for it today .
Why ? Because we all know the social role fulfilled by the postal service in poorer urban areas and in rural or outlying areas .
And we know , we all understand perfectly well - a six year-old child could work this out - that reducing the scope of reserved services undermines the ability of operators to make financial adjustments , which are the basis of solidarity .
This solidarity also enables the necessary modernisation to be undertaken so that high quality services can be provided for all .
Will we soon be telling taxpayers that they will have to put money in the kitty to finance universal service , as they do in the Netherlands ?
After this vote , are we going to show our support for post office closures or our support for the postal workers who are going to be laid off ?
Are we going to take part in these demonstrations after voting on this position ? Certainly not .
We cannot accept a common position today that is still too similar to the position adopted at first reading . There is nothing new in the debate .
I have not heard anyone say that the price of a stamp has gone down in Sweden .
I have not heard anyone say that there has been compensation for the jobs that have been lost at traditional operators . I have not heard anyone say that the new operators are considering introducing a single price for the European postage stamp .
There is absolutely nothing new here .
We are still waiting for the Commission to provide the evaluations that were planned in 1997 and that have been called for in two resolutions adopted by Parliament and in the report by Mr Ferber .
I urge my fellow Members ?
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , after the postal services market was opened up to competition - a process that began in 1997 - the Commission put forward new proposals in 2000 with the aim of achieving deregulation by 2003 and with a view to bringing about full liberalisation by 2009 .
I would reiterate that the Commission proposed , in particular , to reduce the weight and price limits , from 350g to 50g and from five to two and a half times the basic standard tariff , to establish special services with high added value which would be open to competition , the gradual liberalisation of outgoing cross-border mail and direct mail , and to set specific deadlines for full liberalisation .
At first reading , a large majority of the European Parliament refused to fully support the Commission .
Parliament proposed that reductions in the weight and price limits should not go below 150g and four times the basic standard tariff ; it rejected liberalisation of cross-border mail and direct mail ; it dismissed special services , put back the final deadline for liberalisation and lastly , requested a comprehensive impact study .
The position of the Council of Ministers - regardless of what a number of Members are saying - differs considerably from the compromise reached by a majority in the European Parliament .
Although the compromise also abandons the idea of creating special services - a move I welcome - it takes up the Commission 's original proposals on reducing the thresholds and , despite the fact that numbers evened out with the announcement of the deadline , I feel that the compromise will put full liberalisation of the sector at risk .
It is therefore hard for me to understand why what we saw in a negative light yesterday is now something we regard positively .
The Council and the Commission have not taken Parliament 's opinion into account .
They are introducing a significant new stage into the liberalisation of the postal sector .
Mr Ferber 's report - whose work I would also like to commend - as adopted by the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , falls in line with the Council 's position , although , admittedly , several amendments have been added , which I believe to be quite inadequate and which will certainly not require conciliation .
As expressed in the minority opinion of Members of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and the Group for a Europe of Democracies and Diversities in the parliamentary committee , no guarantees have been given on social and economic consequences or on social cohesion .
Contrary to the spirit and the text of the Langen report , no serious , transparent and pluralist preliminary study has been undertaken .
Important issues such as conditions of access to networks of new operators or conditions for the financing of universal service remain ill defined .
I must say that these proposals cause me , as they do my fellow Member , Mrs Flautre , a great deal of concern as to the effects they might have on working conditions , jobs and the quality of services provided with equal access for all , in other words , on the very future of public services .
My group will therefore demand that the Council 's common position be rejected by a roll-call vote and , furthermore , will propose introducing a specific amendment for a study to be undertaken .
Ladies and gentlemen , this week we will vote on the proposal by the Council of Ministers to pursue the opening of the postal sector to competition , which will bring about the swift removal of the monopoly by 2003 .
As reiterated in a petition signed by French postal workers , we would like to point out that , the monopoly on the postal system in France has enabled us to build up a high quality public service that is valued by all . A comprehensive service is provided throughout France with 90 000 postmen and 17 000 post offices , whilst prices are some of the lowest available , thanks to tariff equalisation .
In all European countries , the public postal service is experiencing the same effects as a result of liberalisation .
As regards closures , for instance , 400 post offices closed last year in Belgium , half of the 1 600 post offices in the Netherlands closed down , 30 000 jobs were lost in England , tariffs were increased for people in Sweden .
In France , the effects of liberalisation will also be felt , the quality of service is falling and workers who have left are not being replaced .
Several post offices were closed last summer ; 4 000 workers on private-law contracts working for the postal service had inferior conditions of employment compared to existing permanent members of staff .
In 2002 , 12 800 employees are due to retire , approximately 2 000 workers need to be recruited , which equates to 10 000 job cuts .
This ideological aim corresponds to a short-term economic interpretation of the internal market .
There are numerous examples of the failings of alternative systems such as deteriorating quality , an increase in tariffs , even that the service can no longer be provided .
The harmful effect on users is therefore more serious than what you could envisage happening in State monopolies .
We refuse to allow a model of social and territorial cohesion based on equal citizenship to disappear , even if the situation still has some way to go before it is perfect .
We refuse to sacrifice a quality service simply in order to open up markets to capitalists , especially since we do not know whether or not they will be European .
We must take urgent action , and I am pleased to hear that some Members are prepared to ignore instructions from above and even that these instructions are becoming increasingly vague .
Ladies and gentlemen , we must therefore vote to reject this common position , which means , for some of us , having the courage to meet our commitments and for others to respect the diversity and a model that we want to maintain on the basis of satisfactory experience .
As two final points , I must remind those who claim and who fear that , if the common position is rejected , the Commission will use Article 86 , which bizarrely enables civil servants to pass legislation directly .
Having failed itself , is the Commission in a position to point the finger at others ' faults ?
Despite renewed promises , the impact studies are unofficial , biased and incomplete .
Even the Court of Justice could find fault with them .
And if it risked using Article 86 anyhow , the Convention would have to redefine Europe 's objectives with full background knowledge of the situation .
With this situation in mind , we ask you to reject the draft directive , which would speed up the deterioration of public service .
Mr President , the common position reached by the Council on 15 October 2001 on the opening to competition of Community postal services , is a good compromise , so we are told by the rapporteur and the governments . This includes the French socialist government , which urges us all to approve it .
We , however , think that this text has been based on a series of ambiguities which may be masking many dangers .
First of all , the French Secretary of State responsible for this matter , Mr Piret , claims that less than 10 % of the postal service 's turnover will be open to competition by 2009 , whereas Commissioner Bolkestein estimates that 50 % of the European market will be open to competition by 2006 .
Who is correct ?
Of course , Mr Piret is talking about France and Mr Bolkestein about the European Union , but even so , the huge difference between the two figures leads us to believe that there is a misunderstanding somewhere or that we are being kept in the dark .
The second ambiguity is we are told that the new directive will enable the market to be opened in a gradual and controlled fashion .
However , if we look closely at the proposed arrangements , we might have some doubts over the quality of this control .
The intermediate stage , which is 1 January 2006 , when the weight of mail still not open to competition will be brought down from 100g to 50g , or halved , will be an automatic stage that has already been decided in the document before us . This will happen even though a comprehensive or appropriate impact study has not been carried out .
In these circumstances , there is a risk that the prospective impact study , which is due to start in 2006 , will conclude that the essential decisions have already been taken , that they are already behind us and , once again , we will have taken an unsteady step forward without knowing exactly when and how we have passed the major milestones .
This will almost be a further example of the Monnet method , but on a smaller scale .
To sum up , we are in favour of opening the market to competition , provided this would enable us to refine the postal services , but we do not want to throw out the baby with the bathwater .
We do not want to take the risk of a poorly controlled opening of the market destroying the universal service , which would spell further disaster for the user , especially in a country such as France , where extensive rural areas could see their postal service deteriorate .
That is why we believe that the 2006 stage must not be automatic , but that a comprehensive and thorough impact study must be carried out beforehand . We also require clarification of the public service obligations to impose on all operators .
And , even better , we hope that it is acknowledged , Mr President , that all public services are the overall responsibility of each Member State and that these will have a free hand in the ultimate organisation of their postal service .
Mr President , as well as congratulating the rapporteur on his excellent work now and , particularly , at first reading , we must congratulate the European institutions in general , who have succeeded in doing a good job on this issue .
As we all remember , we started off from positions very far apart , opposing positions in some cases , and we - Parliament , Council and Commission - succeeded in reaching a compromise which we feel will be genuinely capable of catering for even the most radical demands , which some of the Members have upheld this evening , while satisfying a further , absolutely imperative demand which we endorse and support , namely the need to liberalise the public services in the interests of the citizens and consumers , and this is not a whim or part of a general liberalisation trend .
The purpose of liberalisation is to improve the quality of the services provided to the consumer , the user .
Clearly , there are some services which require particular attention and this is one of them .
We have been very careful with this sector : we have introduced more stages , more steps into the process and have achieved a genuinely satisfactory result .
We are convinced , it is our hope , that this text - which we hope will not need any form of conciliation - will become a clear , unambiguous legislative point of reference .
There are no grey areas and , even if the letter were to prove at all ambiguous , the substance is clear , Commissioner , and we call upon and expect the Commission to abide by the text in its work .
We likewise call upon the other Directorates-General and your other colleagues to follow the line taken by the text , particularly the members of the Directorate-General for Competition , who will deal with disputes that are still pending and some of the problems left over from the past in the light of this development , in the light of what we decide today .
Henceforth , the path we must take is clear : we expect you all to follow it with due care and commitment .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the first paragraph of the preamble to the common position under debate reiterates that the main objective of the Community policy on postal services is to combine the gradual , controlled liberalisation of the market in postal services with a guaranteed universal service .
Coming as I do from a country with a great many small islands and numerous mountain areas in the hinterland , I have every right and am justified , I think , in being anxious about the repercussions opening up this market will have on the quality of the universal service .
However , this anxiety should have been allayed , we feel , by optimistic results from the study ordered by the Commission .
Are there in fact any such optimistic results for the ' difficult countries ' , including my own ?
In the end , instead of the required ex ante examination of the situation , we now have an ex post evaluation once the first steps have been taken , but at least that will allow us to determine what steps to take next .
So we must pay close attention to and take particular care with this process which , at this stage at least , has to be dealt with as a mandatory process under Article 80 of the Treaty .
To ensure we do not contradict ourselves , we must bear in mind that Directive 96 / 67 , which is currently being amended , guarantees European citizens and companies a quality universal postal service without discrimination , at both national and European level .
It does not make sense to move heaven and earth so that our cohesion policy can continue to be efficient while , at the same time , jeopardising the future of a village post office which is the village 's lifeline .
Heralded as ' a stage further in the opening of postal services to competition ' , the Council wants the European Parliament to approve a directive which constitutes another step towards doing away with the public postal service .
The policy of the national governments and the European institutions is a reactionary policy that is harmful both to users and to workers of this sector , which is faced with further job losses .
We reject the Council 's draft text , which serves the interests of private companies that will share between themselves the profitable sectors of the postal services and leave the public sector with the scraps that are incapable of properly fulfilling social needs .
We also reject the compromise amendments that are designed to mask the hypocrisy and our capitulation before private interests .
We would like to reiterate that postal services must remain a public service , to which everyone has access under the same conditions , whatever their location and whatever their social situation .
We are against a two-tiered postal system , we are against private profit gained from users and we call for a stop to opening up the postal service to private providers .
Mr President , Commissioner , the postal issue is a protracted and sensitive one .
Many strive towards freer market conditions , while others were very apprehensive about the disintegration of the social dimension offered by the postal services .
This contrast was so marked that it proved impossible to strike a compromise that was acceptable to both parties .
Like other services , postal services came into being in order to meet a social need .
Under the influence of all kinds of developments , especially of a technological nature , these needs have changed .
The advent of new communication services constituted keen competition for the traditional postal companies .
The effects of these developments are felt in both companies as a whole and among their staff .
I believe that , with a healthy dose of business acumen , the companies are capable of absorbing these blows . The mechanisation and automation of post-handling services are a case in point .
Things are not so easy for the staff of postal companies .
Nobody can deny that both developments - competition and technological changes - adversely affect employment .
We have to acknowledge this .
However , always mindful of what really matters , we do believe that society-oriented services do pay off .
In my opinion , the social dimension is useful as a guide for continuing to provide market-oriented services , even in areas where it is less evident .
However , we should remain aware of the fact that the responsibility for this and for the conditions under which this is done lies with the Member States .
This is positive .
After all , the situation is quite different in the different Member States .
In order to guarantee adequate services for each Member State and region , it is useful for Member States to apply a licensing system with the option of using performance criteria .
Time will tell whether the present common position can guarantee an adequate level of services across the regions .
A thorough , broad-based assessment will need to provide the decisive answer .
Based on that assessment , this discussion will need to be followed up at a later stage .
In summary , I am of the view that the present common position , including the amendment by the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , can be considered an even-handed position on the market development of the postal services .
Our delegation will support it accordingly .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament 's major political groups reached a compromise within the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism on the Council 's common position on opening the Union 's postal services to competition and I congratulate Mr Ferber on this achievement .
The postal system is a service of general interest as well as an economic activity .
The performance of the postal services contributes to the performance of the national economies and certain sectors , particularly banking , insurance or distance selling .
At a time when we are setting up , in tandem with the single currency , the internal market of financial services , where we are trying to provide a favourable framework for e-commerce in Europe , we cannot ignore the demands from these sectors to improve services and reduce the costs of postal services .
A certain degree of competition , along with increased demands for quality services , encourages transparency of costs and contributes to the competitiveness of consumer or user activities of the postal services by giving them potential openings .
I am , however , firmly against all types of full liberalisation , as the services of general economic interest play a role in the economic , social and territorial cohesion of the European Union .
The European Charter of Fundamental Rights acknowledges the principle of access to the service of general economic interest as laid down in national legislation and practices .
The importance of access to postal services is not the same in a country with 17 000 post offices and in a country that has barely one thousand .
We must therefore guarantee that the opening up to competition will not have any negative consequences on the access to postal services in the most isolated or most remote regions .
In other words , I think that the modernisation of the postal services under the guise of competition is now required in order to develop these services and , more broadly speaking , for the competitiveness of our businesses .
This liberalisation must , however , be gradual and controlled in order to preserve adaptability , economic viability and guaranteed access to the universal postal service throughout the Union 's territory .
I think that the compromise before us brings together both these aims and that is why I will vote in favour of it tomorrow .
Mr President , Commissioner , having reached the common position , we must welcome the fact that Parliament 's first democratic expression has led to a situation where the Commission and the Council are upholding some of its proposals , such as the special services , the gradual opening up of the market with a review by Parliament in 2009 , and even the keeping of direct mail within the public service sector .
We must , however , note that two things are lacking today and we are dealing with one of those rare liberalisation directives which makes no specific mention of them .
The first thing is the financing of universal service .
As soon as exclusive rights and the reserved sector are opened up and inevitably become smaller , we no longer know how universal postal service will be financed .
And this is no small matter .
The second point is the conditions of network access .
Do we know whether the networks of the French postal system are available to the German postal system and its major competitors and vice versa ?
This is also one of those rare liberalisation directives which fails to specify this aspect in a detailed manner .
I would like to express my regret that the Commission and also Parliament did not want to thoroughly debate these issues .
The Commission says it wants transparency across the board and yet , it is refusing to undertake an evaluation of what has been happening , particularly in Sweden and in Holland , where a scaled-down market has registered an increase in prices for the ordinary consumer .
The Commission refuses to accept the truth about these costs and the truth is that providing a service to everyone in Greece is not the same thing as providing a service in the Netherlands .
In short , they have demonised the debate and pretended that conciliation is a bad thing .
I think that we could have seen this debate through to the end in order to achieve a more balanced position .
Mr President , with regard to the common position , I will just say that , like a number of the previous speakers , I endorse all that the rapporteur , Mr Ferber , said .
I do not feel that this is a negative compromise , which , as such , would not content anybody , but a positive compromise , particularly in terms of the guarantees that it succeeds in providing : guarantees that liberalisation will be carried out gradually and in a responsible manner , without sacrificing the need for universal services in any way ; clear guidelines for the processes of reorganising production and services too , aimed particularly at guaranteeing consumers high quality services at increasingly lower yet still competitive costs .
I do feel , however , that the difficulty will now be preventing the Commission distorting the meaning of the text when it interprets and applies it , thus upsetting the balance reached and , worst of all , violating Parliament 's decision-making rights .
This will be a particular problem when it comes to Community competition rules and the Commission departments which ensure that these rules are adhered to .
The infringement procedures instigated against the Italian State and the Belgian postal service appear to disregard not just the precedence taken by special legislation over general legislation but also the base regulation , that this directive makes more explicit , banning the indiscriminate liberalisation of what are known as special or value added services , to which the specific price and weight limits introduced in the directive apply without variation .
This also concerns the Commission 's attitude to terminal dues , as referred to in the Reims II agreement .
It would also appear that the Commission is rather behind schedule in proposing to regulate access , pursuant to Article 11 of the old directive , and this delay must be made good without upsetting the balances achieved between operators on the basis of mutual commitments so that private individuals can enjoy the benefits without having to bear the burdens .
Mr President , the post and the postal services are indeed not just any old commodity and not any old service ; they are , rather a very sensitive article , one that also needs to be handled with care .
In the first round , the Commission did not , I think , comply with this request which had been addressed by Parliament , and the Common Position with the Council is , I think , a good compromise , which does justice to both the public interest and also to the interests of the people and employees it affects .
Faced with the scepticism that has been expressed , we also need to articulate clearly what we are voting on this week .
It is only from 2006 onwards that things will get exciting .
We then want the Commission to inform us how the universal service is to be financed .
There is no blank cheque ; instead we are getting a study .
There is no automatic behaviour here ; instead we want to know in the most exact terms - for that is the crucial thing - whether , as for example Mr Mastorakis put it , people in rural areas on islands are to continue to get a good postal service .
That will be the case only in 2006 .
I thank the rapporteur , Mr Ferber , as I think he has brought the various Parliamentary interests and the Council together , so that this week , I believe , we can manage to get a good majority for a good compromise .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament 's position at first reading of the draft directive on the opening of postal services to competition was decisive . In fact , the Council accepted four out of the five basic principles we put forward .
Our only demand not to be accepted was that of bringing down the weight limit of normal post from 150 grammes to 100 grammes . We should not forget , however , that the weight limit proposed by the Commission was 50 grammes .
What is the most important aspect of this discussion ?
To my mind , it is to maintain the security of postal services as universal services , which all Europeans citizens have the right to use , regardless of where they live .
It is also essential that the postal services continue to fulfil the irreplaceable social role that they have traditionally played , whilst being able to remain competitive and to provide increasingly up-to-date services .
What is the issue here ?
The issue is that by the end of this year , it will be possible to end the monopoly of postal services that has hitherto been allowed to exist , and unless we are able to reach a common position between the Council , Parliament and the Commission , in 2003 the Commission , using a different legal basis , will be able to treat this problem as a case of competition within the internal market , which falls within the competence of the Commission alone .
The proposal we are now discussing is , then , under the current circumstances , the safest one .
Not only is the common position reasonable and accepted by the companies responsible for postal services in our countries , but it also makes any new liberalisation dependent on co-decision by the Council and Parliament .
We suggest that we vote in favour of the Ferber report with the amendments that we adopted in the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism .
Mr President , this subject has been debated in many places over many years and is of great importance , and I therefore welcome the fact that many speakers have given their opinion on it .
I am fully aware that I do not need to re-emphasise the importance of postal services for the European economy and its citizens .
I would like , however , to reaffirm the need to make progress with the social reform that has been initiated and to move forward towards the accomplishment of the internal market for postal services .
In this context , I am happy that the in-depth debates held in the European Parliament and the Council are about to bring appropriate solutions to the key challenges which have been widely discussed .
I am grateful to the institutions of the European Union for together planning a road map for supporting the ongoing modernisation of the postal sector whilst maintaining the asset of the universal postal service .
May I , in particular , praise the rapporteur , Mr Ferber , and also the shadow rapporteur , Mr Simpson , whom I thank in particular for the kind words which he addressed to me .
I should like to thank both the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteur for their support and their constructive attitudes which have greatly contributed to making all this possible .
Steering such a difficult dossier was a challenge which they have successfully met thanks to the support of their colleagues .
The common position reached in Council sets out a clear path for a gradual and controlled implementation of the internal market for postal services .
It provides for sufficient time for all the market players to be prepared , and for guaranteeing that the universal service is maintained .
The Belgian Presidency - Mr Sterckx referred to the presidency of the country of which he is a citizen- the Belgian presidency has found a good compromise which successfully meets a triple challenge : firstly , to reconcile divided Member States around a common approach ; secondly , to largely reflect the European Parliament 's position from the first reading - Mr Simpson enumerated the five points of which he said four-and-a-half were achieved by Parliament ; and thirdly to gain wide endorsement from the industry stakeholders , including unanimous support from the 15 incumbent postal operators .
If I may say so , Mr President , the European Parliament can indeed be proud of its significant impact on the common position .
Let me mention four points .
Firstly , the definition of special services was deleted , as mentioned by Mr Simpson .
Secondly , the timetable and weight limits were significantly modified to meet the demand for a more gradual and controlled approach .
Thirdly , derogations will be possible concerning liberalisation of outgoing cross-border correspondence to the extent necessary to ensure the provision of the universal service .
Fourthly , the European Parliament will be involved before any subsequent decisive step , confirming , if appropriate , the full accomplishment of the internal market in the year 2009 , or determining any other step in the light of the results of a dedicated study .
It would therefore seem that Parliament has significantly influenced the common position , and congratulations on that accomplishment are due .
Furthermore , the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteur have managed to maintain this widely supported compromise .
They have succeeded in strengthening the common position by updating its monitoring and controlling provisions in order to ensure that the stakeholders will be kept properly informed and fully involved during the process .
The Commission supports the demand from a majority of Members of this Parliament for regular reports on the application of this directive .
I certainly appreciate their wish to be kept informed of developments .
A similar process has proved to be successful in other sectors , such as telecoms and transport , as Mr Sterckx pointed out .
This demand from Parliament is not only legitimate but also beneficial , since it ensures that the next codecision procedure can be as successful as this one in gathering wide support among the stakeholders for such an important Community policy .
The Commission also appreciates Parliament 's improvements to the accuracy of the common position drafting .
In this spirit the Commission can accept , and I can personally support , all the compromise amendments worked out during this second reading to further strengthen the common position .
This concerns Amendments Nos 1 , 2 and 3 .
On the other hand - and in the same spirit - it will be no surprise that the Commission is not able to support other amendments which diverge from the largely supported approach of the common position .
This concerns the remaining proposed amendments to that common position .
Finally , with regard to the proposed legislative resolution " asking the Commission to involve all the relevant actors in the sector as well as the European Parliament and Council as closely as possible in the preparation , implementation and follow-up of the prospective study " , I have already covered that point .
I should like to state again my best intention to meet this wish of the European Parliament when the time comes , using the most appropriate means and in full respect of the applicable agreements between the Commission and Parliament on follow-up procedures for European Parliament resolutions .
In conclusion , I should like again sincerely to thank this Parliament for its attitude on this report .
The expected result , thanks to the contribution of all who have been involved in its preparation , is good for the postal market as a whole and will , I trust , give a lift to the Barcelona Summit which is to take place in a few days time when it reviews progress on our ambition to become the most competitive and dynamic economy in the world by the year 2010 .
This report demonstrates in a clear and practical way that European institutions can transform their commitments into action .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken on Wednesday at noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0054 / 2002 ) by Mrs Paciotti , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission on the regulations and general conditions for the performance of the duties of the European data protection supervisor ( COM ( 2001 ) 411 - C5-0384 / 2001 - 2001 / 2150 ( ACI ) ) .
Mr President , the decision we are debating today is - or at least I hope it is - the last document we need to be able to set up a European authority which guarantees the practical protection of the European citizens ' privacy , including in respect of the Community institutions and bodies .
Article 286 of the Treaty of Amsterdam stipulated that this would happen as of 1999 .
We are behind schedule and we must therefore avoid further delays .
I am glad to say that European Parliament and Council Regulation No 45 / 2001 was adopted at first reading following intense combined endeavours , and it set out the principles and rules , in line with those laid down by Community directives for the Member States , for the processing of personal data by the Community institutions and bodies .
The regulation also set up an independent supervisory authority in the shape of the European Data Protection Supervisor , to be assisted by an Assistant Supervisor , who will oversee the implementation of the regulation .
It established their roles and responsibilities - inquiries , advice and consultancy , regulation , settlement of disputes - and the procedures for their appointment .
Only two points were not fixed by the regulation and are still to be settled : the remuneration to be paid to the Supervisor and his Assistant , and where the office will be located .
On the matter of remuneration , since the full independence of the Supervisor 's office is to be guaranteed in respect of his function of monitoring all the Community institutions and bodies , it appears quite correct to propose that the Supervisor should receive the same remuneration as the Ombudsman or a judge at the European Court of Justice .
In the case of the Assistant Supervisor , who will be appointed by the same procedure and for the same period as the Supervisor , and will have the additional responsibility of deputising for the Supervisor should the latter be absent or prevented from carrying out his duties , it is proposed that the remuneration payable should be the same as that of the Registrar of the Court of Justice .
As regards the location of the office , as the majority of the personal data processing services of the Community institutions and bodies are located in Brussels , it is proposed that the Supervisor 's office should also be located there .
After the debate in committee , a number of amendments were adopted which I do not endorse , such as those raising doubts about financial coverage , which have since become obsolete following the adoption of the budget .
Other amendments , however , refer to the adoption of another major regulation , Regulation No 1049 / 2001 regarding public access to European Parliament , Council and Commission documents .
Since these amendments introduce recitals and not additional provisions , which would be unacceptable due to the lack of a legal base , I feel I can support them .
The adoption during the course of the same year of these two major regulations confirms that , in Europe , the culture of personal data protection and the culture of the transparency of public activities are developing alongside each other rather than conflicting .
Both are in opposition , however , to the authoritarian , bureaucratic culture which , on the one hand , fails to respect the privacy of individual citizens , and , on the other , has the gall to keep the administrative procedures and activities of public bodies confidential .
I feel that the adoption of this decision will fill a significant gap in the system protecting the European citizens ' fundamental right to the protection of personal data , which is now enshrined in Article 8 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union .
We find ourselves in a bit of an awkward situation .
Officially , we are assessing the statute of the European data protection Supervisor here , and there are some observations to be made in this respect , which I will do in a moment .
However , many of us actually want to discuss the brief and working method of the Supervisor but , as already stated , this decision has already been made , and I fear that we simply suffered from a collective lapse of concentration when that happened .
We are now lumbered with a body which employs fifteen people and which is assisted by another twenty people who work internally in the different institutions .
This is quite a significant number , considering that this body only supervises the EU 's data which the European Union has at its disposal for the first pillar .
For precisely those sensitive areas which one would expect to generate a great deal of work , such as Europol and Schengen , do not fall within the remit of this Supervisor .
I therefore seriously wonder what all these people , 35 in total , will be doing all day , whether creating this bureaucratic employment will promote employment , transparency and openness towards the citizens , and also how cooperation with the Ombudsman will work .
In my view , there is a real risk that a kind of rivalry will exist between the Ombudsman and this Supervisor , because their tasks overlap .
Furthermore , what is the purpose of using tax money to set up a new separate institution which caters for such a restricted set of tasks ?
However , as already stated , we can only talk about the statute of the Supervisor and his assistant today , a role which I also question .
In my view , the fact that a Supervisor is accorded the same status as the Ombudsman is neither here nor there , but to give his assistant the same special status is both costly and difficult to justify .
The assistant simply belongs in the organisational chart .
The Commission has underlined the analogy with the Ombudsman at every opportunity , but the Ombudsman has no assistant and has no other official who will be paid as handsomely as the assistant to this Supervisor .
Since , of course , the Ombudsman and Supervisor will subsequently need to be independent , the official positions will simply need to fall within the remit of the budgetary authorities and not be laid down in a statute .
I hope that we can at least get this right .
I can only endorse what my colleague Mrs Buitenweg has said , on behalf of the Legal Affairs Committee .
I have to say that it is rather disappointing that the two opinions from the committees have been largely ignored in the Committee of Citizens ' Freedoms .
It is important that we say here and now that the mere fact that we strongly approve of the principles of protecting data and that we want to move forward , and also the fact that this needs to be done quickly , does not absolve us from the job of scrutinising this proposal properly .
Normally , as he knows , I am very supportive of what Mr Bolkestein does , but in this case I do not feel that the Commission has in any way justified to us the salary and status of the staff that it proposes to administer this work .
I very much echo what Mrs Buitenweg has said .
If this goes through as proposed , to carry out the task that we have set down here , we will be appointing someone who is substantially higher graded and better paid than someone running a major Community institution such as the Trade Mark Protection Office in Alicante - a major autonomous institution .
As Mrs Buitenweg said , we do not yet know how many staff will be engaged in this process .
I asked the Commission to give me more details about the establishment , the organisation , and the responsibilities and particularly the role of the assistant .
Yet the Commission is proposing that we should appoint an assistant on the basis of someone who manages 1 000 staff in the European Court of Justice - now that does not make sense .
Frankly , I have to say to Mr Bolkestein , if this goes through tomorrow - and I hope that we will actually have the opportunity to discuss in more detail and look at some amendments that you will accept - the fact we have come in at the end of the process has made it very difficult for those of us who want change to put forward acceptable amendments .
If this goes through , you will have got off pretty lightly and I hope you will give us assurances , firstly that you will properly justify this grade and position , and secondly , that we will be scrutinising every move you make when you put it in place , to make sure that it is done properly .
Mr President , first of all may I say that I have much sympathy with the remarks that have just been passed by Mr Harbour .
He has spoken very clearly and I am sure that Commissioner Bolkestein has listened carefully to what he had to say .
I take this , however , from a slightly different tack .
The position of the Data Protection Supervisor is of enormous importance .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights which I helped to prepare states that everyone has the right to the protection of personal data concerning him or her and the Amsterdam Treaty called for the establishment of an independent supervisor by 1 January , 1999 .
This deadline is , of course , well past and our main priority , therefore , is to create this post as soon as we possibly can .
The urgency of the matter should not in itself be an excuse for us to rush it through without proper discussion .
Indeed , the salary of both the Data Protection Supervisor and his assistant has resulted in numerous discussions within our committees .
Many people , myself included , were unhappy about the unreasonably high salary of the supervisor , which will of course be comparable to that of the Ombudsman .
But I contrast this discussion with the kind which one might have in a national parliament where , frankly , the issue itself is of such dramatic importance to the establishment of this role that it ought perhaps to be dealt with not in this particular plenary but elsewhere .
We are not as flexible as I would like .
Most of the matters relating to the post have already been laid down in Council Regulation ( EC ) No 45 / 2001 and published in the Official Journal .
I know that the Secretariat has also declared a number of the amendments to be out of order for various reasons and this has caused concern among many colleagues .
Internal politics has also been a feature of this debate .
It is unfortunate , that there is no single data protection instrument for all the pillars .
As a member of the Future of Europe Convention , I do hope , indeed I might even anticipate , that at the conclusion of the work that we shall be doing , it may well be that the protection of the private citizen and the interests of the private citizen , both in terms of the work of the Ombudsman - which I highly value and respect - and also in connection with data protection issues , will be spelled out very clearly as something in need of development in the future .
I hope , therefore , that whatever we decide - and I do hope that we decide to proceed with this post when we vote on this week - we will return to the matter and at an appropriate moment , perhaps , during discussion of the next Treaty or before then , we will look at ways of endorsing the position of citizens and making sure their relationship with institutions in Europe is a properly balanced one .
Mr President , it is precisely because I am concerned with internal affairs policy that I observe that the European Data Protection Supervisor plays a most important role in the creation of an area of freedom , security and justice .
It is he who creates public trust in the institutions of the European Union .
He must work where the majority of the institutions are permanently based , that is , in Brussels - if that is the point at issue .
If he works elsewhere , the impression is created that he is of only negligible significance .
If the public get the impression that the Data Protection Supervisor is nothing more than a paper tiger , they will not trust the European Union .
If they have no confidence in the way their data is protected , our internal affairs policy will never enjoy the public approval it needs for freedom , security and justice to be allowed to grow .
That , though , is our objective .
We want internal affairs policy to have a European added value , which will be achieved only if the citizens put their trust in us .
It is for that reason that we , and , in particular , the Commission , must show them that we take data protection seriously and that it is not in a merely symbolic sense that we are putting it centre stage .
Mr President , let me say one thing at the outset , namely that I am no great friend of ombudsmen .
I still feel that we , as elected members of Parliament , should be the primary ombudsmen of the people of Europe .
Why do we need a Data Protection Supervisor ?
My esteemed fellow MEP , Timothy Kirkhope , justified it on the basis of the Charter of Fundamental Rights and by reference to data protection 's significance .
I do not believe that one can argue in this way , as we would next need a family ombudsman , a women 's ombudsman and a children 's ombudsman as well .
All these groups have an important place in the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
In Schleswig-Holstein , the province of the Federal Republic of Germany from which I come , we have developed a veritable abomination ; we even have a bicycle ombudsman .
Anyone , though , who believes that cyclists come off better out of this , even in the planning of the budget , is , as we say , barking up the wrong tree .
No , data protection really is important , and the reason why it is so to us is that we parliamentarians find monitoring difficult - even the monitoring of the Commission , and especially of what goes on within it - and so , of course , we need an auxiliary person in this field .
He or she , as Mr Ceyhun rightly said , must be based in Brussels , where he or she is to carry on the work of monitoring .
Let us move on to remuneration .
No matter how important the position may be , I really cannot see that an ombudsman , who is to monitor this data , should , in salary terms , be on the same footing as a judge at the European Court of Justice .
Why that should be the case completely eludes me .
A judge at the Court of Justice occupies a significantly superior and more important position .
The judges are , in any case , the guardians of our treaties .
Why , then , should we pay a data protection supervisor as much as a judge at the ECJ ?
I think that in this respect our yardsticks of value have shifted a bit over the years , and they need to be put back in order .
We should rather think about bringing the Ombudsman back to the right pay level instead of going straight ahead with allocating too much to the next position .
On this point , I appeal for a bit more of a sense of reality .
Mr President , the Commission has argued that the right of access to documents and the right to privacy are both legitimate rights and that when they both enter into consideration , a balance has to be struck .
However , the idea of striking a balance between them on a case-by-case basis whenever a name is mentioned misrepresents the nature both of dealing with openness in the public sector and the right to privacy .
The principle of openness means that public bodies should take decisions as openly as possible and is now defined in the public access regulation .
That regulation provides for exceptions to access .
The point of this exception is that a public body may , in carrying out its public duties , come into possession of information about the private and family life of individuals .
However , there is nothing in Article 286 of the EC Treaty or in the Data Protection Directive to suggest that data protection rules should be applied as a general principle of confidentiality in public administrations so as to require a public balancing exercise whenever a document mentions a name .
Such an over-interpretation would damage not only the right of public access to documents , but also the genuine purpose of data protection and the performance of the duties of the Data Protection Supervisor .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we should emphasise the fact that the protection of personal data is essential to ensuring that every individual 's rights , fundamental freedoms and right to privacy are respected , throughout the European Community .
This proposal is intended to respond , as has already been said , to two fundamental issues : the performance of the duties of this European data protection supervisor , which have already been laid down in Council Regulation ( EC ) No 45 / 2001 ; in other words , the issue of the pay of the European supervisor and deputy supervisor and the issue of where they are to be based .
With regard to the location , I agree with those who have said that it does not make sense to have it anywhere but Brussels , for the reasons that have already been stated and which I shall not repeat .
There are , however , other issues which , perhaps due to the highly technical and abstract nature of the regulation , still remain open and which should be responded to .
For example , provisions on procedural aspects and on the way in which the authority should exercise its powers of investigation should be included here .
Furthermore , it is to be regretted that there is no instrument for data protection that could apply to all the Community pillars .
The duties of this supervisor will be limited to the first pillar , but Europol and Schengen - for which data protection instruments are also planned , with the creation in 2000 of a joint secretariat - are currently excluded from the post 's scope .
This means that very little data of a more sensitive nature will fall within the scope of this European supervisor 's mandate , which gives legitimacy to the criticism of those who say that the pay package is probably excessive for a post with such limited duties .
I sincerely hope that in the near future , the current structure and organisation of this European Data Protection Supervisor can be adapted to also include , under the responsibility of a single European authority , supervisory authorities within the European organs created on the basis of Titles V and VI of the EU Treaty , in order to prevent the unnecessary duplication of functions and resources .
At the same time , it would be good to alleviate the risk of a possible duplication of some functions between the Ombudsman and this European authority , with a view to optimising the use of Community resources .
Mr President , the aim of this draft decision is to ensure the full implementation of Article 286 of the Amsterdam Treaty and of Regulation ( EC ) No 45 / 2001 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data by the Community institutions and bodies , adopted under codecision procedure on 18 December 2000 .
Before going any further may I stress that the regulation we are now debating was adopted by this Parliament in codecision in a single reading , so it is a little late for some Members of this Parliament to complain about the contents of this regulation , for example where it stipulates that there should be an assistant regulator in this area .
It is a little late to start complaining about that , but today we are dealing with other issues and , therefore , I should like to continue my contribution to this debate by saying that it concerns the place of data protection in relation to the right of citizens to transparent administration .
Some Members who have spoken tonight have expressed concern that this initiative might impede , or even reverse , the significant progress made towards achieving the greatest possible transparency in Community administration .
I must assure these Members that the principle of transparency , and in particular the principle of public access to documents as enshrined in the Amsterdam Treaty , in Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 and in the Charter of Fundamental Rights , is applicable to the Community institutions and bodies and in particular to the European Data Protection Supervisor .
On the other hand neither of these two principles - data protection on the one hand and public access to documents on the other - has absolute force or takes precedence over the other .
The Human Rights Convention as interpreted in the case law of the Strasbourg courts and the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union require that a balance should be struck in specific cases in order to reconcile the various interests at issue .
Any attempt to change this by putting an artificially narrow interpretation on the field of application of the fundamental rights governing data protection by denying the representatives of the new body to be set up the institutional status they need to assert their independence , would be on shaky ground .
The European Court of Human Rights here in Strasbourg has built up a body of case law on the interpretation of the scope of protection of private and family life which cannot and should not be called into question by this decision .
In accordance with this case law the professional life of individuals - employees and employers alike - is not excluded from the field of application of data protection .
Amendment No 1 would introduce an unacceptable ambiguity in this respect .
The status of the European Data Protection Supervisor and his deputy , who together form a sort of mini-committee , must , above all , ensure their independence in the Community institutional context beyond the mere budgetary aspects .
The Ombudsman is a good Community-level reference , given his role in monitoring administrative procedures .
At national level - I should like to say in particular to Mr Harbour but also to others - a judge or even a chief justice is often taken as the reference .
The draft decision takes account of the two references .
Any reduction in the status of the deputy would mean loss of independence without any corresponding budgetary savings .
Amendments Nos 10 , 11 , 13 and 14 are not sufficiently precise to determine the level of remuneration of the President and his deputy .
Amendments Nos 12 and 16 contain excellent ideas but the present decision 's legal base of Article 43 , Regulation 45 / 2001 , is not sufficiently large to carry them .
Amendments Nos 9 and 15 refer to parts only of the evidence and need redrafting with a view to achieving more balance .
Parliament and the other institutions concerned have a great responsibility towards the citizens of Europe to ensure that the data protection system , including the supervision provided for in the Treaty as long ago as 1999 , is put in place as soon as possible .
With that in mind the Commission intends to be very flexible with regard to the amendments accepted in the Civil Liberties Commission in the tripartite dialogue with a view to establishing a final text of the decision by agreement between the three institutions .
It also hopes that the Council , which has already expressed its agreement with the Commission proposal , may be able to act likewise .
I feel I should raise a point of order in relation to what the Commissioner has just said .
He referred to a number of texts on the definition of privacy and he referred to Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights , which guarantees the protection of privacy and family life .
As the rapporteur on the Regulation on Access to Documents , I feel it only right to point out that in the judgment of 16 February 2000 , the European Court of Human Rights confirmed its earlier case law , that it is data relating to the private life of an individual that falls within the scope of Article 8 .
The preamble to the Data Protection Convention and recitals to the Data Protection Directive also make clear that their purpose is to protect the fundamental right of privacy , not to restrict the information available to citizens about public activities .
If the Commission pursues the line indicated tonight , it is on a collision course with Parliament .
Mr Cashman , whether that is strictly a point of order or not I am not prepared to rule at the moment .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0046 / 2002 ) by Mrs Malmström , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the European Commission 's legislative and work programme ( amendment of Rule 57 of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure ) ( 2001 / 2110 ( REG ) ) .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Malmström , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , not only for having familiarised herself with these difficult processes but also for having conducted the negotiations on the subject with the Commission with the rigour , prudence , but also the friendliness that they call for .
I believe that this result will , both for the Commission and the other institutions have a calming effect on procedures which , over and over again , have led in the short or long term to disputes that might well have been unnecessary .
For us , this result makes it possible to make debate on the Commission 's annual work programme more political , getting away from listing individual projects somewhat in the manner of a book-keeper , indeed , it makes it possible for us to set out at the start of the year , what we see as the European Union 's most important projects in the coming year .
One might say that this procedure and the preparation for it make this annual work programme interactive .
I believe that this represents a move forward in terms of the reliability and predictability of the processes we are considering .
As Mrs Malmström has rightly emphasised , this result also makes demands of us ourselves , for we really must refrain from constantly repeating what we wanted already , and must instead actually limit our deliberations to a period of one year .
It is also necessary for us to become more closely involved than before in the actual planning of the half-year presidencies , which may go against our own priorities .
Involvement in the preparation of the legislative programme is important to us also because we still do not possess the right of initiative in the European legislative process .
On that , let me say something about my personal assessment of the position . Our spontaneous reaction when the Commission 's sole right of initiative is called into question is always a cool one .
Above all , the Commission itself reacts understandably with great reserve on that point .
Despite that , we must of course consider whether we should raise the issue anew , perhaps within the framework of the Convention 's discussions , for it is the case that the European Union 's great acquis communautaire , consisting of some 10 000 instruments , can be amended only on the Commission 's proposal .
I will say here that I doubt whether that satisfies the requirements of a democracy .
To that extent the decision we are drawing up today , is also a crutch , helping Parliament to move towards enhanced involvement in initiatives .
Mr President , my group will support Mrs Malmström 's proposals , and I would also like to offer her our congratulations for the hard work she has put in for more than nine months and in negotiating intensely with the Commission .
Parliament and the Commission have long recognised that legislative planning is a matter of common concern .
The Commission has the right of initiative .
My group does not seek to change that .
We have the right to call upon the Commission to make proposals already given to us in the Treaty .
It has the right of initiative .
We are a parliament that is master of its own timetable , unlike some national parliaments .
We both therefore have an interest in reaching an understanding on the legislative programme coming up in any given year so as to plan our work , so as to exchange views on priorities , so as to reach agreement and convergence as much as possible .
That has long been the case , but the actual procedures by which we have done it have not always been working satisfactorily , and I welcome this updating and rationalisation that has been put forward .
Given the number of times that we will be discussing and looking at the following year 's programme in the different fora over a year , my one fear is that , if we are not self-disciplined , we will spend an enormous amount of time looking at what will come up well over a year ahead , without being very concrete .
We must be self-disciplined and make sure that problem does not arise .
There is a ghost missing from this feast , namely the Council , and the role of the Council presidency .
Council presidencies often present a programme to Parliament as if they were assuming executive office .
Council presidents must remember that they are not taking over executive office when they become president of the Council .
They are merely chairing the body which is the co-legislative body with Parliament for a short period of six months , with an inherited agenda .
We must make sure that this legislative planning works without upsetting the whole balance of the system by delivering it in the wrong way .
I too would like to begin by congratulating Mrs Malmström on this report .
It is an important proposal because it introduces a more formal structure into the process of Parliament 's scrutiny of the Commission 's legislative programme , which is , after all , a very important component of one of our most important functions - that is to say , scrutinising and holding the Commission to account .
Following what the Commission is up to is always slightly difficult unless one is a true initiate of the workings of the European political system .
Most people are not , and so to introduce a more formal structure into this process is , in my view , a very desirable development because it should assist those outside the circle of initiates , by providing as it does a series of markers for the cycle of the year 's business .
Ignorance of the way in which the European Union works , coupled with the failure of national parliaments to oversee and scrutinise European matters properly , are two of the great weaknesses in the European political structure as it has developed .
Now , while it is for national parliaments themselves to determine their own agendas , I as a Member of the British second Chamber as well as a Member of this House feel that the formal structuring of the way that the European Parliament scrutinises what the Commission is doing may well be a very useful template for scrutiny by national parliaments and at the same time for disseminating accurate facts about what is going on at European level , to the benefit of all our citizens .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank you warmly for offering me the opportunity to participate in this debate on the reform of the European Parliament 's Rules of Procedure and specifically the proposed revision of Rule 57 , which takes up the agreement we have reached between the Commission and Parliament in relation to the methods for presenting our legislative and working programmes .
The contacts we have maintained throughout these months have allowed us to reach a solution for structuring a constructive dialogue on this issue , which is important .
The text which the Committee on Constitutional Affairs proposes including in an annex to European Parliament 's Rules of Procedure respects the institutional role of the Commission and Parliament and honours the mutual commitments we have made over the last two and a half years .
I would firstly like to thank Mrs Malmström for her cooperation and constructive work - which has not always been easy , but the results of which have made it all worthwhile - in our debates and discussions , and that of the whole of the Parliament 's team and the representatives of the various political groups , since I believe that this has allowed us to achieve a proposal which I hope will be beneficial to the functioning of the European institutions .
The College of Commissioners has held in-depth debates on this matter and has agreed that the right of initiative laid down in the Treaties must be retained in its current form , with the collegial responsibility of the Commission .
Furthermore , Parliament must be informed on time , and not only informed , but it must also be in a position to be able to contribute its ideas and suggestions on the best definition of Community policies .
In this respect , I believe that the agreement , which I am not going to explain , since Mrs Malmström has done so magnificently , includes the ideal procedure for combining these elements .
As for Mr Corbett 's point , it is true ; we should consider how we can involve the Council in this process .
We will have to seek a formula which , of course , must be acceptable to the Council .
In any event , we in the Commission hope that this structured dialogue can focus our attention , as Mrs Malmström rightly said , on the political and strategic aspects in relation to the broad approaches of our action , with realism , as the new President of the European Parliament , Mr Cox , has also said on a previous occasion .
The Prodi Commission fully shares this objective and we want to prevent this process from becoming a mere bureaucratic accounting operation , which should not stop us from applying the relevant rigour , and the debates should be accompanied by general approaches and political considerations which , as has been said previously , can be turned into concrete proposals and political approaches .
I hope that , by means of this dialogue , we will discuss our political priorities for 2003 , in order to define concrete courses of action for the enlarged Europe .
In any event , the Commission , as it has been doing since 1999 when it came to office , will fully comply with the agreements with this Parliament and we hope that the trust and cooperation between the two institutions will lead to the better functioning of the institutions and that , furthermore , when the time comes we can also seek a formula to incorporate the Council as well .
Congratulations once again to Mrs Malmström .
The discussions have been long but the final result has made it worthwhile .
In any event , we will soon find out , because within a couple of months a first round of participations by all the Commissioners will begin - by means of the specialised committees - in relation to our future projects for next year .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at noon .
I declare closed the 2001-2002 session of the European Parliament .
( The sitting was closed at 9.15 p.m. )
Opening of the session
I declare open the annual session of the European Parliament for the year 2002-2003 .
I have received a request for a topical and urgent debate on the Council 's proposal to change the legal basis for the European Parliament and Council regulation amending Regulation ( ? EC ) No 218 / 92 on administrative cooperation in the field of indirect taxation ( VAT ) [ C5-0103 / 2002 - 2000 / 0147 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , two years ago the Commission presented two proposed modifications , one of the sixth directive and the other of the Regulation on administrative cooperation .
The aim of both was to end the discrimination suffered by European companies in comparison with those of third countries , particularly American ones , in terms of the provision of services .
This discrimination is due to the fact that companies from outside the Union do not pay value-added tax when they provide electronic services , while European companies are obliged to pay it .
Since this is an urgent issue , Parliament produced two reports very quickly .
At the moment , the Council are asking us for a change to the legal basis exclusively for the Regulation on administrative cooperation .
I am not going to expand on this issue , but I wish to say they are two different things .
The Committee believes that we should not proceed with the change of legal basis , but that the issue should be studied with the greatest urgency , in order to put an end to this discrimination and , furthermore , as Parliament has requested , in order to facilitate the use of electronic means for identifying clients , putting an end to the costs which are faced in particular by small and medium-sized businesses .
I would therefore advise the House to accept the Council 's request in relation to the urgency procedure , and not accept the change of legal basis in relation to this issue .
It is one thing to deny a material request and quite another to deny it an urgency procedure so that these two proposals can be implemented very quickly .
Mr President , the information on the vote on request for urgent procedure on administrative cooperation was not supplied to me in due time , or rather , it was not delivered at all , and , for that reason , I am unable to vote in favour of it .
Mr Ilgenfritz , I appreciate your request .
However , I can tell you that Parliament 's services have been trying to get the translation since last night .
If you insist , we shall have to postpone the vote until the relevant document has been distributed in every language .
Last night , I attended the coordinators ' meeting of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
It is unfortunate that the chair , Mrs Randzio-Plath , is not here today .
Otherwise , I am certain that she would have told you that the meeting of coordinators last night decided to advise against urgent procedure .
The reason for that is that the Council would like to decide on this matter before 1 July , which leaves us plenty of time , even if we do not decide on urgent procedure today .
It can be discussed reasonably quickly , but there is no need at all for urgent procedure .
It is , indeed , correct that the legal basis still causes some difficulty , but we can discuss this in due course .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs therefore advises against urgent procedure .
Mr President , I want to raise a point of order on a very serious matter dealing with Scotch whisky .
A year ago , this Parliament selected two whiskies to be put on sale to Members of Parliament , to visitors and to people visiting our shops in Brussels and Strasbourg with Parliament 's own label and own brand placed on the bottles .
The College of Quaestors has agreed all of the conditions necessary for having these whiskies placed on sale in our shops , yet the Administration is still blocking their sale in our shops .
This is a serious matter because it raises the question of who runs this Parliament - the Members or the Administration ?
I would ask you , Mr President , to intervene in this matter to ensure that the request of the College of Quaestors taken on behalf of the Members is carried out and that these branded whiskies are placed on sale in our shops .
Thank you very much , Mr Stevenson .
May I assure you that the Quaestors will look into the matter tomorrow on the basis of what you have just said .
Mr President , yesterday , in one of the Palestinian refugee camps , Ariel Sharon 's troops killed twenty-two people .
I do not know whether to feel horror or shame at the Israeli Government 's treatment of the Palestinians , which reminds me of the treatment the Jews themselves received in Europe 60 years ago .
I believe this must end and that the President of Parliament should lodge a protest and condemn such acts .
Thank you very much , Mr Nogueira Román .
Your comments have , of course , been noted and will be examined by the relevant parliamentary committees .
Mr President , on the issue which Mr Nogueira has just mentioned , I would like to refer to an issue which affects this House even more directly .
As the House knows , a few days ago a special representative of the European Union - the institution to which this Parliament belongs - Mr Moratinos , was detained against his will for some minutes at the residence of President Arafat , due to the bombing of that residence by Israeli troops .

Mr President , I would ask you to communicate this Parliament 's indignation to the Spanish Presidency of the Council at this blatant aggression against a diplomatic representative of the European Union in the fulfilment of his duties , while he was in Palestine with the President of the Palestinian Authority , something which the Israeli authorities had prior knowledge of , as the honourable Members and the President know .
Thank you .
You may be sure that your comments will be passed to the proper authorities .
Mr President , yesterday the Group of the Party of European Socialists requested the deletion of Chechnya from the subjects for topical and urgent debate on the basis that it is an urgent subject of major importance , to be dealt with when the time comes , which I hope it will .
Today , the political position of Parliament on a very serious , extremely important situation that cannot be resolved is being presented as a point of order .
Naturally , we are all sorry that Mr Moratinos was present when these events took place .
We are all aware of the situation in the Middle East , which deserves an in-depth discussion , not just a point of order and request to the President .
I therefore invite you , Mr President , to ask that a debate take place , if necessary , but not this type of attitude asking the presidency to do things that , under other circumstances , we do not want Parliament to do .
Mr President , having listened to the speeches by the two honourable Members on the crime being perpetrated in the Middle East against the Palestinian people , I totally agree .
My problem is that , at some point - and I would suggest immediately - we need to stop making declarations and verbal accusations and do something and the first thing we need to do - and do at once - is to cut all funding from the European Union to Israel and all supply lines , because there appears to be a fairly dense network of supply lines between Israel and the countries and arms industries of the European Union .
So an end to hypocrisy !
We must do something to put an end to this heinous crime .
As I am sure you understand , this is not the time for an in-depth debate on the problem in the Middle East .
Your comment has been noted and I thank you for it .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the budget process looks a bit different this year than previously .
We are on the way towards an activity-based budget . Of course , we hope that , in the long term , this will lead to simplification and increased clarity , although this year we will be working with the old and the new methods in parallel .
Another new feature is that all three institutions are producing political budget guidelines at roughly the same time .
The Commission now produces an annual policy statement , and the Council makes decisions on guidelines .
In my view , this should mean that we will obtain a better political dialogue on the priorities and that the Commission 's preliminary draft budget can be based on deliberations by all three institutions , not just those of the Commission itself .
This should naturally lead to a better budget process and to simplification .
The greatest difference as far as the European Parliament is concerned is perhaps the increased emphasis now being placed on follow-up and implementation , for we cannot merely be content to pass decisions on a mass of figures in the budget which then just remain on paper .
As a Parliament , we must also make sure that our ambitions and priorities are being realised .
The wording of the guidelines which the committee is now submitting to the European Parliament is more precise in many cases than before .
This applies to statements on the importance of ensuring that the budget is followed , as well as to decisions of the European Parliament or budgetary authority .
It applies to the actual amounts involved , as well as to budgetary remarks , etc .
However , on a number of occasions , the Committee on Budgets has had to point out that a number of remarks which the European Parliament made in various contexts did not , however , lead to the Commission 's actually acting in accordance with the decisions made .
On a number of occasions , we have also pointed out the importance of the amounts in the budget actually taking effect .
Naturally , it is worrying when , year after year , the budget produces large surpluses which have to be paid back to the Member States because important work is not carried out .
This is particularly serious in terms of areas to which political priority is given , such as regional policy assistance under the Structural Funds or aid to prioritised recipients in other parts of the world .
We have already been warned that it will be proposed that the Member States receive early repayment of EUR 10 billion from the 2001 surplus .
This is a tenth of the entire budget .
This surplus arose primarily because the Structural Funds did not manage to implement their programmes .
In our opinion , this must lead to greatly increased pressure on both the Commission and the Member States to take the problem of implementation seriously .
In reality , this has to do with confidence in the EU as an institution .
This has led to our attempting to introduce a somewhat different budget process .
We are attempting to bring the committees on board in a quite different way than before , for example by means of hearings involving Commissioners and through each committee 's checking its part of the budget and seeing how it is implemented .
This will ensure that the entire European Parliament is involved in the budget process more actively than before .
The budget debate will also be a little different .
During the July session we shall have a debate which will largely be to do with implementation but which will take place at the same time as the debate on the mandate for the conciliation negotiations on the Council 's first reading .
In the Committee on Budgets we had a great many amendments , 129 to be precise .
Here in the plenary sitting , the number has been considerably reduced , and the reason for this is of course that we have been able to compromise on a consensus approach towards the most important priorities .
We are entirely agreed that the most important political priority is EU enlargement .
For us , this means , in more concrete terms , the preparations we must now make if it is to be possible for this historic task to be carried out .
Enlargement itself creates no problems for the 2003 budget , but we are still affected in various ways .
We must begin the debate on the long-term effects of enlargement , and the European Parliament wants to be involved in this debate .
The agreements now being made in negotiations with the Member States will affect the budget for a long time into the future .
This is therefore a very important concern for the European Parliament too .
We must also set in motion a debate on the principles of how we are to prepare for accession .
This will apply to pre-accession aid under heading 7 and to our own costs in terms of administrative expenditure for preparing for the interpretation , translation , buildings and premises required because of enlargement .
The urgent , and largest , problem is of course the administrative expenditure under heading 5 .
If nothing radical is done , we run the risk of hitting the budget ceiling as early as 2003 as well as a major risk of considerably exceeding the ceiling in 2004 .
We are therefore attempting to put pressure on the Secretaries-General of our institutions so that they really come up with practical proposals for co-operation and savings .
If this does not succeed , we will have a discussion on either painful reprioritisations or the injection of completely new funds .
I am convinced that no one in this Parliament wishes to jeopardise the enlargement timetable for reasons of this kind .
Changes such as increased co-operation and rationalisation are , moreover , completely in line with the ideas for which we ourselves press when it comes to reforming the institutions of the Union , reforming the Commission , etc .
Great emphasis will also be placed on the Union 's role in terms of foreign policy and aid policy .
Where these are concerned , we are this year in danger of further exacerbating the problem which dominated the debate last year , that is to say the fact that , on top of our traditional priorities , we constantly heap new tasks such as those involving the Balkans , Afghanistan , the Global Health Fund and the common foreign and security policy .
In the end , it will become impossible to constantly squeeze in new tasks under the same budget ceilings , especially as the old tasks are often linked to practical undertakings involving recipients in other parts of the world .
Even though we have not adopted a position on the Commission 's proposal for a new flexibility instrument , it is quite clear that we welcome debate on this instrument or , alternatively , debate on a more planned use of the emergency reserve .
I would also like to mention a couple of different areas where we are adopting a very aggressive approach .
Regarding heading 3 - internal expenditure - there is now the opportunity , in the wake of the Barcelona process , to make considerably more active use of funds for trans-European networks , for the development of small enterprises , etc .
I believe this is vital .
We are also attempting to press for a situation in which the review of agricultural policy , the midterm review , really does lead to actual change .
To conclude , I would like to thank my co-rapporteur , Mr Stenmarck .
There is an unusually large number of Nordic rapporteurs this year , and the budget will also undergo its final reading during the Danish Presidency .
In that spirit , I would like to remind you of what the then Chairman of the Court of Auditors , Mr Karlsson , said in his last speech before retiring .
He said that the most important thing you can do with the EU budget is to make it simpler , more direct and clearer in the eyes of the people .
I hope we are able to take these words to heart .
Mr President , let me also begin by thanking my fellow rapporteur , Mr Färm , for his sound cooperation so far .
There are three priorities in the guidelines for the administrative budget on which we now have to adopt a position .
The first is enlargement .
That is the most important priority and the greatest challenge for the entire EU , and it is therefore also the most important issue for which the European Parliament and the other institutions have to prepare .
The second priority is institutional reforms , which will become vital in an enlarged EU which will soon comprise 25 , rather than 15 , Member States .
Thirdly , it is about completing enlargement and the institutional reforms within the financial framework laid down in the financial perspective in Berlin in 1999 .
We must respect these limits and manage the EU 's budget within them .
Because we have a deficit in the region of EUR 130 million to EUR 140 million so far , we need a strategy for managing this .
In the short term , it is entirely possible to deal with this .
The solution will involve cutbacks in all the institutions .
This is also the most important message I have the opportunity to convey at all my meetings and in all my contacts with the various institutions of the EU .
It gives them the chance to set their priorities in a way that respects the fact that they themselves know best what can be done in their own areas .
If they are unwilling to do this , we will have to set the priorities ourselves but the result may not be as good .
In the longer term , more systematic changes are needed in the budget in order to cope with a constantly increasing deficit .
We had an informal trialogue in Madrid just under a week ago .
There is no doubt that , at least in terms of putting it into words , there is a broad understanding of the size of the problem in both the Commission and the Council .
Despite this , the Commission is clearly prepared to look for the simplest possible solution , namely that of using the flexibility instrument to inject extra funds into heading 5 .
I must emphasise that this is a solution with an extraordinarily large number of drawbacks .
For all of us who do not work within an anonymous Commission but instead have to meet our voters on a daily basis , it would in actual fact be impossible to look these voters in the eye and , at the same time , explain that the EU needs more money to employ more bureaucrats in Brussels .
That would just not be on .
With precisely this in mind , it is incredibly important that the European Parliament demonstrate firmness and consistency in its position and in encouraging all the institutions to contribute to budget reductions .
Let me say a few words about the most important priorities in the report .
When it comes to enlargement , a number of issues are particularly important .
The first is language and the right of every Member of this Parliament to be treated in the same way as all the others .
There are in fact only two options .
Either we must all speak the same language or each of us must be allowed to speak our own language .
If I , as a Swede , have the right to speak Swedish and a Portuguese Member has the right to speak Portuguese , then a Hungarian Member must be allowed to speak Hungarian and a Lithuanian to speak Lithuanian .
The Committee on Budgets has backed what the Podestà Group calls controlled multilingualism .
At the same time , we urge the working party to revise its proposal and produce its conclusions in time before the budget for 2003 has to be adopted .
Enlargement will also entail the need for investment in buildings , offices and interpreting booths .
All of this is particularly difficult as we are unaware of what the scope of enlargement will be .
We will not be aware of this until the Copenhagen Summit in December .
If enlargement is to begin to be implemented with ten countries in January 2004 , we have an incredible amount to do in the space of only 21 months .
In fact , we have even less time as the new Member States will be entitled to send observers immediately the agreements are signed .
This means we might only have just under a year .
A great deal remains to be done in this time .
Therefore , everything that has to be done must also be given the absolute highest priority .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , if we want to keep to the timetable for enlargement - which we all do - 2003 will be essentially characterised by the need to make preparations for enlargement .
That has already been underlined in this House .
In the candidate countries , assuming that negotiations have been concluded , 2003 will see the referendums being held , and , in the Member States , the processes of ratifying the Accession Treaties will be in progress , the Convention will be presenting its recommendations on Europe 's future in an enlarged EU and the European institutions , their personnel and structures , will be having to make very real preparations for the increased membership after 2004 , from which date they will exercise their responsibilities on behalf of a good many more people and on behalf of more Member States .
All three of the reports before us on priorities for 2003 are therefore right to highlight this essential task .
I wish to thank the rapporteurs , Mr Färm and Mr Stenmarck , for these conclusive reports , which also lay very definite emphasis on this .
On 27 February , the Commission decided on its priorities and annual strategy for 2003 .
In it , we agreed on three priorities : firstly , preparation for enlargement ; secondly , measures to enhance stability and security in the European Union and also outside it ; and thirdly , on the priority to be accorded to the promotion of sustainable economic development .
The President of the Commission has already had the opportunity to present this strategy to Parliament , and there will be a plenary debate on it in the next part-session , in order that we may also discuss together the consequences this will have on the programme of legislation .
We are focusing today on issues of budget planning and on the effects that the setting of priorities will have on them .
The maximum funding allocation for 2003 has been set by the Financial Plan at EUR 102 billion , precisely one third of which is laid down as being for structural assistance and for the principal support instruments that are at our disposal for the purpose of achieving the important objective of matching living conditions across regions , improving the employment situation , improved protection for the environment and the promotion of gender equality .
Most of the resources will , on the other hand , accrue to the sphere of agricultural policy , subject to the creation of the relevant legal basis .
We will of course be presenting the agricultural policy 's mid-term balance sheet in 2002 , which will be linked with further proposals for reform , although I believe it rather too optimistic to assume that these proposals for reform will take tangible form as soon as the 2003 Budget ; Agriculture Ministers are simply not in the habit of deciding on agricultural reforms at that speed .
In the context of the priorities set for 2003 , therefore , new initiatives focus primarily on the policy areas of internal and foreign affairs .
The Commission is proposing to make available an additional sum of approximately EUR 270 million in the coming year , that is , 2003 , for these pressure points .
Let me give the following as examples of what is proposed in the area of internal affairs policy : Firstly , redoubled efforts towards an integrated common civil protection strategy , for 11 September opened the eyes of all of us to how important this is as a task for the Community .
Then new actions with additional resources in the area of the Refugee Fund and a programme from the area of sustainable development , and a programme for smart energy to continue previous support programmes in the energy sector with increased resources .
In the foreign policy field , as has indeed been our experience from the very beginning of this parliamentary term , greater demands will again be made on us .
We will have to continue our commitment in the Balkans , in order - among other things - not to put at risk the successes we have already achieved , and , as a European Union , we will be taking on new tasks .
To be precise , I refer here to the police operation in Bosnia-Herzegovina .
It is the Commission 's view that the international Police Task Force , at least as far as the operational costs of the joint operation are concerned , should be at least partly funded from the Community budget .
That , again , is of course a new step .
Mr Färm has pointed out , though , that it represents a new measure , but the Commission takes the view that it should also be seen to be a joint one .
The Council conceded the highest priority in 2003 to the issue of how this operation should be financed , and I believe that all three institutions are agreed in principle , but we must of course also agree on the conditions , that is , on how the resources from the common foreign and security policy are to be provided .
What , though , can of course very well happen with further measures for 2003 in the common foreign and security policy area is that the resources in category 4 , that is , in the foreign policy budget , will be insufficient to cover further measures for civil crisis management , and so it is my urgent appeal to the budgetary authority that they speedily examine the Commission proposal on the creation of a new financial instrument .
I think we should , in the coming months , as a matter of priority , discuss what ideas the budgetary authority have as regards further development of the budget line for the common foreign and security policy .
On foreign policy , I would further like to mention that we have promised Afghanistan that we will make aid available for the reconstruction of the country .
This year , in 2003 , and in the years to come , the people who , for 20 years , have lived through war and suffered oppression by the Taliban , will be in urgent need of aid .
This will continue to be a priority for the next few years .
Still on foreign policy , I would like to mention that we - or so , at any rate , I hope - will , in 2003 , be faced with a new task in respect of Cyprus .
Any political solution that we manage to bring about there will of course need to be backed up by financial resources .
Let me remind the House that the budget for assistance with preparations for enlargement includes only resources for the southern part of Cyprus and not for the northern part .
This , too , will confront us with a new challenge .
The Commission is also proposing , as overseas aid , to make a further contribution to the Global Health Fund .
It takes the view that its commitment to support the Barcelona process in the Mediterranean region should be reinforced , in particular by more offers of funding for the development of the private sector .
The Commission has therefore proposed to the Council the significant possibility of establishing a subsidiary of the European Investment Bank , and has already made provision in the Budget for a capital investment of EUR 25 million .
To return to preparations for enlargement , these mean for the institutions of the European Community definite additional human resources and tangible administrative measures .
Taking just one of the tasks as an example , the Commission must , starting from the first day of enlargement , audit State aid in the candidate states .
We also , of course , want participation in the Structural Fund or in the Agricultural Fund to work virtually from day one , so that there is no excessive time lag .
This means in real terms that administrative reconstruction must start as early as in the run-up to enlargement .
The Commission is therefore proposing the creation of 500 non-permanent positions within itself .
Why temporary staff ?
We would welcome the option of , as early as 2003 , appointing staff from the candidate countries to serve in the Commission .
Of course , we have to bear in mind the constrained position in category 5 , that is , the area of administrative expenditure .

On that , the Commission is in complete agreement with Mr Stenmarck 's report , and we have therefore included in our proposal the suggestion that staff should be made available for the new political priorities by means of reassignment , which makes it absolutely necessary - on which point , too , we agree completely with Mr Stenmarck - that the report submitted by the Secretaries-General , which is on the table , should be checked exhaustively to see where savings might be possible .
The Commission has submitted the first such ' screening ' and has nonetheless come to the conclusion that , in all probability , additional resources over and above category 5 will be required in 2003 in order to fund the measures in preparation for enlargement .
I see the proposal that the flexibility reserve be used for this purpose as being wholly concordant with the wording of the interinstitutional agreement , dealing as it does with a temporary situation , that of no resources having been set aside in the Financial Plan for the European institutions to prepare themselves for enlargement .
It is of course not acceptable to use the resources allocated to enlargement for that purpose in 2003 .
The Financial Plan does not permit it .
I do think though that the peculiar situation in 2003 means that we should check closely whether the instrument of the flexibility reserve can be used in this way .
One last word on the flexibility reserve : use will be made of it in any case , as , when dealing with the 2002 Budget last year , we had agreed that the last tranche from the specific restructuring programme for the Spanish and Portuguese fishing fleets would be made available in 2003 .
I think we are all aware that , just as in recent years , the European Budget will face fresh demands made on it in 2003 , but I note - and this is something I would like to underline - that the priorities set out in Parliament 's reports coincide to a marked degree with those set by the Commission .
I am therefore working on the assumption that the budget procedure will again see us summoning up together the flexibility and willingness to compromise that we need in order to meet the challenges of 2003 .
Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking Parliament 's rapporteur , Mr Färm , for his extremely cooperative and helpful approach to the budget this year .
For the first time in my parliamentary career I can honestly say I am looking forward to working with the Committee on Budgets on this year 's budget .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy fully supports the Commission 's reforms , which have increased its effectiveness and efficiency of delivery in the field of foreign affairs .
We have some concerns , however , for the 2003 budget .
Firstly , as we take on more responsibilities and as the Council goes around the world promising support here there and everywhere , insufficient thought seems to be given to where we get the money from .
If we are to maintain the ceilings as they are , the only ways we can pay for increased responsibilities are either through the increasing use of flexibility instruments - and we have reservations about that - or quite simply through cuts in other lines .
How can we maintain long-term programmes of support for the poorest parts of the world if we are constantly robbing Peter to pay Paul ?
We must try to address that question , or at least get the Council to address it .
Secondly , we must have greater transparency in the budget , and that has to begin with this year 's PDB .
Far too much time is spent playing hide-and-seek , trying to work out what the Commission is actually proposing and why it is proposing to do it .
It may be understandable to our budget junkies in the Committee on Budgets , but for us normal human beings most of it is incomprehensible .
We cannot have cooperation between Parliament and the Commission unless we have greater transparency .
Thirdly , we need to work harder still on implementation to make sure that we are spending the money and not just committing it , and that we are spending it in accordance with the priorities which are set out by Parliament during the budgetary procedure .
Fourthly , we must have greater clarity in financing the CFSP - particularly the difference between administrative and operational expenditure .
I would support the Commission 's proposal on civilian crisis management and oppose the Council 's clear intention of cutting Parliament and the Commission out of that .
Finally , we must take more effective action in the field of small arms and light weapons ; and if that is to be achieved , I believe it has to be moved into the first pillar .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there will again be elections to Parliament in 2004 .
European citizens , every one of them , will be wondering which piece of the cake they have got , and whether that cake had been fairly shared out .
I take the view , as a representative of the Group of the European People 's Party , that the cake that is being shared out is a big one , for the bigger the cake , the more fairly it can be shared out .
When theorising about how the cake should be shared out , we should , then , always consider the way we support and promote those who bake it .
As a matter of course , most of Europe 's bakers of cakes are small and medium-sized enterprises , which produce the cake by the sweat of their brows .
I believe that our most important future concern must be with those people who work in these enterprises , and , let me underline this , two thirds of workers are employed by these firms with fewer than 250 on the payroll .
What is of the utmost importance to us in the political world , they produce 80 % of taxes .
I believe , then , that we must get started where we have the best chance of future success .
We have all set ourselves the goal of becoming , in eight years ' time , the highest-performing and most competitive region in the world .
All I can say to that is that we urgently need to step on the gas if we are actually to achieve this objective , for our citizens ' sake .
We have had a few crises in recent years , such as , for example , the support given to the former Yugoslavia , the BSE crisis , and Afghanistan .
Now a package arrives in this House that gives me a lot to think about ; I mean the provisions of Basle II .
In essence , the provisions of Basle II are quite right .
We have to see to it that firms have sufficient equity and venture capital .
If these conditions are incapable of being fulfilled , regulations cannot be enforced .
If we want these provisions to be capable of being complied with - as we all do - then we need a Green Paper and a plan of action in good time , so that our small and medium-sized enterprises will again be able to pay their wages in 2005 .
In the event of Basle II entering into force without our having either a Green Paper or an action plan , then , in 2005 , when it enters into force , there will be mass lay-offs and mass bankruptcies .
We do not have much time left to us , and action is urgently needed .
This applies especially to firms in the countries that want to join the EU ; mention equity capital there , and you find that most firms do not have any at all , and that there , the borrowing of capital from outside sources , along with bank credit , prevail to the exclusion of all else .
If a liquidity squeeze means that small and medium-sized banks are unable to make cash and its equivalent available , then big problems are coming our way .
That we still have matters outstanding as regards a secure future was shown to us by 11 September .
We must see to it that we press on with security of energy supply by means of the Synergy , Energy , and Altener programmes .
We must look to research to make resources available for the post-2003 era .
Training and continuing education will demand enormous effort of us with ' e-learning ' and ' e-business ' .
The Trans-European Networks , too , are waiting to be made reality .
We must also see to it that the European Union becomes more active in the WTO .
We must ensure that its Parliamentary Assembly takes on a monitoring role as soon as possible , and we need financial resources for those parliamentary delegates from the least developed countries , who at present cannot even afford to travel to its meetings .
We must engage in training and continuing education there , for these are people we must integrate .
We have to show them how they too can make the cake as large as it can be .
of the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
( DA ) Mr President , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I too should like to thank Mr Färm and Mr Stenmarck for their work and willingness to cooperate .
We are particularly delighted that Mr Färm has supported the committee 's conclusions .
Those of us in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs are somewhat concerned to see the 2002 budget for our area down by 10 % on that for 2001 . We believe that the decisions taken in Lisbon with a view to creating the world 's most competitive and dynamic economy by 2010 , together with what will happen in this sphere in Barcelona at the end of the week , show that this is a high-priority area , and this must be reflected in the budget for 2003 .
We have noted that the Commission has this year attached importance to improving health and safety in the workplace , and we should like to see this too reflected in the budget for 2003 .
With regard to enlargement , it is important for us also to create funds for developing the social dialogue , or cooperation between the two sides of industry , in the candidate countries .
This too is a high-priority area for the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
I should particularly like to say something about the agencies .
We have four agencies , whose work we follow closely in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , and we think it important to remember that the agencies are different and should be treated differently .
They have different needs in terms of budgets .
Enlargement will also be of significance to how they develop , and the agencies ' tasks will change .
That is something which needs to be considered carefully when we look at the budget for 2003 .
It is important that the agencies should be treated individually and not all lumped together .
Moreover , we shall call upon other committees to cooperate more closely on how we are to look at the budgets for the agencies .
Finally , it is our view that we should attach importance to how the individual budget items are used , and there are some areas in which the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs will monitor carefully whether the Commission is seeing that matters are implemented .
Mr President , Commissioner Schreyer , from the point of view of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , the most important aspect of the budget is the codecision issue .
We need a decision by the Convention to the effect that agricultural policy is to be included in the full codecision procedure , so as to overcome the separation of compulsory and non-compulsory resources .
We must reach the point where we have full competence as regards the budget , including in agricultural matters .
When that has been achieved , we would like to be given the option of flexibility in the items in which the resources have not been used up .
Although that is already what we expect of the 2003 budget , we of course know that we have to reckon with resistance on fundamental decisions .
We take the view that the law of budgetary discipline has already cut back on the re-use of the compulsory resources or their use for other purposes , so that , if we increase outgoings , we have to have recourse to legislation , whilst the resources left over revert to the countries ' Ministers of Finance .
I can imagine that they would like that , but that can hardly be what Parliament intended .
Secondly , it is always being said that a lot of money is being spent .
I favour a thrifty budget , even in the agricultural sphere , but we must again point out that our EUR 20 billion puts us under the 1.27 % ceiling .
It is not advisable for a parliament to financially restrict itself in this way .
Politics always has to do with money - I mean that in a positive sense - and hence it would be sensible , and , from Parliament 's point of view , also in the Commission 's interests , not to overdo the austerity policy on these countries .
Thirdly , there is one point to which I would like to refer .
You said , Mrs Schreyer , that preparations for enlargement need to be intensified ; to date , EUR 30 million , which is hardly anything , has passed through the SAPARD programme framework .
Here there has been no preparation , and that is highly regrettable .
Let me again mention the proposal by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , which was , however , taken up by the Committee on Budgets , and under which we are this year instigating an INPARD and a LEADER programme , as could have been done last year .
Our intention with this is to facilitate the induction of the candidate countries into this bottom-up programme , so that they will be able to draw on the resources they need from the previous programmes after they have acceded .
Mr President , Commissioner , I am taking up this position on behalf of the Home Affairs Committee - we may well have the lowest outgoings in terms of the EU 's overall expenditure , but , on the other hand , we have , since 11 September , been working in an area that should have a very important role to play .
It is for this reason that I am very happy that both rapporteurs were very frank and that Mr Färm ended up by accepting our proposals and taking them on board .
This also shows that , after 11 September , we are dealing with concepts such as the combating and prevention of terrorism in such a way that we are taking this matter very seriously and are making our readiness clear to strengthen our own European authorities in this field such as Europol and Eurojust , and our will to be successful through them in this area .
My Committee saw as a second important point the theme of enlargement and the important issue of how we deal with borders in the first place .
This was not just through a desire to reinforce borders .
Of course , we do not want people to die at them - the Home Affairs Committee is very sensitive in matters concerning the combating of illegal immigration , and looks closely at what is actually achieved in this area and how effective is the form that the measures take .
On that , there are naturally certain things that we expect of 2003 .
Yet , despite counter-terrorism and police efforts on the one hand and action taken by border guards on the other , there is one thing we do not want to forget under any circumstances , that , in a democracy consisting of 15 states , soon indeed to be 25 , in the European Union , we also have an obligation to the people who travel to the European Union and live together with us .
This has led us to make a number of proposals relating to integration policy .
I am very grateful to my colleagues on the Committee on Budgets for their willingness to accept these proposals .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to address just three issues , three key words , in our debate today on the guidelines for planning the 2003 Budget .
Issue No 1 : enlargement , which will of course play a larger part in 2003 's Budget procedure than it has done in previous years .
Looking closely , though , at how much pre-accession aid can drain away today - and we have heard a certain amount about this in agriculture - there are still things that must be done both by us and by the candidate countries .
It is not enough to enable them to get the hang of the programmes and the management structures as well , and then require only 3500 posts up to 2008 , all of which is described as ' enlargement costs ' .
I wish , though , also to appeal to my fellow Members of this House , and warn against using budgetary sleight-of-hand to take money intended for enlargement under category 8 , shove it under category 7 and fund pre-accession aid from it .
That is not the Commission 's doing , but rather an amendment proposed by Members of this House .
I would ask them , in that event , to be honest , go home and tell their own Ministers of Finance that we need the Financial Perspective to be revised , and that enlargement is underfunded .
Using such tricks to try to fund enlargement is something I can only warn against .
I wish to express my gratitude to the Commission for the position they have taken on this subject , which also expresses the view of the Group of the European People 's Party .
Issue No 2 : foreign policy .
I will keep this very brief , and tell you once and tell you clearly that I am slowly getting steamed up by the fact that a lunch for the European Union 's Foreign Ministers costs us on average EUR 100 million .
That is just not practicable in the long term .
There is more to come .
We are now suddenly supposed to take over further activities , whereas the Member States said months ago that they would finance them themselves .
Let me mention only ' Amber Fox ' as a key example .
Now they are suddenly supposed to be funded by the Community budget , which is utterly extraordinary .
Let the Council state which of the European Union 's activities it can do without , and then funding can be provided on a serious basis .
Issue No 3 : agricultural policy .
I think we do not need to use the Budget procedure to reinvent agricultural policy , but I do of course expect the Commission to submit its proposals on the Mid-Term Review in good time , so that we are in a position to incorporate whatever is of budgetary value into the framework of the 2003 Budget procedure .
On that point , let me observe that , as the budgetary authority , our participatory roles in the rural development programmes and in the area of traditional income aid are different and that the Commission should please bear that in mind so that it can go ahead on time .
Let me conclude by thanking Mr Färm and Mr Stenmarck most warmly for their good cooperation .
I am sure that we will be able , by the end of the year , to present a sound Budget .
It should not be left to Parliament .
I hope that it is not left to the Council either .
Mr President , Commissioner Schreyer , let me , of course , start by thanking both our rapporteurs for the work they have done , which is outstanding .
I would like to take today 's debate on the guidelines as an opportunity to pause and do a sort of interim report .
We have completed the first half of our parliamentary term , and when we recall the tasks that faced us at its outset , what had to be funded by the Budget , what was made available to us and what we allocated to others , we see that the world has , of course , changed a great deal .
We have to deal with the problems of the world , which are not without their effects on us .
Europe has closed ranks , and we stand alongside the world .
We have taken on hitherto unmanageable tasks , and there are yet others for us to take on .
The field of foreign policy has been mentioned : extensive aid for reconstruction in the Balkans , aid for Afghanistan and for the people persecuted and harassed there , the fight against the global scourge of AIDS , the disarmament measures that we need to reduce not only the number of landmines but also chemical and biological weapons , and also , for example sending a police task force to the Balkans to ensure that peace can enter there .
The field of home affairs and judicial policy has , of course , see us agree , in the aftermath of the events of 11 September , to strengthen Europol and Eurojust and speed up their introduction ; one of the Commission 's new proposals is the expansion of civil protection in the event of emergencies .
In the Convention , we are discussing cross-border structures and future developments .
In the field of home affairs and judicial policy , we are discussing immigration and how to control it .
Enlargement has been described as a problem area , and in it we have a number of things to sort out both internally and externally ; whilst Mr Ferber says that there are calls to rethink the relationship between Categories 7 and 8 , we must also note that , as opposed to the original estimates , on the basis of which we assumed that the first six States could be added as early as 2002 , this position has of course changed , and that is something we have to be allowed to discuss .
We , too , see of course that there is a lack of uptake , and , where too little is taken up , we must not heap up even more .
Budgeting is not about demanding more ; it is about making proper use of the taxpayers ' available resources .
There is a need , though , to take note of realities as well ; everyone - including those Members of this House who even want to bake bigger cakes - has described the points we want to discuss together in order not to stage enlargement as a sort of cataclysm with the expectation of dramatic overnight change ; rather , we have to prepare ourselves .
We have to prepare the countries , and part of that involves , of course , our making appropriate provision and discussing it .
The capacity for taking the right decisions presupposes that we talk about them .
It is , in my opinion , irresponsible to simply stand up and say , for whatever simplistic reasons , that ' we cannot even think about that ' .
In the last few years , we have had to move reform of the Commission forward , but we also have internal problems that have to be discussed further .
The combating of unemployment must not be forgotten ; it is one of our central tasks , and one in which the cooperation procedure has of course enabled us to make progress already .
We want to prevent social exclusion .
We want to promote technological development and , to that end , to make promotional funds available for ' e-learning ' and the new technologies .
These great challenges , which have arisen in recent years , do not find us in a state of fear .
We face this challenge with a confidence which we want to make visible .
It is a good thing that this European Union of ours is working together , that we are increasingly trying to present a composite picture to the world we want to work with .
We are not sitting here or standing up and simply calling for more money .
We must look closely to find what options we have in this Budget .
This is , of course , something that any serious housekeeper must do , but we must also highlight the fact that we have other things to do ; if they are to work , if , on the one hand , the poor are not to be victims , if we want to help others who endure persecution , then we have to give some thought to how we treat each other .
This is not a demand for more money on tap ; it is about the purposeful use of money .
We have to look carefully at where our money is being spent .
Is the best possible use being made of it ?
If not , then we must redirect it , and apart from that nothing should be declared to be unthinkable .
It is not more money that we want , but its purposeful use , and we seek the resources that are needed for Europe to continue to develop in the way constantly , and rightly , called for in all their resolutions by members of the European People 's Party .
Mr President , I first wish to thank my Swedish colleagues , Göran Färm and Per Stenmarck , for their excellent reports .
Strengthening the guidelines for budgetary procedure is the first step in the drafting of next year 's budget .
My group stresses the importance of strict budgetary discipline .
This means that the budget should not include unnecessary appropriations and that economy should be a feature of financial management .
Proper budgeting leads to a decrease in payment arrears and promotes the implementation of budgeted programmes .
In this respect the figures in recent years have been disheartening .
In the year 2000 , EUR 8.5 billion in appropriations were unused , and last year the amount was as much as EUR 12 billion .
The situation is therefore alarming .
In no way does this reflect rigorous financial management : it is symptomatic of poor administration .
The Commission is unable to implement those areas of policy that Parliament has held to be important and for which it has authorised appropriations .
As a result , areas of policy are implemented unsatisfactorily , while at the same time the arrears - the unpaid commitments - grow .
There is no such massive degree of underutilisation in the administration of any Member State 's budget .
For that reason our group not only supports budgetary discipline but is also strongly in favour of the Commission 's programme of reform .
This is lent additional weight by the recent so-called new disclosures in the Commission 's administration .
The matter of personal accountability must be clarified and the power of decision-making delegated downwards in the organisation .
Accountability and result-oriented management are the key words here .
There are special requirements associated with enlargement .
The budget for 2003 may be the last one drafted for a Union of 15 Member States .
In this regard our group also believes that the appropriations connected with enlargement are absolutely crucial .
I wish the rapporteurs for the budget every success in their future work .
Mr President , our group can support the guidelines at this stage , but will make a judgement on the overall budget later in the year , depending on the outcome of various policy debates that are of key concern to us .
Firstly , the EU must be able to welcome new member states in the best possible circumstances , meaning that they must be able to fully benefit from the funds originally earmarked for them at Berlin by switching , if necessary , underspends from accession to pre-accession , depending on the pace of individual countries .
Secondly , another matter related to enlargement is the reform of the common agricultural policy .
Instead of getting into a heated debate about whether or not to give the new member states direct payments , would we not do better to concentrate our energies on reforming the common agricultural policy by encouraging integrated rural development schemes and sound environmental working practices suitable not only for the existing Member States but for our applicant countries too ?
The third area of concern is the funds available in category 4 ( external policy ) .
Every year we face new international crises and we want to help solve them .
We have a duty to help solve them , but if this has to be done year after year without new money , then of course we will run out of money and will have to make difficult decisions such as cutting off aid to one poor area to help another , or spreading our aid so thinly that it does not have the desired effect anywhere .
Surely this cannot be our aim .
Also in this respect , we would like to know to what extent countries which receive aid will be encouraged and enabled to tender for contracts in public works and services themselves , so as to give long-term benefits to their economies .
Mr President , the important area of focus in the draft budget for 2003 is enlargement .
Our group supports the view that savings from the budgeted enlargement expenditure for 2002 and 2003 can be used to finance enlargement in later years .
The rapporteurs think the important area of focus is the administrative reform of the Commission .
We are prepared to allow those Eurocrats who cannot be made fit for work through retraining to retire prematurely .
A sense of moderation will have to be observed when determining their pension benefits .
I would also like to draw your attention to how the Commission has managed to get round the staffing ceilings by employing officials whose salaries are paid by Member States .
There are 800 of them .
It is our group 's opinion that the rapporteurs do not insist forcefully enough on the clearance of the backlog of commitments that have not been forwarded for payment - the so-called RAL .
From one year to the next , the gap between commitments and payments is allowed to grow .
That means the Commission may well disregard implementation of the areas of focus specified by Parliament .
Our group would like to see the Commission include the RAL question in the areas of focus in its preliminary draft and safeguard the implementation of programmes to a greater extent than is now the case , including the implementation of Structural Funds programmes .
Our group sees immense problems with the margins in Section 4 of the budget .
There are none .
That is why the Commission must propose action in next year 's draft budget to ensure the implementation of political areas of focus under Section 4 .
While a certain amendment calls for considerable financial support for Afghanistan 's neighbouring countries , we should remember that all the former Soviet Republics , Uzbekistan , Kazakhstan , Tajikistan , Turkmenistan and Kyrgyzstan , are their presidents ' dictatorships , where there is no respect for human rights .
We also have to insist on democracy in those countries that are supposed to be our allies .
Our group also considers important the reconstruction of the Palestinian areas in the wake of the havoc wreaked by Israel .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by congratulating the rapporteurs , Mr Färm and Mr Stenmarck , on their work thus far .
I feel that before us are two sound documents which identify precisely what the budgetary priorities should be for the coming financial year .
Five political priorities have been identified : enlargement and preparation for enlargement , external assistance , internal security , reform of the institutions and reform of the Commission .
I feel that we can all agree on these points , particularly in view of the imperative need to provide the Union with adequate financial instruments for it to be able to see its priorities through .
In fact , to be honest , the growing battle against the Council and the Commission itself is not over which actions we should concentrate more on , namely combating terrorism and the reform of the institutions - which are indisputable priorities ; the problem arises when Parliament and the Council have different views on how these actions should be financed , when the Council refuses even to contemplate revising the financial perspective , when we continue to treat the flexibility instrument as an instrument whose use can be planned from year to year .
Clearly , there is something wrong !
In my opinion , this is the principal battle that Parliament will have to fight in the coming months , a battle in which we will have to succeed in presenting a united , fighting front .
Then at horizontal level - to use a technical term - three particular needs have been identified : the need for further budgetary monitoring at technical and political level , for example by means of budgetary hearings ; the need for the Commission to improve its spending capacity and , consequently , implementation considerably , in an attempt to prevent the creation of new RALs at source ; lastly - what the rapporteur wanted to point out to the Commission and the Council - the fact that they are bound to consult the European Parliament on all initiatives with significant budgetary impact , particularly in the context of non-compulsory expenditure .
On all three matters , I feel that the rapporteurs should be able to count on the support of us all .
Mr President , I note with satisfaction that enlargement is now being given top priority .
This is not a day too soon .
After all , if the negotiations run as the European Commission has envisaged , 10 countries will be joining the European Union from 2004 onwards .
The report by Mr Stenmarck , in particular , excels in terms of its clarity and effectiveness , and can count on our support .
Mr Färm , too , is right to accord enlargement the prominence that it deserves .
With regard to his report , I should like to comment on the recommendations pertaining to category 4 .
This section conveys an excessive tendency towards political influence at global level , under the pretext of safeguarding the Union 's credibility in the world .
Is the aid that is now being proposed for Afghanistan more than a fig-leaf for the half-hearted support to the United States , which , together with Great Britain , pulled the chestnuts out of the fire ?
This is a politically and financially risky operation , for with economic assistance , which Mr Färm advocates , comes political support to the Middle East .
The Union appears particularly sympathetic towards the Palestinians and not towards the Israeli citizens .
For a start , the foul methods which Palestinian terrorists use to cause death and destruction are worrying .
The counter attacks by the Sharon administration , however painful they are , are a response to this .
Furthermore , there is reason for great concern with regard to the Commission 's policy .
How can the Commission make annual contributions to the Palestinian Authority to the tune of EUR 180 million , while corruption is at its highest ?
By using racist and anti-Semitic language , the Palestinian schools teach hatred rather than reconciliation .
How long can the Commission wash its hands of this ?
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I in turn congratulate the two rapporteurs , Mr Färm and Mr Stenmarck , on their work .
I also think that these are two good documents that will enable the budgetary procedure to run smoothly and that constitute a good working plan for Parliament , the Commission and the Council .

In particular , I would like to say a few words about the Stenmarck report , first of all to congratulate the rapporteur , and also to express my pleasure in seeing my idea accepted , that of increasing our use of the Internet and making this institution truly transparent by eventually broadcasting our debates , and even debates in our committees , in full on the Internet .
The Secretary-General , who is present today , is familiar with this document .
I think this is a step forward that we must follow through .
Parliament is an institution which , let us say , is a symbol .
It runs the risk of not being very visible , as , for security reasons , a subject we are very familiar with , access to our work itself is somewhat restricted , although we maintain the principle of public meetings .
I therefore think it is important to use the Internet .
However , let us say that I am a little surprised to see an amendment by the PPE-DE , I think , which is the new version of paragraph 15 stating that the administration of Parliament would be held in greater esteem if it were efficient , coherent and politically balanced .
I find the concept of political balance very interesting as this basically means that employees must be chosen so as to maintain a balance between the groups .
However , to my knowledge , for the past 20 years or so , the only transfers that have taken place have been between the two main groups and , as a result of this , at least one third of the Members of Parliament did not benefit from this .
I think that the administration is fine as it is and that it does not need to be rebalanced by means of a system that , in Italy , we call the ' Cencelli ' system , which , moreover , worked very well at the time of the last nominations .
Ladies and gentlemen of the PPE-DE , I think that that is sufficient and that we are balanced enough as we are .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism believes that Parliament , as the budgetary authority , must be regularly informed about the execution underway for structural actions so that the alarm can be raised in terms of the application of the sunset clause .
With regard to the application of the additionality principle , which is an extremely important issue , the Commission must establish the means for its verification and control on the ground .
Halfway through the period of application of the funds , the Commission should inform Parliament about the evaluation of its compliance on the basis of objective criteria .
Furthermore , we ask the Commission , by means of appropriate solutions , to support the idea that the structural allocation should be considered a spending objective .
In relation to the budget line for the trans-European transport network we note that the level of budgetary implementation over recent years is satisfactory and we recommend giving priority to projects with a clear European added value , stressing the importance of the funding of projects which provide a rebalance between modes of transport .
We in the European Parliament also urge the Member States to use the Structural Funds while paying more attention to transport infrastructures , in particular intermodal transport and less polluting forms of transport .
Naturally , in the case of land transport , they must pay particular attention to the railways , from the point of view of respect for the environment .
Commissioner , at this decisive point for the European Union , prior to enlargement , the Member States , with the support of the Commission , will have to achieve greater efficiency in the application of the Structural Funds with the cooperation of the regions and local groups they are destined for .
Only in this way will we come closer to the economic and social cohesion which , together with political union , is the great objective of the European institutions and citizens .
Mr President , I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Färm , who is a true friend of development .
I look forward to working closely with him during the course of this year .
In my contribution I should like to refer to paragraph 26 of the report , which states explicitly to the Commission , on behalf of this Parliament , that we are not satisfied that development aid is sufficiently focused on poverty eradication and that we need to build on the agreed benchmark system .
Let me explain that for everyone 's benefit .
Two years ago Parliament voted a series of input targets on development aid to ensure that the large amount of spending that takes place through the regional budget lines was actually held to account and to insist that more be focused on social infrastructure , and in particular on basic health and education policies .
The extent to which the Commission took action in this regard is questionable , particularly as Mrs Schreyer herself issued a so-called reservation , something that this Parliament does not recognise .
Last year , therefore , when we undertook the same discussions , we had further and more intensive deliberations with both external relations Commissioners , Mr Patten and Mr Nielson , and agreed that a minimum of 35 % of EU external assistance would be focused on social infrastructure , and in particular on basic health and education .
I say to the Commissioner this morning and to this Parliament that we are relying on this being implemented this year within the budget and we will , as we say in this resolution , be looking to build on it next year .
I would also like to say in relation to paragraph 33 that it is a matter not just of development aid to the African , Caribbean and Pacific countries , but also of the funds to Asia , Latin America , the Mediterranean and other regions .
All of it should be poverty-focused .
The Commission has brought forward a development policy statement and it is time , through the budget , that it matched its words with deeds .
Mr President , I would like to join those of my colleagues who have already thanked our two rapporteurs , Mr Färm and Mr Stenmarck , for their very helpful contributions to our debates this morning .
On the Commission , firstly , I would like to see us having an ongoing monitoring of the budget to follow up the work of our colleague Mr Costa Neves in last year 's budget .
I think this is particularly relevant as we have now changed the way in which the work programme of the Commission is formulated so as to have more input from our specialised committees .
I fully support that particular point .
Secondly , I would like to join with what our colleagues and in particular Mr Titley have said so far about foreign affairs expenditure .
I guess it is the big spenders from the Foreign Affairs Committee who are seeing all these commitments being made and we in the Budgets Committee who are querying where the money is coming from .
It seems to me that we need a priority-setting , forward-thinking agenda , which is why we are supporting the idea of a study , so that we in the Budgets Committee should have an idea where the money is coming from .
Lastly , we would like to know if the reform of the institutions has continued .
I would like to ask the Commissioner when we can expect a final decision on the early retirement scheme .
Insofar as the Parliament budget is concerned , we support those colleagues who have criticised the Administration for trying to suppress the EP-rom study .
We need a proper resource management discussion in this Parliament , and , particularly , we would like to see a coherent , effective and politically balanced Administration .
The reason for that comment , Mr Dell 'Alba , was precisely because there had been parachutages .
There is an imbalance in the Administration and I would like to be sure that the Administration is seen from the outside as being effective and politically balanced .
Secondly , insofar as the political groups are concerned , to ensure effective control of the Administration , we would like to see them strengthened .
Lastly , in terms of enlargement , we would like to be sure that in interpretation we have controlled multilingualism ; that in translation , we are looking at the aspects of teleworking ; and , above all , in the buildings , that we do not take on any commitments to construct new buildings until we know they are absolutely essential .
Mr President , I add my congratulations to the rapporteurs on the work that has been done but have one criticism to make on the guidelines in general , which is not necessarily the fault of the rapporteurs , but of the committee and the other committees .
Guidelines should be just that and they should be concise .
They should not form a volume on the scale of Great Expectations , which is what they invariably turn out to be .
There are 41 paragraphs in Mr Färm 's report , 34 paragraphs in Mr Stenmarck 's report and another 38 amendments to vote on later on .
That is my gripe .
I would like to make a couple of points on each report .
The first is on the Färm report .
The problems highlighted concern categories 4 and 5 and I would like to bring to Members ' and Parliament 's attention the fact that these issues were raised with the Spanish presidency at the trialogue meeting to try and find some sort of solution .
On category 4 the Commission has made proposals for a new flexibility instrument for humanitarian aid .
I said then , and I say again now , that as far as the Council is concerned hell will freeze over before it agrees to a new flexibility instrument .
What we did propose - and what may be negotiated with the Council - was to use existing humanitarian aid reserves and to find wording , without changing the legislation , to make sure we can use them for the problems we find ourselves with in category 4 .
Regarding category 5 : how do we fit everything into the existing ceilings ?
With great difficulty , unless we make some radical changes .
The one thing we have asked the Council to do is to try and find an agreement on these two items during the July conciliation procedure .
Rather than drag them out until the conciliation procedure in November or our second reading in December , it would be beneficial to everyone if we could resolve those two issues , in principle , in July .
I now turn to Mr Stenmarck 's report .
One part relates to category 5 , where the Committee on Budgets has created a working group to look at administration expenditure in all the institutions .
The reason for doing this was to get some political commitment from the Council to do exactly the same thing or to do it with us .
That has not yet been forthcoming , but we live in hope .
For those Members who have seen the comments in our working documents , do not be too fearful of them .
We are trying to look at things that people would not normally touch , but to at least stimulate some debate .
Finally , the Stenmarck report touches on what Mr Elles has just mentioned , that is the reference in paragraph 15 to a politically balanced Administration in Parliament .
Sometimes we vote on things which on reflection we regret .
To have a comment asking for our Administration to be politically balanced would not give the right signals to the outside world .
The term ' politically neutral ' would be far more acceptable .
I am one of those people who think that civil servants should be politically neutral .
They should not wear political colours .
I also believe that people in the civil service should win promotion because of their ability , not because of their political allegiance .
A split vote has been asked for on that matter and I would ask all groups to consider carefully how they will vote .
Mr President , I too should like to congratulate both rapporteurs .
I wish them every success .
I concur with the Commission in terms of the priorities .
I share the views of others and particularly those of Mr Wynn , who said a moment ago that categories 4 and 5 will cause the greatest difficulties .
As far as I am concerned , category 4 should not contain any holy cows .
It must be possible to use money that has been budgeted , and we should not end up in a situation whereby we receive various claims in the course of the year on unused funding that was budgeted for a specific purpose for which it may not be used .
I would therefore urge the Commission to assess the needs very carefully .
The same applies to category 5 .
From the most recent trialogue meeting , I understand that there is a shortage of only 48 million .
Given the total , this is a very small amount .
I have seen a draft letter in this respect .
The Commission should check with all institutions whether it is still possible to find an amount of around 48 million that can be saved elsewhere .
If this is the case , we would remain within the financial perspectives and the flexibility instrument would not be needed for the time being , which means that it can be used in other areas .
Mr President , it goes without saying that I can support the guidelines in general terms , but I would wish to observe that it is , in my view , to be welcomed that the EU is preparing well for the planned enlargement .
We must not , though , overlook the fact that the costs of this should not mushroom , as explosive growth in cost would jeopardise Europe 's stability and that of the euro .
This would happen , for example , if enlargement were to increase the burden on the Member States ' budgets still further .
Support should also , of course , be given to agricultural reforms redirecting resources from the market promotion to rural development .
A particular concern of mine continues to be the reinforcement of small and medium-sized businesses , and so I hope that Amendment No 5 , which deals with this , will be adopted by a large majority , so as to prevent the implementation of Basle II having adverse effects on SMEs .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , my group would like to congratulate both rapporteurs and vote in favour of their reports .
As the Chairman of the Committee on Budgets , Terry Wynn , has said , our group also wants very specific budgetary guidelines and not a shopping list .
The guidelines are a political message which we send to the Commission and the Council regarding the form we want the budget to take ; the more specific the message is , the more chance there is of it being understood .
For next year , the situation of categories 3 , 4 and 5 is very worrying ; we have already mentioned it : we are very close to the upper limit and in category 5 we are really above it .
My group still defends the Berlin financial perspectives , but we accept the strictness of the figures , especially those referring to enlargement .
Therefore , the Costa Neves report on the 2002 budget proposed real alternatives , in particular an improvement in the quality of budgetary execution both in the Commission and in the Member States , and we want to see results this year .
Furthermore , we must stress that there is a lack of a genuine spirit of interinstitutional cooperation in the budgetary field .
The budgetary procedure should not be a game in which some institutions seek to gain power at the expense of others .
We will not achieve anything that way .
The financial Regulation or the response to Parliament 's demand that the legislative and budgetary procedures be updated are two clear examples of the fact that interinstitutional cooperation is still unsatisfactory .
We expect a more positive response from the Commission and , in particular , the Council , in those two areas which are so important to our group and to the whole of Parliament .
I would like to end by mentioning an example of the opposite : the good example of interinstitutional cooperation provided by the funding of the Convention 's budget , on which the three institutions have come to an agreement in order to move ahead without conflict .
Mr President , I suppose that the total absence of the Council must be a mark of respect so that we feel more comfortable during our own debates .
Mr President , I will focus on the aspects relating to the financial perspectives .
The 2002 budget has hardly begun to be implemented and we are already preparing for the launch of the 2003 budget and we can see that many of the problems of the last three financial years are reappearing , perhaps even in a more serious form .
The financial perspectives are even less sufficient for the requirements .
An exponential increase in activities is expected within a financial framework which has seen hardly any arithmetical growth .
Ladies and gentlemen , on this issue , the great innovation of the 2003 procedure is that heading 5 - administrative expenses - is also bursting at the seams .
In 1999 , when we negotiated the current interinstitutional agreement , we managed to modify the figures in heading 5 , but with perspectives which , as a result of shortsightedness , are now insufficient .
The general forecasts , including those of the Council , exceed the ceiling of the financial perspectives by EUR 125 million , with the contribution of a growth of 9 % for the budget of the Council , which will now ask for cuts , while criticising the bad execution of some policies .
I would like to avoid cheap demagoguery , amongst other things , because there are no vast numbers of officials in Brussels , where the number of bureaucrats is less than those in the municipal authorities of Berlin , Stockholm or Madrid .
Heading 4 - external policy - is still inevitably doomed to failure .
Every year we have forced the flexibility instrument in order to implement external policy .
Now we are attaching increasing importance to the fight against poverty , which is a great thing , but which is essentially , in the current context , a reflection of the bad conscience of the wealthy Europeans , but we are not implementing external policy .
And that is an issue of enormous concern to me .
Finally , ladies and gentlemen , heading 7 poses a serious problem which is very easy to understand .
Heading 7 - pre-accession - since 2002 only had to assist the five countries which were not then Members .
And now , Mr President , we have ten candidate countries which are sharing the money intended for five , without taking account of the fact that Malta and Cyprus , on a whim of the Council , come within heading 4 .
All of this should be reviewed , Mr President .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have been given the opportunity to speak on Section III of the 2003 budget , having monitored the report in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on behalf of my group , that of the European People 's Party .
I therefore want primarily to set out the concerns behind the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development 's amendments to this report by Mr Färm , whom I will take this opportunity of warmly thanking for his work .
Today we are not discussing the 2003 budget , but the budget guidelines which express our fundamental thinking , and I am here to present that of my group in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
For a start , we want , in the first instance , resources from Chapters B1-1 to B1-4 to be capable of being carried over individually to the following year .
In the long term , though , we also want compulsory and non-compulsory resources to be able to be carried over , something that presupposes Parliament 's right of codecision in agricultural matters .
Secondly , we have a further demand with regard to the increase in the flexibility reserves with a view to potential crises and emergencies .
Thirdly , even though the majority on the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development voted differently on this point , we are opposed to the introduction of the INPARD programme , which will lead only to a further fragmentation of the resources , demand for which on the part of the candidates for accession has been slack .
A supplementary programme of this sort will , moreover , bring only additional bureaucracy in its train .
Fourthly , and - for us - most importantly , the 2003 Budget is not to be used to prejudge the mid-term review of Agenda 2000 .
In this report , we do not want agricultural reform right now .
What we need is a further development of European agricultural policy .
The resolutions on Agenda 2000 are for us the binding foundation .
The agricultural budget must not become a quarry for every kind of desirable commodity , but must set forth a reliable agricultural policy option .
Mr President , 2003 will be a key year in terms of preparation for enlargement .
Therefore , it is disappointing that the report on the other institutions does not really grasp this challenge and , I believe , has missed an opportunity to build on the reform agenda that Parliament had embarked upon in the last few years .
I have three main issues I wish to touch briefly on .
Firstly , I am concerned about the lack of perspective and the narrowness of the focus .
There is far too much concentration on Parliament , and the other institutions do not appear to merit much comment .
I understand that the rapporteur did not have an opportunity to visit Luxembourg before the vote in the Committee on Budgets ; that might explain the lack of emphasis .
I hope this is not seen as a negative message by them .
Secondly , it is imperative that we iron out some of the contradictions and inconsistencies in the report .
With reference to staffing , the report calls for a politically balanced Administration .
This is a ludicrous statement and I completely disagree with what Mr Elles said earlier .
My understanding of the Executive of this and of many other Parliaments across the world is that the Administration is generally neutral .
I have grave concerns about what has been suggested and the implication that the Administration is not neutral or that it should not be , and I shudder to think of the consequences of this .
Are we really going to ask the staff to tick a political affiliation box before they are appointed to a new job ?
Even more fundamentally , this runs in direct contradiction to the emphasis that the Committee on Budgets has put in this report , on the staff appointment or promotion always being based on ability and merit .
That is the principle I wholeheartedly support .
Therefore , I would urge the rapporteur to distance himself from such negative statements .
These sentiments , if carried , will be to the detriment of the standing of Parliament .
Thirdly , with respect to the freelancing of translation and interpreters , I have no problems with improving efficiency and exploring ways to achieve this , but the statement we have here is an ideological standpoint with no evidence to support the assertion that freelance translation will be more cost-effective and of the quality required to meet Members ' needs .
This also runs in direct contradiction to the emphasis in the report on developing the Podestà report further with regard to the linguistic regime for enlargement .
Speaking on behalf of the Socialist Group , we are interested in working in cooperation with the rapporteur at the next stage when we get to estimates , to strengthen the report and to achieve consensus in this key budget area .
However , cooperation is only achievable if it is a two-way process .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate rapporteur Färm on his initial ideas .
However , as the PPE-DE 's shadow rapporteur for fisheries , I do regret that the Group of the Party of European Socialists has not decided to issue a report on the fisheries budget at this stage .
I should still like to highlight a few salient points which will prove important in future discussions .
The year 2002 was marked by the failure of the fisheries agreements with Morocco .
As a result , less than EUR 200 million were set aside for the regions in Spain and Portugal .
On that basis , it was decided to take 243 vessels out of circulation .
For the 2003 budget , it is important to find out whether this is actually being done , whether this is being monitored and how the Commission reports to Parliament on that score .
Why ?
Because the 2003 fisheries budget will be based on this year 's Green Paper and because the discussion about future fisheries policy will be concluded this year .
It is very likely that the Green Paper will be a painful document , considering the situation of cod fishing in Scotland and the far-reaching implications of that .
Some form of restructuring will be needed there .
It is also important to find out how the programme in Spain and Portugal will be implemented in 2003 .
As a second point we also have , when we consider biodiversity , the problems in aquaculture .
Here too , it will be necessary to examine the budget very closely and to assess to what extent it can be used for this purpose .
This is also in anticipation of the discussion on the Green Paper and the implementation of existing programmes .
On that basis , it is important for the Commission to take elements of this kind into consideration , to link the 2003 budget to the Green Paper and particularly to make political choices in that area , also with regard to the budget .
This will be the PPE-DE 's main issue and line of thought .
Mr President , I too would like to thank the two rapporteurs for their hard work .
I would particularly like to congratulate Mr Färm on the part of the report which concerns internal policies , which includes a clear , explicit reference to policies for the elderly , who represent an increasingly significant proportion of our society .
The report rightly focuses on both social integration and the importance of ensuring dynamic economic growth .
However , I would like to draw your attention to and focus on a different matter .
I refer to Argentina , a country which does not currently appear to be following the path of economic growth that we are but which merits a special effort on our part .
Argentina 's current situation raises disturbing questions regarding the future of the country , a land of immigration which , in the past , has absorbed thousands upon thousands of citizens from all over Europe .
I feel that , not least in order to prevent the crisis spreading to the neighbouring countries , the European Union needs to give a specific sign of its commitment .
I have tabled an amendment to that effect together with Mr Naranjo Escobar , which I hope the House will adopt .
With regard to the Stenmarck report , I would like to thank its author for incorporating so accurately the sense of controlled multilingualism , that is the need to balance the requirement that all the Members should be able to express themselves in their own language with indisputable budgetary requirements .
Lastly , one more point : there is a phrase which should perhaps be expressed differently .
I refer to that part which states that the administration must be ' politically balanced ' .
In my opinion , the expression ' politically neutral ' would certainly have been much more acceptable .
Mr President , Commissioner , in view of the initial positions of the Council and the Commission , this budgetary procedure deals with the challenge of being capable of contributing to the historic task of enlargement and funding the reform of the working methods of our institutions .
The reports by Mr Färm and Mr Stenmarck reflect Parliament 's concerns and priorities in relation to these issues and I therefore join in congratulating them on their excellent work .
The budgetary guidelines must be based on elements which are of interest to the citizens : the objective of full employment and the Union 's solidarity policies .
And , before mentioning other aspects , I would like to thank the Commissioner for her expressed commitment for 2003 to fund the last stage of the structuring programme for the fishing fleets .
The budget for 2003 faces difficulties similar to those of recent years and rather more serious in the field of administrative expenditure .
Furthermore , the Union 's commitments in external aid and the continuous demands of the security and defence policy must receive a budgetary response compatible with the rights of Parliament and the financial framework in force .
In this respect , we must carefully analyse the Commission 's proposal on the creation of a new budgetary mechanism to confront the implications of the crisis .
In the field of management we may come across difficulties in payments , despite the fact that year after year we have a surplus .
It is therefore necessary to have detailed knowledge of the final amount resulting from the non-execution of the spending commitments and , likewise , to know the evaluations necessary in the medium term of the multiannual commitments of policies funded by means of heading 3 .
This could provide us with a margin for flexibility in order to more efficiently adapt political priorities to the available resources .
Finally , I would point out that the citizens have offered an historic example of confidence by accepting the euro without hesitation and they have shown us the way forward .
The Union 's budget must reflect this confidence and contribute to strengthening the policies of the States aimed at full employment , solidarity and economic growth .
Mr President , I would just like to go over again a number of remarks made in the very interesting discussion on the priorities for the budget year 2003 .
First , the issue of the low take-up of resources in the last two years of the structural policy .
Mr Puerta had called for the Commission to be constantly giving information about the use to which Structural Fund resources are put .
Let me again point out that the Commission supplies information on this to the Committee on Budgets and to the Committee on Budgetary Control on a weekly basis .
The Structural Fund stipulates that the Member States must be reimbursed in respect of the resources provided by them ; if the implementation of the Structural Fund in the Member States is held up , we cannot of course carry out the refund .
It is with regret that we note here that the new Structural Fund programmes have taken longer to implement than the Financial Perspective had originally envisaged .
I see the consequence of that as being that the next Financial Perspective will require the Council 's and Parliament 's decisions to be produced earlier in order to guarantee better implementation .
As regards the issue of bottlenecks in individual categories , I would just like to point out that the European budget for 2002 faces us with a situation which is out of the ordinary and will assuredly not continue in the coming years .
The fact is that this year we are far , far below what financial planning estimated , to the tune of EUR 4.6 billion below it !
None of the Member States comes near matching us on budgetary discipline of that sort .
Next year , then , we will need more resources for the Structural Fund , as the Member States are demanding that all the programmes should run for longer , something which should actually have been concluded a long time ago , and hence the situation will look rather different .
It is , despite that , possible to state already that the Agricultural Policy will probably not require all the resources estimated .
This means that economies are to be reckoned with .
Budget technique does not , unfortunately , make it possible to use savings in any one sector to fund new foreign policy requirements or the preparation of the institutions for enlargement .
Such a redirection is not possible , and the only means available to us is the flexibility instrument .
With reference to enlargement , I would once again like to clarify that what financial planning provided for the financing of new Member States in 2003 was provided exclusively for that purpose .
We cannot redirect that , and also reject the option of doing so , but we do have the flexibility instrument .
Let me again point out that , as soon as enlargement is completed , new resources will be allocated to administration .
It is only for the preparations that they have not been set aside .
If enlargement is to be successfully handled , though , preparations for it will be of fundamental importance , and they must be made in 2003 by all the institutions - Parliament , the Council , the European Court of Justice , the European Court of Auditors , and by the Commission as well .
We are not talking here about excessive sums of money , but in terms of amounts that would still leave room in the flexibility reserve for other measures .
We should subject this instrument to serious testing in this respect .
It is the citizens of the new Member States , above all , who are entitled to European institutions that are prepared and ready to make a success of enlargement .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
The next item is the joint debate on the following two reports :
A5-0077 / 2002 by Mr Turmes and Mr Rapkay on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directives 96 / 92 / EC and 98 / 30 / EC concerning common rules for the internal market in electricity and natural gas ( COM ( 2001 ) 125 - C5-0184 / 2001 - 2001 / 0077 ( COD ) ) ;
A5-0074 / 2002 by Mr Mombaur on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on conditions for access to the network for cross-border exchanges in electricity ( COM ( 2001 ) 125 - C5-0185 / 2001 - 2001 / 0078 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , I assume that the Commissioner with responsibility for these matters is in the building .
Should we not perhaps wait half a minute until Mrs de Palacio is here to listen to us ?
Mr Turmes , as you yourself can see , she is not here at the moment , and so I would like to ask Commissioner Schreyer to carry on representing the Commission here until Mrs de Palacio arrives .
We cannot , though , have a break , as that would disrupt the timetable .
Mr President , your reminder a moment ago to us to keep strictly to our speaking time leads me to make my fundamental observation and ask all of you in the Bureau to give consideration to how Parliament works .
The law we are drafting will completely overhaul the market in energy , which is one of the key markets in Europe , one that is worth billions , and we allow each rapporteur to speak for just five minutes - five minutes in which we really cannot make any sensible points .
That , then , we even have to divide up again between the two rapporteurs , because , strictly speaking , we have only one directive , but its two dossiers mean that there are two rapporteurs .
The Commissioner , who is just entering the Chamber , will then have the opportunity to say something , provided it is something amusing !
There is no doubt about it , I do not begrudge her that , but our having to limit ourselves in political debate in such a way strikes me as positively catastrophic .
I have just said that we are going to change the structures of the market .
What we actually have in the European Union is not an internal market ; rather , we have 15 submarkets which , in themselves , are more or less open , but which vary widely as to their degree of openness .
That is still much more the case in the market for gas than in the market for electricity .
If , though , we want to exploit the efficiency gains of an internal market , then what we need is not the addition of 15 submarkets , but an integrated , common , internal market .
Efficiency gains to enable business - especially small and medium-sized enterprises - to improve its competitiveness , efficiency gains for consumers in terms of favourable prices , and efficiency gains for the environment , gained through the careful use of resources .
The open market that we want is not a matter of ' laissez-faire ' or of everyone doing as they please .
We need rules for all the participants in this integrated market , rules that they can make sense of , rules that they can apply in a similar manner .
We need , then , the access of all market participants to the networks and other system installations to be utterly transparent and free of discrimination , as otherwise distortions of competition will come into being .
We therefore need a unitary regulatory framework , such as we do not as yet possess , the consequence of that being that we have a divided market and a system that in practice works virtually nowhere , with the possible exception of in one Member State in an island situation ; it is not yet working anywhere else .
We need a regulatory framework that sets objectives , lays down binding standards , and creates machinery and applicability across the board .
Our problem is now that we have , of course , 15 different Member States , and the structures of these 15 Member States differ widely .
The overall conditions of a country with 700 or more network operators are quite different from those of a Member State with only one network .
What matters , though , is that the regulatory framework should have binding effect , with its application being monitored and with sanctions being imposed in the event of non-compliance .
That is what is at stake , and , that being so , we must correct some of what the Commission originally proposed in its amending directive in order , on the one hand , that the objectives of the different systems in the Member States should be standardised , and , on the other , that their home-grown structures should remain compatible to some small degree .
How the institutions and authorities in a Member State then guarantee that this happens is a matter for the Member State itself .
All that is needed is for it to be clear and reliable for all participants in the market .
So much for what we , as legislators , can actually regulate .
I want to use the seconds remaining to me just to ask the Commission for something .
It so happens that we currently have different conditions applying to electricity and gas respectively .
On the whole , we produce electricity ourselves in the internal market .
For gas , we are increasingly dependent on imports from third countries .
I believe that , from the competition and competitiveness angle , we will have the important task of introducing competition among producers .
I know this is a problematic issue , as the suppliers are generally from outside the EU , but this would be a task on which , as a whole , we would have to work together , as , without supply-side competition of this kind , we will never have more than restricted competition in the European market .
Mr Rapkay , I share your unease about how much time we have to spend on such an important matter .
I might take the liberty of pointing out , however , that it is the Conference of Presidents which draws up the agenda and not the Bureau .
In my experience the great and the good spend much more time on so-called political matters than they do on things which have to do with real life .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to address cross-border trade in electricity .
As the committee 's rapporteur , may I say that the committee supports the Commission 's proposal for a regulation .
Cross-border trading must finally get underway so that producers can supply other Member States , enabling competition to be introduced between existing suppliers across the EU .
There are five preconditions for this .
Firstly , the networks which operate the transit flows need to have their costs reimbursed from a fund .
Secondly , it will only work if the same conditions apply throughout Europe , that is if there is regulation .
Thirdly , both producers and consumers have to pay into the fund .
Fourthly , these producer payments need to be standardised in the Member States to avoid any party being at a competitive advantage .
Fifthly , there must be no internal duties , so no payments by so-called importers and exporters - which are in any case an odd concept in an internal market - and there must be no distance-related tariffs .
What counts here is physics and not the law .
I should like to make three concluding comments on this issue .
The place where the electricity is generated is significant .
This depends on many factors .
The committee will no doubt be flexible , even if additional so-called price signals , which meet the criteria that I have mentioned , are developed and applied .
In Florence , the regulators , the networks and the Commission are of course reflecting on this .
The committee is not proposing to change the competences in the comitology procedure or in the fora .
Since this is codecision , however , we propose that the situation be reviewed after four years to ascertain whether the procedure advocated here meets the requirements of codecision .
After all , the regulators in the Member States and the experts , for example the network operators , should be involved in a regulatory process .
The regulation should not come into force before the directives which also legislate on changes in the electricity and gas markets .
This brings me to my second subject .
Here I should like to make a few comments not in my capacity as rapporteur but as a member of the committee , and specifically , Madam Vice-President , for you to take with you to Barcelona .
Firstly , the Member of the Council which still only wants partial market opening - and we know exactly which one this is - is in contravention of the Treaties .
I should like to make this absolutely clear here and it is also in the committee 's motion for a resolution .
These Treaties guarantee all EU citizens the freedom of establishment , the freedom to provide services and the freedom of movement of goods across the EU .
These freedoms will only be implemented once all electricity and gas consumers are able to select their suppliers from across the EU .
Only then will we have achieved conformity with the Treaties .
Secondly , if a Member State wishes to treat all the households in its country equally - for example all those between Lille and the Pyrenees - it may do so ; it is free to make that decision .
However , it can invite tenders for the work and ask which competitor is the most suitable and best qualified for the job .
A supply monopoly cannot be justified .
This too violates current law .
It lends credence to the suspicion that people are lining their pockets illegally .
Perhaps I might make the following additional points on the reports .
We support free choice for all consumers across the EU .
We are in favour of all suppliers having access to the technical networks , which need to be managed in separate companies to prevent discrimination against certain types of supplier and to prevent abuse of dominant position within a company .
We are in favour of having regulatory systems in the Member States to ensure that this is the case .
So far - and here I fully agree with my fellow MEP , Mr Rapkay - this has not been satisfactorily resolved in any Member State .
Like the Council I support a solution which takes account of the heterogeneity of the national network structures .
Mr President , the Commission 's proposals for fully liberalising the internal market in electricity and natural gas in the Member States of the European Union are , in our view , on the right track , which is why the rapporteurs , Mr Turmes , Mr Rapkei and Mr Mombaur , basically endorsed them .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs took the same position and unanimously approved my opinion and my amendments , almost all of which were included by the rapporteurs in their reports , for which I thank them .
The prevailing view , I think , is that the liberalisation of the internal market in electricity and natural gas is : one , way behind schedule and is being systematically obstructed by monopoly interests on the part of the private sector , the trades union and the national governments , and not just in France ; two , that there are huge differences from one country to another .
For example , Great Britain has fully liberalised , while France is doing exactly the opposite and the same applies , unfortunately , to my own country ; three , as a result of the foregoing , there are serious disruptions in the working of the internal market , competition is being distorted and , consequently , prices are being squeezed at the expense of competitiveness both in the energy production sector and between European companies and in the consumer sector and , four , this delay is hampering cross-border transactions on these markets .
There is no single market , nor do I foresee one in the immediate future .
The Lisbon objectives of a dynamic and competitive European Union with full employment depend on a competitive internal market in electricity and natural gas .
And the proposed independent authorities and the abolition of state intervention , which uses pricing policy as a way of exercising social policy will help here somewhat .
Instead of prices which undercut production costs and block competition , it is better to find other ways of exercising social policy , for example by reducing taxes .
Finally , any delay in opening up these markets will deter private companies and foreign investment in the energy sector and in the European Union in general and will not therefore increase employment , which is supposed to be the ultimate objective .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market first and foremost studied the comitology procedure .
This committee was of the opinion that it was preferable to include the annexes in the regulation and the directive so as to create clarity , and to safeguard public access to legislative documents .
This appears all the more justified since the annexes contain a number of regulations which protect the end user .
With regard to the gas directive , the great importance of effective and non-discriminatory access to natural gas production markets for all operators in the European energy industry should be underlined .
By extending the principles of the internal energy market to countries which possess raw materials , producer countries can be developed and the internal market objectives met .
The gradual and mutual harmonisation of legislation is crucial for the internal energy market to reach completion .
A common minimum framework of standards must be available by means of which the regulatory bodies of the energy markets can be granted authority and given responsibility .
In addition , I should like to underline that the sole purpose of gathering information on companies , both at Member State level and at Commission level , is solely to fulfil the tasks prescribed in this regulation and this directive .
Since this information is partly confidential , restrictions on the distribution of the information obtained are urgently required .
Finally , I should also like to draw your attention to the fact that the present directive amends a whole host of regulations in the existing directive , and it appears useful to me to seize this opportunity to publish a consolidated version .
Mr President , the completion of the internal market in electricity and natural gas is a wonderful opportunity for further development in the European Union in terms of the economy , the environment and also society .
For a long time now it has been clear that the energy issue plays a central role , above and beyond security of supply .
It is inextricably linked to the fate of our generation and future generations .
The rapporteurs recognised this and have extended the Commission proposal to make it more forward-looking .
Slowly but surely , more and more people are realising that the future lies in renewable sources of energy .
They are the only sources which will guarantee a clean and secure energy supply in the long term .
That is why we need to lay down some ground rules for these renewable sources of energy .
The most important point here is that the true cost of supplying all energy is reflected in its price .
To achieve this , when energy is supplied from traditional nuclear and fossil fuel sources , the external costs for insurance and the subsequent costs in terms of pollutant emissions need to be internalised .
We need undiscriminatory access to the networks for electricity and also for biogas .
This is a new concept which has been accepted here for the first time .
We need fair transmission charges for all sources of energy and in a free market we also need the primary energy sources to be labelled .
We owe this to our consumers .
I would even go so far as to say that it is not only bills that should be labelled ; energy sources should also be disclosed in the energy supplier 's promotional literature .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I should like to congratulate our three fellow MEPs , Messrs Turmes , Rapkay and Mombaur on their sterling work .


What is on today 's agenda ?
On today 's agenda is a fresh step for Parliament in the process of total liberalisation .
And after the successful first opening we have had , it is important to take that second step .
We would therefore make an urgent appeal to the Commissioner and the Member States to ensure that this is achieved in Barcelona and that we do not try to frustrate the process , as we usually do - and you know which Member State I am referring to .
As Mr Mombaur has already indicated the principal arguments , I will not elaborate on these any further .
So what are the key points ?
Firstly , we must ensure that a level playing field is established . In other words , we must remove obstacles and ensure that everyone is given equal opportunities .
Secondly , we need to ensure that the role of the supervisors is framed in such a manner that we ultimately work towards a single European market .
This is why Amendments Nos 53 and 130 to Article 6 ( 1 ) of the directive are of prime importance .
My group is keen to see these amendments adopted , because we can thereby ensure that we work towards this single European market .
The third key point is that we can allow competition actually to take place , thus ensuring transparency and non-discrimination .
After all , we have seen that the instrument of reciprocity does not work .
The consumer must have free choice .
My final point is this : it is of great strategic importance for us to start with an assemblage of information .
We are keen to support the amendment that is now before us by Mr Westendorp , among others .
We have nothing against the Mombaur report , but we struggle all the more with the report by Mr Turmes .
Allow me to say at this stage that the PPE-DE Group will request a split vote for Amendment No 69 and will withdraw Amendment No 181 , so that there will be no question of negotiated third-party access .
For the rest , we have great difficulty with the Turmes report .
In our view , it contains too many rules , too great an administrative burden and too little respect for the market economy .
We also believe it is not right for responsibility to lie with industry and not with the supervisors or national States .
I should like to note that liberalisation is not promoted in this way , but that new obstacles are raised , so that it is difficult for liberalisation to get off the ground .
And this could never be the intention .
Needless to say , we must carefully consider the environmental aspects .
However , we should bear in mind that with regard to combined heat and power production and telecommunications , we can regulate many of the points on this topic in other directives too .
We would therefore urge Mr Turmes to withdraw amendments in this area .
Mr President , I too should like to thank the rapporteurs very much for all of their preparatory work .
In my opinion , the debate or discussion about these directives and regulations has been a good example of how together we can get to grips with a complicated issue at least enough to know where we concur and where our views differ .
Incidentally , I should like to recall that at the end of the eighties , when the Commission published its White Paper on the internal market , energy was not even mentioned , which shows that we are dealing with an extremely complicated matter here .
At the time there were many who said , hands off , that is far too complicated , we in the electricity and gas industry understand this much better , let us deal with it .
We chose another route and I believe that competition is indeed the right way forward .
I am also in favour of our establishing unrestricted competition .
Incidentally , if we did not do this , in the end the European Court of Justice would probably force us to change the way we do certain things , for example to recognise that the customer is the domestic customer and not a customer defined by us .
You see the Treaty always carries more weight than any Parliament resolution .
I should , however , also like to advocate that we not only deregulate , but also regulate .
What we are doing here is actually regulated deregulation , if I am allowed to say that .
But that is precisely what it is .
We are not only opening up the market in gas and electricity , we are also setting the conditions - the environmental and social conditions - under which this will take place , or we are leaving it up to the Member States to do so by enacting their own regulations .
I believe that these are two sides of the same coin .
This is perhaps where we differ , Mr van Velzen , in our assessment of these directives .
Neither do I regard this as complicating the process ; I think it is part of it .
We need a market and we need regulated competition , but energy is also something to which the public has a right .
Security of supply must be established and the environmental conditions must be set .
This is an integral part of this directive .
The opening up of the energy markets is also a fundamental prerequisite for the functioning of the Kyoto Protocol .
Without competition and without an open market , we will not be able to have emissions trading in Europe .
This is part of the Kyoto Protocol , which , after all , almost all of us wish to ratify .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , all the Member States have decided to create a large market for electricity and gas .
It is a good choice , but the problem lies in a single question : ' How are we going to create this market ? '
The aim of the Commission 's new directive is regulated competition .
The main assessment criterion we should use is whether or not there is a balance between competition and regulation , that is , whether or not the fundamental rights to a public service , environmental quality and security of supply are taken into consideration .
The goals of many of my fellow Members in the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy remain within the proposals made by the Commission .
Their sole objective is to speed up liberalisation and create a level playing field .
Others have tried to pave the way for a regulation of general interest .
Claude Turmes and Bernhard Rapkay have carried out significant work to this end .
At the end of the day , however , there is an imbalance between the choice of effective competition and the requirements of society .
This imbalance is unacceptable .
That is the raison d 'être of our strategic Amendment No 177 which aims to oblige the Member States to fulfil both their obligations regarding competition and increased , more effective obligations of general interest .
We do not agree with the attitude of the French State which opposes the opening up of its domestic market while the French public operator is buying market shares elsewhere .
However , the compromise it is asking for today , which consists of establishing freedom for non-domestic customers to choose their supplier , while being able to retain a reserved sector for domestic customers , is a good one , in particular if this means equal tariffs throughout national territory .
Those in favour of the market have not presented any economic argument to justify the obligation to open the market to small customers at all costs , even though this could result in additional inconvenience and cost rather than freedom .
Common sense would dictate that a principle of diversity be respected .
With regard to the obligation on competition , strong pressure is being exerted in countries like France or Germany , where the traditional operators are powerful and well-established .
The requirement for transparency is justified , as is the requirement to set up an independent regulatory body .
However , ownership unbundling , or the separation of transport and distribution , amongst others , threatens to destroy effective groups .
Making room for new players in the renewable energies market is justified .
Attacking the nuclear industry and the national assets of our neighbours is not .
I also find it shocking that certain advocates of competition are opposed to Community legislation in the field of market access .
The TPA negotiated actually represents the closure of the German market .
Others are demanding reciprocal market access , even though this contradicts the very notion of the large market and stirs up ill-feeling .
On the contrary , we believe that the European Union , that is to say the Commission , the Council , Parliament , organised European civil society , must take on tasks of general interest and regulation duties .
Otherwise simple competition would be dogged by increasing national conflict .
Mr President , at the outset I would like to congratulate both rapporteurs for their tremendous work on this very important piece of legislation .
Completion of the internal market in electricity and gas is something which will impact on each and every one of the 370 million consumers right across the European Union .
As co-legislators in this area , we have a great responsibility to get things right and to ensure that the end result is one which brings about a fair deal for all .
From an Irish perspective , I can inform colleagues that work is well under way to achieve this aim .
Formal opening of the Irish electricity market has exceeded the requirements of Directive 96 / 62 / EC .
In fact , the Irish national authorities are already putting in place a model of market opening which has much to recommend it , separating as it does operation from ownership of the assets .
This model effectively separates ownership interests from planning decisions , which helps overall efficiency .
It may not be the model which suits every Member State , but it has clear advantages in a small state where certain economies of scale are required in order to deliver the lowest cost and the most efficient production to end-users .
In conclusion , I believe that efficient , cheap and sustainable energy production is a key element in achieving our goal .
The rapporteurs in the committee have done us proud in dealing with this complex and technical issue in a comprehensive and balanced manner and in working to a very demanding timetable in order to complete this very important dossier .
Mr President , Commissioner , the good work carried out by the rapporteurs should enable Parliament to adopt a favourable position on the laborious attempt to achieve full liberalisation of the energy market in Europe , in the interest of businesses and consumers .
In the very brief amount of time available to me , I would like to confirm our support for the more stringent measures proposed by the Commission - Article 86 of the Treaty - and push for a majority vote .
There are countries such as France , which have a genuine conflict of interests in this sector .
The French Government owns EDF so it has every reason to want to maintain the asymmetries in the market which allow EDF to go and take over market segments elsewhere , exploiting its monopoly position and the closed nature of the internal market .
That is why I feel that we must go all the way and push for a majority vote at Barcelona too .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , first may I express my regret at the delays in working on this portfolio last year because the Commission declined to accept our advice of splitting the proposals into two separate proposals for gas and electricity .
I also regret that the timetable has now been compressed from May to March because of the Council 's desire to have this proposal before it at Barcelona .
I hope this will not be a case of ' legislate in haste and repent at leisure ' .
We strongly support the aims of the directive and the regulation .
The present situation is a flawed and inequitable market .
French and German utilities are able to buy UK power companies , yet it is impossible to have reciprocal opportunities to buy into EDF or acquire whole companies .
The German market is almost as difficult to enter , despite so-called full competition .
This must change .
I recognise that the step-by-step approach is a realistic one : first all non-domestic consumers then domestic later , as a progressive opening , is a more orderly process .
I have to regret that one rapporteur has chosen to introduce too much detail in amendments and tried to over-elaborate some of the measures , for example , the question of the detail demanded on energy bills .
This is an unnecessary amount of detail .
Finally , I would like to commend the proposed amendments on establishing a committee of European energy regulators so as to improve cooperation and coordination in implementing the regulation on cross-border trading .
Mr President , my thanks go to the rapporteurs : you have completed an enormous task .
Although the Union was established as a single market , this market only functions in part .
Many Member States have actually become expert at protecting their markets , monopolies and cartels .
The Nordic countries have liberalised both the electricity and the telecommunications markets , and the consumer has benefited : prices are low .
The large Member States , in particular , often pay little heed to jointly agreed rules , and the insistence on unanimity with regard to decisions is a shield behind which they withdraw .
As the Commission has neither the authority nor the courage to intervene when there is malpractice , the market does not work .
The situation harms solidarity and must end .
Some , then , are for liberalisation while others are for maintaining the status quo .
It is true we might ask whether market liberalism is justified from the point of view of public service obligations .
However , we need common rules , which should also be monitored .
The same lack of solidarity has prevailed in the telecommunications sector .
Cross-border transmission tariffs and overload control are important matters .
Only actual costs should apply for access to the network , and then competition is possible and the consumer benefits .
My group is satisfied with the basic approach outlined in Mr Mombaur 's report .
Nevertheless , the Commission 's scope for monitoring is not made sufficiently clear , and this awkward and unfair situation is likely to continue .
We clearly highlighted this in the end in the framework legislation for the telecommunications sector , and it will benefit consumers in Europe .
The Union must therefore be reformed in such a way that Member States cannot at the same time both prevent competition and muscle in on the situation in other countries , buying up local energy companies .
Commissioner , I should like to bring three points to your attention .
Firstly , electricity and gas are two different products .
By lumping them together in one report , an artificial attempt is made to treat them in the same way , and the specific differences between these products are not sufficiently emphasised .
Secondly , it is vital for long-term contracts for gas transport to be safeguarded , given the increase in demand for gas , partly as a result of the planned closure of nuclear plants , and given that important investments , for example in piping , which are indispensable to the EU 's gas supply , are necessary .
The gas supply is literally at stake here .
Thirdly , the legislation put to the vote is diametrically opposed to the wish by industry to cut down on red-tape .
Too many new obligations are being imposed .
Second reading might provide an opportunity to change this .
Mr President , underlying this report is the decision to liberalise the internal energy market through the privatisation of the public electricity and gas sectors that still exist in the European Union .
Failing to heed negative experiences of similar processes , as in the case of California , for example , the report insists on the need to open up and liberalise these strategic sectors , and to make them more competitive in order to satisfy the interests of various economic groups , even with the knowledge that they are thereby endangering fundamental aspects of a universal public service : the right to the supply of high-quality energy at a reasonable price and the commitment to develop alternative and renewable forms of energy .
Although these reports express some concern about universal access , minimum environmental rules , information and guaranteeing consumer choice and security of supply in every country , the fact is that taking the route towards the liberalisation and total opening up of the market will undermine these concerns .
Consequently , we have , of course , voted against the report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as early as March 2000 the Lisbon Council advocated liberalisation of the gas and electricity sectors .
The Commission tabled a comprehensive proposal to make this desire a reality .
The Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy enriched this proposal by including other relevant points , stressing the need for greater emphasis on renewable sources of energy and the right of all suppliers to have unrestricted access to the network .
The Committee also beefs up the role of the independent regulatory authorities and counters possible distortions of competition with provisions on ownership unbundling .
I am in favour of these measures .
I should particularly like to draw your attention to Amendment No 43 to the report .
Here electricity providers are required to disclose to the final consumer the composition of the energy mix supplied in the bill and in advertising materials .
This minimum information makes an essential contribution to creating transparency and provides a basis on which consumers can exercise their necessary freedom of choice in the completed internal market .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in Europe , we have been working on the liberalisation of the energy market for some 15 years now .
And directives in this respect were adopted as early as 1994 and 1995 , but there are still Member States that keep their markets sealed from new suppliers , France naturally taking the crown , despite the fact that the Sun King has been long dead and buried .
Transparent and non-discriminatory access to networks is necessary to break monopolies .
In order to achieve this , it is sometimes necessary to take measures that do not appear liberal , such as prescribing fixed rates for transmissions for all users and producers , for this is absolutely vital to grant newcomers access to the market .
I therefore hope that the Council in Barcelona will at long last take decisive action and will take liberalisation seriously , for it already agreed in Lisbon that Europe should become the world 's most dynamic , competitive and knowledge-based economy .
In order for this to happen , the liberalisation of energy is vital .
Mr President , today we have to vote on speeding up the liberalisation of the energy sector .
Following in the footsteps of air transport , telecommunications , rail transport and postal services , it is now the turn of the energy sector to suffer market dictatorship in the form of total openness to competition , in 2003 for electricity and 2004 for gas .
All things considered , however , we cannot say that the opening up of public enterprise capital has been conclusive .
The anticipated increase in productivity did not take place .
For the user , the dismantling of public services has led to reduced security and quality of service and prices have risen by 30 % for gas and 5 % for electricity .
As far as the workers are concerned , we have seen significant job losses : 300 000 have already been lost in this sector in Europe .
The public have experienced increased inequality .
Only a handful of shareholders and investors have benefited from deregulation .
Today , however , we must promote a new energy policy ; now , more than ever before , we must coordinate public services at European level .
Mr President , Commissioner de Palacio , ladies and gentlemen , liberalisation must bring benefits .
I was pleased to see that the rapporteurs identified this as a key point .
In our view , it is important that the benefits are not offset by new taxes and that we create a system which guarantees a sustainable and secure energy supply , in terms of both the environment and business management .
Just as I will decide this lunchtime whether to eat a schnitzel or a salad , thus determining the energy supply for my personal energy balance , in the future I also want to take advantage of the free movement of goods to be able to decide whether to have solar power or hydroelectric power .
But perhaps it will not only be a choice between one or the other ; it would be nice if I could say , in the future I want to be able to use 50 % solar power and 50 % hydroelectric power in my private house or in my company .
Here I attach the utmost importance to there being no cross-subsidisation .
In particular , for instance , we do not want the final disposal of nuclear waste to be cross-subsidised from other sectors .
We also want a universal service and compliance with public service and environmental obligations ; this will of course be achieved through public calls for tender , so that good service is guaranteed and efficiency is central .
An external certified body should be responsible for assessing quality in the electricity sector .
In the future , you see , we also want renewable energy , energy efficiency and energy-saving measures to be focal points .
In the future , there must not be any discrimination in the network price on the basis of quantity of electricity or method of generation .
Nor should cross-subsidisation of any kind be admissible .
Mr President , Commissioner , we are going to vote on three reports by the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy which are crucial to the forthcoming Barcelona Summit .
They are essential to compliance with the Lisbon objectives if we really want to build the most competitive economy in the world , and they are also essential to the liberalisation of the internal market .
To sum up , they are of benefit to the consumers .
It has been a complex subject . We have had to separate two directives - the one on gas and the one on electricity - and we have had to do a lot of work very quickly .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs , Mr Turmes , Mr Rapkay and Mr Mombaur , because they have done a lot of very good work and have done so in record time .
Because of the complexity of the subject , there have been attempts to postpone the vote which is going to take place tomorrow .
As Chairman , I have done everything in my power so that we may vote on them before Barcelona .
The credibility of the European Parliament was at stake and we did not want the European Parliament to be an easy pretext for possible failure .
It is a crucial test for Barcelona and the European Parliament has been a match for the circumstances .
Of course , we agree with the Members - in particular the French - on the desire to combine liberalisation with the need to maintain an efficient public service and I believe that all our work must follow that approach .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is not sufficient to privatise or liberalise unless we prevent possible dominant positions which significantly distort competition .
If public monopolies are turned into private oligopolies , we will have achieved little .
Therefore , it is essential not only to legally separate transmission from transport , but furthermore to make each one totally independent .
That is the aim of my amendment .
Mr President , the purpose of the amendments under consideration is to liberalise the market across the board , including distribution , including down to the final user .
The stated aim is to encourage business activities in a sector which until recently , because it was under state control , was closed to the private sector .
The transmission systems are , to all intents and purposes , administered by government agencies which only have to break even , while the private companies which use them will pitch their prices so that they can reap the maximum possible profit .
This is just one example of the favours being done to the private sector . In Greece , the Public Power Corporation is forced to buy electricity at a loss from private companies , just so that they can enter the market .
Liberalisation ignores social requirements , such as supplying electricity to islands and other inaccessible areas , and is causing obvious difficulties with long-term planning .
The argument that prices are falling does not stand up , given that the fully liberalised markets in Germany and the United Kingdom charge consistently higher prices than the partially liberalised Greek market .
The fact that the amendments increase the intervention of the European Commission is also a very serious matter .
To sum up , the only ones who stand to gain from the new arrangements are the large monopolies , which will penetrate the markets still further , with the help of the regulation on cross-border transactions .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I feel that mention must be made of the good work carried out in preparation for this debate , especially in view of the decisions to be taken later on by the Council and the Commission , as well as Parliament 's future input .
We have witnessed the shattering of an illusion : the State , which , motivated by social ideals , should have achieved adequate regulation of basic services , has almost completely failed in its duty .
The ideals of fairness , asceticism and non-profit making have fallen , unable to contend with such a weak market : this has led to abuse , an increase in wastage , privileges , bureaucracy and inequality and , at the same time , falling profits .
As a result , we are turning back rapidly - it is to be hoped - to competition , to the market , to the prevailing interest of the consumer and also to the profit-making of private enterprise , which is no longer seen as a negative thing .
Of course , some last strongholds remain : monopolies , oligopolies , dominating positions - as the previous speaker mentioned - and also the market , which has been controlled to a great extent by cartels on many occasions and continues to be so now .
There are examples of this in Italy : we have two great structures , excessive , unjustified strongholds - ENEL and ENI - which have played a highly egotistical and , in some cases , parasitical role .
We need to take appropriate action , not least to establish a direct relationship as regards both energy supply and the management thereof , with monitoring of transfers and measures and of the effectiveness of the product sold .
I feel that this should be the subject of forthcoming European Union action .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the energy sector is not like other sectors , and that is why the discussion cannot be restricted to the question of opening up to competition and the associated timetable .
Security of supply , territorial cohesion , network and interconnection development , plant renovation and public service obligations are all essential aspects that involve long-term investment without immediate profitability but which must be guaranteed , if we are to avoid replicating the California crisis .
This sector must therefore be closely monitored and a balance maintained between market mechanisms and other imperatives and factors in market organisation .
Some Members here advocate opening up to competition .
However , when we look at the situation in the various countries , we see that the legislative framework is one thing and the reality of opening is another .
Germany , for example , is in theory 100 % open , but less than 3 % of its electricity is imported .
Perhaps it would be better to allow for opening to take place more slowly in order to be able to fulfil our commitments .
From this perspective , the date of 1 January 2003 put forward by the Commission for opening with regard to all non-domestic customers is unrealistic and does not even allow time for countries to adopt transposing legislation , where necessary .
That is why the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy has suggested a period of 24 months after adoption of the directive .
In addition to this , along the lines of Amendment No 177 which Mr Herzog has already mentioned , we have asked that the other factors in the organisation of the sector , public service obligation , security of supply , promotion of renewable energy sources , safety of installations and environmental protection be guaranteed operational at the time of opening .
Lastly , with regard to domestic customers , households , we must take account of the fact that in some countries , equal tariffs are a key element of public services .
Whether the customer lives in the country , in an isolated valley or in a town , they are charged the same price per kW / hour .
This is considered part of equal access to public services .
That is why we propose that those Member States who so wish be allowed to retain a sector which is not open to competition so that equal tariffs remain possible and equal access to public energy services continues to be a reality in our countries .
I hope that the Council will take this into consideration .
Mr President , a French-owned company is able to sell electricity to the British Prime Minister .
I would like to ask the Commissioner when we are likely to see a situation when an English-owned company will be able to sell electricity to the French Prime Minister .
Until that situation is reached , the idea of an internal market in energy is a political mirage .
There has been a lot of comment about the pressure under which this debate is taking place .
When the Commission 's proposals first came out , it was the view of the British Government that they could be accepted as they stood .
We have managed to bring in hundreds of amendments , which says a lot for the fertile imagination of Parliament .
We make a bit of a rod for our own backs at times .
By trying to bring in issues such as energy efficiency , renewable energy and social issues we complicate the matter further , these are better left for other types of legislation .
I should like to make two points .
On independent regulation , we regard this as essential if an internal market is to develop , because it provides the predictability and stability which consumers and new entrants need ; but it should be for the Member State to reflect the different structures of national markets .
On the question of third-party access to infrastructure , market entrants need to know that they can access infrastructure on the same terms as those that already exist .
And they should be approved by the national regulator , rather than be the subject of one-sided negotiations between a monopoly infrastructure operator and a potential user .
Mr President , reading the newspapers one would think that the European Council in Barcelona is going to settle every detail of this legislation .
The press suggests that Barcelona will determine whether energy liberalisation takes place at all or not , and yet I do not see Mr Blair , Mr Aznar or other prime ministers here .
This is an important point : the liberalisation of the energy sector , one of the last components of the single market yet to be subject to single-market disciplines , is a legislative process .
We must assert our fundamental role in that legislative process .
This legislation will go through to second reading well after the political pyrotechnics of Barcelona are long forgotten .
It is essential , therefore , that at first reading we establish the principles of the legislation so that at second reading we can indeed push through a proper liberalising energy package .
Mr Chichester referred earlier to the need to get the details right .
He is absolutely correct .
In that spirit I have two specific questions for the EPP-ED Group , which has been keen to promote itself as the liberal voice on this issue and yet , I fear , may be voting quite differently tomorrow .
Firstly , will the EPP-ED Group support the amendment adopted in committee to make sure that nuclear decommissioning funds cannot be used as a cross-subsidy for electricity operators ?
If not , it should explain why not , because of the risk of destroying the level playing field .
Secondly , will it withdraw its own amendments , passed in committee , which insist on negotiated access ?
If those amendments are retained the package will be severely undermined .
I look forward to working with you in the vote tomorrow .
This has been an excellent cross-party endeavour and on behalf of the ELDR Group I wholeheartedly support the result .
Mr President , as usual , very sincerely meant congratulations to the three rapporteurs involved in this package .
Liberalisation of gas and electricity is certainly part of the Lisbon Process , but this does not mean a free-for-all in the electricity and gas markets .
Our concern must be for those we represent : customers both commercial and - the majority of us - domestic .
We want the lowest prices possible for them in line with choice , and for choice you need information , including labelling about the source of electricity .
You need reliability and no discrimination ; you need help , particularly at domestic level , for energy efficiency measures ; and you need strong emphasis on public service obligations .
And I would like to emphasise that research and development should be a public service obligation , because in a free market research is one of the areas that is most at risk .
We have amendments on subjects such as renewable energy sources , energy efficiency , and combined heat and power .
This is relevant .
We must have joined-up thinking , and there must be references in this directive to those areas which may be covered by other directives but which must also be mentioned here .
We want joined-up thinking , and we expect confirmation from the Commission that those measures , as important as these directives , will be part of the programme in the immediate future .
We hope , therefore , for some limited success at Barcelona to take forward in a responsible way not a free-for-all , but a controlled competitive market .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to say that I believe that the full realisation of the internal energy market is the most important economic measure to be dealt with at the Barcelona European Council .
Therefore the vote on these reports in Parliament seems to me to be extremely timely and I would like to thank the Chairman of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , Mr Westendorp , for the efforts he has made to make this possible .
Secondly , I would like to point out our intended objectives with these reports .
As Mr Linkohr has said quite rightly , this is something which may sound rather contradictory : a regulated deregulation , a regulated liberalisation , which is largely what makes up the European liberalisation model .
This objective is based on providing the European economy with all the elements of a market , while guaranteeing our citizens a series of rights which we consider to be basic within the model of society , the balances , solidarities and cohesion we want to create .
It is therefore a question of offering freedom of choice to industrial and commercial clients on specific dates , namely 2003 and 2004 , respectively , for electricity and for gas and , for domestic users , from 2005 .
Consumers and producers must be able to access transport and distribution networks without discrimination and , to this end , the proposal provides for systems of transport and distribution which are separate - from a legal point of view - from the production and supply of gas and electricity .
Charges for access to the network which are set , published and approved by the competent national regulatory authority .
Each of the States of the Union will create an independent regulatory authority with a common minimum level of competences .
The proposed regulation on the conditions for access to the network for the cross-border trade in electricity is intended to promote cross-border trade and overcome an unacceptable situation , as indicated by several speakers and the rapporteur , Mr Mombaur , which is that there are 15 different electricity markets .
Therefore , it is a question of achieving the true objective of this proposal which , as pointed out by Mr Rapkay , is simply a European electricity and gas market .
There is another series of necessary measures created specifically in response to the requests of the Stockholm European Council .
Amongst them , the first report on the creation of the internal market in gas and electricity which clearly indicated the distortions caused by the differing degrees of openness and the differences between the structural measures adopted .
In December 2001 , the Commission also published a Communication on energy infrastructures which identifies the priority proposals and intends for the Member States to achieve an electrical interconnection equivalent to the minimum between now and 2005 , that is to say , 10 % of the capacity of installed production .
With the aim of guaranteeing greater protection of the environment , the Commission will present two additional directives during this year and , in this respect , I would say to Mrs McNally that , before the end of the year , I hope to present a directive on behalf of the Commission intended to promote cogeneration and at the same time prevent certain fraudulent uses which we all know about and which in the end lead to greater expense and wastage of electricity .
As I have said , this directive will promote suitable cogeneration within the European Union .
Secondly , I also wish to present a framework directive on the energy efficiency of equipment and apparatus installed in all buildings , which supplements the directive on the energy efficiency of buildings .
Mr President , I believe that , together with the directive on the promotion of electricity generated from renewable energy sources , the proposal on energy efficiency in buildings , the political commitment to guarantee the environmental aspects of our energy consumption , and the proposal on biofuels , we are making a real effort to combine the rules for the creation of the internal markets in energy and to improve their operation with the improvement in energy efficiency and the environmental aspects of energy in Europe .
With regard to the directive and the Regulation we have presented , I would firstly like to congratulate Mr Turmes and Mr Rapkay on their work as rapporteurs , which has been carried out rigorously and seriously , although we cannot accept certain specific aspects of certain amendments .
However , in general we all agree with the spirit and objectives in terms of making these modifications to the current directives in force .
I am pleased that Parliament - and specifically the two rapporteurs - is taking the approach contained in the Commission proposal , particularly with regard to the dates for opening up the market , the separation of the operators of the networks and the competences of the regulatory authorities , which are crucial elements in terms of the correct operation of the system .
In general terms , the Commission is in favour of the amendments that have been tabled , the majority of which are acceptable , either totally - with some changes to their wording - or partially .
I am not only talking about the amendments which improve the situation of consumers and the amendments relating to a better definition of the public service aspects ( always taking account of subsidiarity aspects , of course ) , but also the amendments which formalise cooperation between regulatory bodies and those relating to the competences of the regulatory authorities .
The Commission , however , has certain reservations with regard to the amendments relating to non-discriminatory access to the network , which is essential to guaranteeing fair competition in the gas and electricity sectors .
We therefore propose certain measures in this context : to legally separate the operators of the networks - an approach accepted by Parliament - and to establish access to the network on the basis of previously published charges , thereby replacing access on a negotiated basis .
I would like to thank Mr van Velzen who is going to withdraw the amendments relating to negotiated access , because I believe that is going to clarify the debate a lot and help us to reach a final agreement .
Nor can the Commission accept the amendment dividing the proposal into two different texts for electricity and gas , bearing in mind the growing interdependence between the two markets and the fact that the majority of new electricity production will be based on production which uses gas as a fuel .
The Commission believes that the amendment relating to the funds for dismantling the nuclear sector is of the greatest importance .
The Commission is aware of the importance of guaranteeing availability of the funds at all times for future dismantling activities , not only for the purposes of the internal energy market , but also to ensure that those funds are specifically destined for those activities .
These funds have a specific and perfectly stipulated objective , which must be respected at all costs .
Therefore , and with a view to dealing with this issue appropriately , the Commission is committed to presenting a proposal in the coming months , before the conclusion of the negotiation of this directive and this Regulation in Parliament .
This issue is closely related to the system of guarantees and securities in the field of the use and handling of nuclear energy .
We must be extremely rigorous in terms of the availability of these funds , within the corresponding framework , and we are studying the best legal formula for producing a proposal in this regard .
With regard to the Regulation , I would like to congratulate Mr Mombaur on his wonderful work .
The Commission can support the majority of the amendments proposed , some with slight modifications .
This is the case , for example , with the amendments which propose the creation of a consultative group of national regulatory authorities , and those which propose the establishment of specific rules for the so-called national interconnectors .
Next I will mention the amendments which we find difficult to accept .
Amendment No 19 , for example , which proposes that the procedure of the Regulation Committee laid down in the Regulation should only be applicable for four years and that , after this period , Parliament and the Council should once again study the issue on the basis of the Commission proposal .
I know that Parliament has considered this distinction clause in the context of the regulations on financial services and of the Lamfalussy report , but President Prodi , on 5 February , in his statement to this House , clearly said that that case could not set a precedent .
Nevertheless , I can assure you that , in accordance with the agreement of the European Parliament and the Commission on the methods for applying comitology , the Commission will put all its efforts into ensuring the greatest possible transparency in it relations with Parliament in the context of the procedure laid down in the Regulation on access to the network for the cross-border trade in electricity .
Amendments Nos 5 , 6 , 7 , 16 , 20 , 22 , 23 , 24 and 25 seek to remove all the references in the Regulation to the regulatory authorities of the Member States , and suggest a more neutral expression such as ' competent authority ' .
I do not believe these amendments to be appropriate since the Commission 's policy in this field is based on the principle that all States must designate one or several regulatory authorities , which are intended to play an essential role in the context of the implementation of the Regulation .
Furthermore , accepting these amendments could be considered to be in contradiction with the creation of a consultative body made up of national regulatory authorities proposed in a series of amendments by the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy and supported by the Commission .
However , the formula proposed by the Commission leaves an appropriate margin for subsidiarity so that each State can find the most suitable formula .
The amendments relating to the treatment to be given to integrated generation in national charging systems are not acceptable either .
This type of generation must be dealt with appropriately within the national charging systems , in accordance with the principles of non-discrimination and reflecting costs which appear in the Regulation , and , with regard to the most important case in practice , the electricity produced from renewable energy sources , and with the directive on it .
It is not therefore appropriate to exempt integrated generators from the payment of certain charges in a general way , rather than by case-by-case treatment .
There are three amendments which propose that the text of the regulation should stipulate that the harmonisation of charges for access to national networks must be limited to the charges applicable to producers and that those charges must be reduced .
However , this is an overly restrictive provision .
National charges should be harmonised on the global basis of the charging structure , bearing in mind the specific characteristics of the national networks .
We cannot therefore accept this amendment either .
We do not believe it appropriate to link the entry into force of the Regulation with that of the directive too strictly , as suggested in Amendment No 35 .
The promotion of cross-border trade is necessary in any event , regardless of the adoption of proposed amendments to the directive on electricity and gas currently in force .
In conclusion , Mr President , the vote on these texts is of the greatest importance .
Thanks to the support for the main approaches and the broad convergence between Parliament and the Commission on all the measures , I hope that the negotiations in Barcelona will give us new impetus and that then , as Mr Adam indicated earlier , the negotiations between Parliament , the Council and the Commission will give full and total support to this regulated liberalisation in the electricity and gas sector , key elements for the creation of the internal market and therefore for the competitiveness of the European economy .
Mr President , on a point of order , as one of the rapporteurs in the debate we have just had , I would like to say that the conditions in which this debate was held are ridiculous .
When I started to speak , just three Members were in the Chamber and the Commissioner had not had the time to join us because this House is unable to set a clear time for the start of the debate .
As the rapporteur I had just two-and-a-half minutes and my colleague , Mr Rapkay , also had two-and-a-half minutes , to explain a directive on the European market for electricity and gas .
Now when we listen to the Commissioner 's answers there is so much noise that it is almost impossible to hear her .
Mr President , please organise the proceedings in such a way that we have dignity when we discuss this .
On the question which you raise about the organisation of debates , we have had an extensive , informal discussion in the Conference of Presidents about trying to create more space for debate .
This has to do with our voting procedures and so on .
We will eventually also have the report by Mr Corbett , which will help in this regard .
It is a priority to create more space for debate , I hope in the not too distant future .
I can only say that I agree fully with the point you make about the dignity of the House .
Whenever I have been in the Chair I have tried , to the best of my ability , to insist that the House listen to speakers in a dignified fashion appropriate to Parliament .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 12 noon today .
The next item is the vote .
Simplified procedure :
Proposal , on behalf of the Committee on Citizen 's Freedoms and Rights ; Justice and Home Affairs , for a Council regulation establishing a general framework for Community activities to facilitate the implementation of a European judicial area in civil matters ( 15532 / 2001 - C5-0021 / 0109 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament approved the Commission proposal as amended )
Report ( A5-0034 / 2002 ) by Encarnación Redondo Jiménez , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on
the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 3528 / 86 on the protection of the Community 's forests against atmospheric pollution ( COM ( 2001 ) 634 - C5-0551 / 2001 - 2001 / 0267 ( COD ) )
and
the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 2158 / 92 on the protection of the Community 's forests against fire ( COM ( 2001 ) 634 - C5-0552 / 2001 - 2001 / 0268 ( COD ) )
( In successive votes Parliament adopted both legislative resolutions )
Recommendation for second reading ( A5-0052 / 2002 ) by Marieke Sanders-ten Holte , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the Council common position with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 2027 / 97 on air carrier liability in the event of accidents ( 10794 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0641 / 2001 - 2000 / 0145 ( COD ) )
( The President declared the common position approved )
Report ( A5-0070 / 2002 ) by Lord Inglewood , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation on the application of international accounting standards ( COM ( 2001 ) 80 - C5-0061 / 2001 - 2001 / 0044 ( COD ) )
Before the vote :
Mr President , if the House follows my recommendation - which I hope it will - this will achieve an outcome that was agreed by the Committee on Legal Affairs and can be accepted by the Commission and the Council .
The pattern of the voting list is slightly convoluted because the text is complicated and what is proposed deals with drafting points .
I have endeavoured to be open about this and I know that the Socialist Group has had concerns .
This morning I spoke with Mr Berenguer , the shadow rapporteur , who I believe can now confirm that he is content with what I am suggesting , i.e. that we should vote against the second half of Amendment No 3 and against Amendment No 6 .
If my suggestion is followed , it should lead to the adoption of this important text in a single reading .
Mr President , I would like to confirm what Lord Inglewood said : the Group of the Party of European Socialists will vote against the second part of Amendment No 3 and against Amendment No 6 .
I believe that this would increase the coherence of the text .
I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate Lord Inglewood on his excellent work .


Mr President , I would like to table an oral amendment : I propose to replace the clause ' the European Data Protection Supervisor is bound by the objective of Regulation No 1049 ? with the clause ' the European Data Protection Supervisor is bound by Community law , including Regulation 1049 ? , and to replace the clause ' and by the provisions of the Treaty stating that decision-making in the Union shall be as open as possible ? with ' and by the provisions of the Treaty relating to the protection of fundamental rights and freedoms and stating that decision-making in the Union shall be as open as possible ? .
I hope there are no objections to this .
Mr President , I propose that the vote on the legislative resolution be postponed .
This is a decision covered by an interinstitutional agreement : Parliament , Commission and Council must all agree on it .
Now , the text to be put to the vote today is different from that proposed by the Commission and , as far as I know , endorsed by the Council . I therefore call for the vote on the legislative resolution to be postponed so that we can see if the other institutions can accept our point of view or , in any case , so that we can attempt to achieve a common position .
- ( DA ) We have voted against the report on the grounds that we are concerned here with a regulation and not a directive .
Because of national differences and the circumstances of individual nations , there is a need for flexibility , something which could better have been brought about by means of a directive .
Mr President , yesterday morning , during a television programme broadcast from Milan called ' Telelombardia ' , a pensioner , Lucia , telephoned me and told me that she had been robbed on her way back from withdrawing her pension , as she does at the end of every month , and that , because of what had happened to her , she did not know how she was going to survive the month .
You may ask me what the connection is with Mrs Paciotti 's report on data protection .
Well then , reflecting on this matter , I said to myself , ' We must vote for the Paciotti report on data protection because data protection is extremely important , but when will we , at last , have protection of pensioners , especially poor pensioners who , when they go to withdraw their pensions , are the victims of delinquency and violence which , for them , are extremely harmful ?
I hope that Mrs Paciotti will soon concern herself with pensioner protection as well as data protection .
Thank you , Mr Fatuzzo , for an ingenious method of introducing your favourite subject .
Report Färm ( A5-0068 / 2002 )
Mr President , there is always a great deal to say about the Commission 's budget , as there is about Parliament and all the other institutions ' budgets .
However , I will restrict myself to saying that , although I voted for the motion , I hope that the Commission will set money aside for informing all the workers who live in the European Union and the candidate countries about their pension rights .
In actual fact , a great many citizens are unfamiliar with the rules and laws of the State and do not know how to obtain all their rights .
Furthermore , I hope that we will soon have a European television channel broadcasting the work of Parliament including what happens in this Chamber during explanations of vote such as this .
I feel it would be extremely educational and very interesting .
Judging by the guidelines contained in the Färm report , it does not look as if the 2003 budget is going to be very different to preceding budgets , which means that , once again , we will have a disputed budget for the sake of the Stability Pact .
Despite the fact that year after year , new priorities give rise to greater needs , the policy that has been pursued consists of redistributing Community funds from old priorities to new ones and vice versa .
Consequently , we are seeking to enlarge the European Union to a further 10 countries with the same amount of money and , if possible , even making some savings , which is not acceptable .
The revision of the financial perspectives is absolutely essential to safeguarding the principle of economic and social cohesion , a genuinely distributive budget and the adequate financing of development and cooperation policy .
This year , the rapporteur has given priority to enlargement , but has become bogged down in administrative issues without questioning the very limited proposals presented by the Commission for financing enlargement , without guaranteeing the transfers of appropriations to prepare for accession in 2002 and 2003 , insisting instead on the priority of financing the communitarisation of the third pillar - justice and home affairs - supporting an increase in appropriations for Europol , for Eurojust and for the external borders , but ignoring fundamental social areas , specifically employment and improving living conditions .
The rapporteur is concerned with budgetary implementation , specifically of the structural funds , but presents no solution , such as a clear commitment to making payments at levels that ensure proper implementation .
He does not mention the reform of the common fisheries policy , when 2003 will be its first year of implementation - hence the proposal that we tabled - and opens the way to the co-financing of the common agricultural policy .
He is vague on the financial needs of heading 4 - external policy - when the priorities are mounting up , in areas such as the Palestinian Territories , Timor , Afghanistan , Argentina , the Balkans , the Mediterranean and humanitarian aid , without any additional resources .
The rapporteur wavers between the redistribution of appropriations and their increase without ever being clear .
Hence our position against the report .
. ( NL ) The European Parliament is free to discuss anything , but a real parliament has the right of initiative and the last word in the forming of coalitions , in legislation and the budget .
In the EU , a distinction is drawn between compulsory and non-compulsory expenses , and the extensive agricultural budget falls outside the parliamentary remit .
Furthermore , by means of structural funds , money that originates from rich Member States is pumped back to the self-same rich States via the bureaucracy in Brussels .
The Council always reduces the level of the budget artificially .
Money for military ventures outside the EU territory and reparations for these wars in Serbia , Kosovo and Afghanistan is taken from previously committed funds .
Members of various EP groups are right to criticise this intransparent course of affairs in which the electorate has no say .
However , it is their colleagues in the Council and the Commission who are responsible for this crazy situation and who insist that everything stays exactly the same .
The Committee on Budgets is now looking for resources to absorb the effects of the expected doubling of the number of official languages at the lowest possible cost , among other means , by using remote interpreters who are also required to translate into languages other than their mother tongues .
Bad-quality translations and overburdened staff cannot solve this problem .
According to paragraph 15 of Mr Stenmarck 's report , Parliament regrets that the dispersion of Parliament 's staff in three working places remains a major obstacle for improving the allocation of human resources and points out , in particular , that the need to maintain a number of posts in Luxembourg leads to unnecessary duplication in a number of services .
Furthermore Parliament hopes , says the report , that the forthcoming enlargement will provide an opportunity to improve the allocation of posts between Brussels and Luxembourg .
What is the meaning of this ?
This paragraph clearly seeks to undermine the Edinburgh Agreement on the location of the seats of the individual European institutions , which stated that the seat of the General Secretariat of the European Parliament was Luxembourg .
Parliament has no business , certainly not in a paragraph hidden away in a report on the budget , to call this decision into question either directly or indirectly .
The only authority on this matter is , and remains , the European Council and , as far as I know , it is still abiding by its 1992 decision .
. ( FR ) Since part of paragraph 15 has been retained , I voted for the Stenmarck report on the European Parliament 's preliminary draft estimates for 2003 .
This paragraph , inserted in committee following an amendment by a British Conservative Member , is a challenge to the integrity and impartiality of the European public service and an attack on Luxembourg , the workplace of the European Parliament .
Those who show their aversion to the process of European integration should at least respect historical fact and the law as laid down by the Treaties .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 12.54 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

The next item is the report ( A5-0053 / 2002 ) by Georg Jarzembowski , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on the establishment of rules and procedures with regard to the introduction of noise-related operating restrictions at Community airports ( COM ( 2001 ) 695 - C5-0667 / 2001 - 2001 / 0282 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen , visitors in the gallery , we now turn to a Commission proposal to further reduce noise in and around airports .
This proposal implements an agreement which was adopted at the ICAO Assembly in the autumn of last year and which applies throughout the world .
Personally , of course , I have certain reservations about it because at the ICAO Assembly the entire system was changed .
They abandoned the system of taking certain types of aircraft out of use altogether or suspending their use and moved over to a so-called ' balanced approach ' , whereby , instead of the aircraft being assessed , the noise situation at each individual airport is assessed and suitable restrictions are introduced .
Apart from this general reservation - and after five years these provisions will be reviewed - we as a committee believe that we should implement the international agreements reached in Montreal , along with this approach of finding a balanced solution for each airport .
This kind of noise protection , which will vary from airport to airport , at the same time makes it possible for us to repeal the hushkit regulation .
We would have got into some difficulties with the USA and other third countries on account of this hushkit regulation , because from 1 April of this year the landing rights of these aircraft would automatically have been suspended .
Thanks to the new balanced approach , which we have had since Montreal , we can do without the hushkit regulation and thus end the conflict with the USA , but here I also want to say loud and clear that the Americans should not forget to withdraw their Article 84 complaints if we withdraw our hushkit regulation .
Because of the 1 April limit , we had to process the legislation quickly , and I have to say that our efforts have been very successful .
There were some initial difficulties determining responsibility for the dossier with the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , but we agreed that the Environment Committee would draft an opinion .
We incorporated this in our report and held an informal trilogue procedure with the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , thus avoiding any dispute between the environment and transport areas in this House .
I should like to thank the Vice-President and also the Council representatives very much for enabling the informal trilogue to reach a satisfactory conclusion .
I should like to inform the House that there are two technical amendments which I will be tabling tomorrow , because in our haste we allowed two editorial errors to slip in .
There are discrepancies between what we agreed with the Council and what the amendments actually say .
But we will make the necessary corrections .
On the substance , I should like to point out that we in Parliament have been successful on two central points .
We have succeeded in changing the definition of the city airport .
Until now airports have only been classified as city airports if there has been another alternative airport nearby .
This has meant that there have been hardly any city airports .
We have extended this definition by leaving out the alternative airport requirement .
However , we did not get too carried away , so as to avoid a conflict with the Americans , and have said , city airports are airports as defined in Annex I. This can be amended by the Member States and the Commission in the committee procedure .
This gives us the possibility of introducing more stringent rules on noise protection in particularly noisy areas and at particularly noisy airports .
However , and here I turn to my socialist friends in this room , the general call to increase the limit from -5 EPNdB to -8 EPNdB would lead to a conflict with the USA and would also cause internal difficulties , because the Member States are not at all willing to accept more stringent standards , and at the moment the airports do not want these either .
This means that we should actually stick to -5 here .
In difficult situations we can use the definition of the city airport as a way out .
That is why I urge the House not to support Amendments Nos 21 and 22 so as not to jeopardise the compromise with the Council .
Secondly - and this is also for all of the environmentally-friendly Members of this House - we have obtained the Council 's agreement that we already state now , in respect of the review in five years ' time , that after these five years we should seek to establish a more stringent limit than -5 .
This means that we have sent out a clear signal that we want to take account of public sensitivities and public health .
But the same public wants to go on holiday ; the same public wants to fly to the European Parliament .
We therefore need to reach a compromise between the interests of the people who want to fly and the interests of those who live near airports .
I believe that we have found that compromise .
I would earnestly request that tomorrow the whole House convincingly approve the measures that we negotiated with the Council with the help of the Commission 's conciliation services , because then we can conclude this difficult issue - which is so important in terms of foreign policy - at first reading .
Mr President , the topic of aircraft noise often gives rise to conflicts , conflicts between the European Union and the United States and conflicts among European Parliament committees .
The solution to the conflict with the United States is very close .
Tomorrow , the plenary session can simply end the conflict by accepting the compromise that was reached with the Council .
As far as the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy is concerned , this will not pose a huge problem since the following four points have been resolved satisfactorily .
First of all , the scope to designate airports as city airports has been widened .
This helps combat noise pollution , since city airports are allowed to take more stringent measures .
Secondly , the research obligations from Annex II have now been formulated in such a way as not to constitute an unnecessary barrier to measures .
Thirdly , the possibility has been created to ban subsequent phases of aircraft after five years .
Fourthly , the exemption regulation for developing countries is now restricted to a ten-year period .
A total of 33 compromise amendments have been tabled , as a result of which most amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy can lapse .
However , I only tabled the first two amendments of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy by way of supplement .
Environmental considerations , in particular , must be integrated in transport policy in accordance with Article 6 of the Treaty .
As rapporteur Jarzembowski remarked a moment ago , there were a few minor changes submitted , including oral additions to the amendments tabled and also the change to Amendment No 12 , which have led us to achieve complete agreement .
I recommend that the plenary session tomorrow support the compromise package , so that the legislative process can be concluded in one reading .
This is important in order to solve a long , drawn-out conflict with the United States involving the Hushkits Regulation .
Finally , as far as the conflict between EP committees is concerned , I have no choice but to conclude that this report has wrongly been designated to the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism .
Fortunately , thanks to sound cooperation with Mr Jarzembowski , we have reached agreement with the Council .
We will therefore leave this conflict for what it was .
Could I , too , say to Mr Jarzembowski : all is well that ends well ?
The fact that we eventually ended up singing from the same hymn sheet has given me enormous pleasure .
Mr President , noise pollution around airports is always an emotive subject for the citizens who live near them , and Mr Jarzembowski who lives in Hamburg , knows this all too well .
What can be done about this ?
There are two types of measures .
One , you can develop aircraft which emit low noise levels ; you can regulate daytime and night-time operating ; noise levels can be measured - measurements are hard facts - and certain types of aircraft can be banned .
This is precisely what we have done : we have banned the noisy aircraft , the hushkits , and I was all for it .
However , when all these measures have been taken , something else can be done , namely insulating and zoning .
They are incredibly costly , very expensive indeed , not only to the government , for what the government spends is ultimately the expense of the citizens .
This meant , therefore , that when the ban on aircraft created problems , we had to consider new measures .
The Hushkits Regulation had to be scrapped .
The Commissioner had no other choice .
She started to negotiate with the Member States and a new idea was born , an idea which , at the moment , I am giving the benefit of the doubt .
And why the benefit of the doubt ?
If we consider the effects which the new measures that were agreed in ICAO context worldwide have had , not only on the European population but also on the populations in all other cities across the world , then I believe it was a useful exercise .
I would like to thank Mr Blokland who managed to tighten a few aspects , and I am well-supported in this by the PPE-DE section of our group in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
Adaptations have been made and refined , and , Mr President , I have to tell you that , if I could end each issue on this note , I would continue to be on very good terms with Mr Jarzembowski .
And I wish you , Commissioner , every success .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , firstly the rapporteur deserves our thanks for his consistent report and his committed efforts to reach compromises , the majority of which we will be supporting .
However , I have to contradict him somewhat as regards the treatment of the Environment Committee - it may have been legally correct , but from a political point of view it was not exactly optimal .
On the actual substance : a third of all European airports are currently suffering noise problems ; the problems are continuing to increase and the air transport sector is continuing to grow .
We have seen aircraft movements double in the last ten years and perhaps it will take even less time for them to double again , because flying is becoming part of everyday life .
I only have to think of the low-cost airlines , enlargement towards the east and other issues ; they will quickly lead this sector out of the slump that it has been experiencing because of September 11 , and , in fact , the first signs of growth are already visible .
The noise problems are increasing in our cities because there is more traffic , and in the conurbations population density is also on the increase .
At the same time there is also an increased desire for a better quality of life , which means that people are less willing to tolerate additional noise pollution .
That is why it certainly makes sense for us to make every effort to secure a proposal for a directive which is as effective as possible .
It makes sense to conclude international agreements because this is of course a global industry .
The ICAO agreement on the new chapter four was secured only after laborious negotiations , but of course it does not apply straight away , and that is why it is good that we are introducing these additional possibilities for placing operational restrictions on individual airports , which will enable stricter noise emission standards to be imposed .
It is also important for us to adopt a higher profile in ICAO because more international agreements are on the horizon and we will also soon have to be prepared for further international conflicts .
That is why it is really important for us to consider what we want to stand up for .
I only have to think of the open sky agreements and the issues which will still be on the agenda in connection with subsidised aircraft from third countries .
On the other hand , it does not actually make any sense - we are not in any trouble - to curtail the parliamentary procedure , because I think that in the USA they will recognise that parliamentary procedures take time .
We see three points rather differently .
Firstly , we want it spelt out even more clearly that in five years ' time , after the review , moves will be made to increase the limit values ; we want this laid down now along with the eight decibels .
Secondly , the necessary operational restrictions should take effect as quickly as possible , more quickly in our view than the Commission has proposed - this is more a reflection of the result of the vote in my group than my own personal views .
Thirdly , we should perhaps reopen the discussions on the city airports after all , although the compromise which has been reached with the Council and the Commission , as it were to extend the definition so that not only the original four but all of the airports in conurbations count if they handle internal Community traffic , seems to me personally to be right , and I think that my group will also support it in the end , even if it is after some debate .
I should like to make two final points : work should continue to conclude international agreements on engines and we will be discussing noise again - specifically overall noise-handling - in the context of the slot regulation , which will be exciting .
I am sure that we will achieve workable compromises in the next round .
Once again many thanks to the rapporteur .
Mr President , Commissioner , is what we have ideal ?
I do not think so .
However , in the current circumstances , this is the best we can commit to paper , in my view .
It is always easy to draft a series of standards just for the European Union , making them so strict in the process that while we may be happy with them , they may make it impossible for the average company to operate .
We had the choice .
We held a debate on whether to opt for an international , global or European solution .
Given the present circumstances , we made a sensible choice .
Moreover , it is on the strength of what we said that this strict standard was copied internationally .
If all Member States have accepted this standard within the ICAO , it seems necessary to me that we , as a Community institution , ensure that this standard becomes law in the Union .
I , for one , support this principle , and I think that the rapporteurs , both those of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism and those of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy have done sterling work . As I belong to both these committees , I do not feel the ambivalence which some fellow MEPs do feel .
I feel happy on both sides . This is also because the directive offers the necessary flexibility , since a system has been provided for which allows for an individual approach tailored to each airport , so that measures can be selected within a European framework .
This , at least , guarantees a certain level of equality in the treatment of people who suffer from noise pollution . In the final analysis , this is the whole object of the exercise : to ensure that people are affected as little as possible and to reconcile - at least up to a certain degree - two aspects which are , in fact , irreconcilable .
Although the review after five years will involve a tightening up of legislation , there is , in my opinion , no need to establish a limit at this stage .
This would be very unwise , in my view , and it could , in fact , undermine the entire proposal , which would be a very bad development , for we need to move forward quickly .
Parliament must , therefore , approve this proposal , so that there is a legislative document by 1 April , upon which we can withdraw the hushkits directive .
For this we must take another look at Article 5 ( 1 ) , and we are in agreement on this .
This is what we are planning to do , and I should like to ask the Commissioner whether she could not ensure that a uniform , Community method of measurement be established for this kind of noise , for that is still not available .
In my view , you should draft a bill on how noise is measured , so that we can establish objectively how measurements are to be carried out , applicable to every airport uniformly .
This initiative would also benefit the joint discussion on this issue .
Mr President , I do not share the enthusiasm of the majority of our fellow Members for the result obtained with regard to this directive .
In fact , I think that , as regards the noise reduction policy which concerns in particular those living near airports , this seems to be a step backwards .
The proposal repeals the Council regulation that should have entered into force on 1 April 2002 preventing hushkit planes , old planes fitted with muffling devices , but whose overall performance was recognised as insufficient , from landing .

This regulation is replaced by a directive based on an approach to noise management which is supposedly balanced , but which , in fact , restricts the margin for manoeuvre by the Member States with regard to combating noise pollution and prolongs the life of hushkit planes .
The amendments proposed by the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism and approved by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy may well improve the original text .
Nevertheless , we are still in a situation where the Member States who will not do anything to assist in combating noise pollution in the vicinity of their airports will in fact be practising a dumping policy which could increase over the next few years insofar as we are currently experiencing a significant rise in air traffic .
In addition to this , the legislation allowing specific action to be taken is relatively complex and will therefore slow down initiatives .
I would like to point out in this respect that , a few months ago , the European Court of Human Rights ruled in favour of people living near Heathrow airport in London who were complaining of nocturnal noise , and the right to a healthy environment and the right to sleep were recognised as human rights .
I therefore believe that in keeping with this decision of the Court of Human Rights , the Commission must quickly take a new initiative , a directive that not only restricts noise in the vicinity of airports , but lays down standards on noise exposure , thus allowing for harmony within the European Union .
Mr President , I should like to thank my colleague , Mr Jarzembowski , for all his hard work .
As Mr Jarzembowski has explained , it is extremely important that this directive repeals the original hushkit regulation within the timeframe laid down .
Without doubt , having discussed the hushkit issue on and off since many of us were elected in 1999 and for many years before , it will come as a relief that this debate can reach a conclusion .
It is worth reminding some of our colleagues that , when the agreement was reached between the EU and the US at the ICAO meeting in Montreal , all Member States were represented and agreed with the proposals that were put forward .
The key to those proposals was to take the balanced approach .
If we are to have any credibility it would be ludicrous if we in this Parliament then reneged on what has been agreed .
Speaking as someone who has lived close to London Heathrow , the busiest international airport in the world , for 30 years , and acknowledging the prosperity and jobs which flow from a successful industry , I find it extremely disappointing that perhaps some Members would prefer to score party political points rather than take on board the broader picture of what is required .
What would not be acceptable would be for any airport within the EU to be in a position to arbitrarily prevent or stop legitimate carriers from operating into and out of their airport .
The decision has to be made at Member State level in order to ensure a uniform application of any rules laid down .
However , if we are to improve congestion and noise pollution for the future , I suggest that Member States and local authorities take responsibility for proper land use planning and think carefully before using the aviation industry as a scapegoat for their failures .
Finally , having read through the additional amendments , many of which have been retabled predominantly by the Committee on the Environment , I found it somewhat disappointing that those Members found it necessary to go along that path .
I hope that they will think seriously about their actions and support the rapporteur when we vote on this report tomorrow .
International agreements are the way forward and we should continue to build on the agreement which was reached in Montreal .
Mr President , I have listened very carefully to the debate so far and I was very interested in what Mr Stercks and Mr Lannoye said .
To understand properly much of what they have said , one must consider the history .
For many years , there was no sign at all of ICAO taking any action to deal with the problem of growing aircraft noise so we in this Parliament took action .
We introduced the hushkits regulation which suspended the use of aircraft not retrospectively fitted with noise suppressors - the hushkits starting in April 2002 .
Then suddenly , there was action .
The Americans threatened legal action and sanctions and ICAO seemed to wake up .
ICAO proposed new and better noise standards and guidance on sensible operating restrictions around airports .
We are now asked though to rescind our regulation and to accept this new directive , which is quite clearly much watered-down , and to expect ICAO to agree on some new international standards as soon as possible .
I will probably go along with this at the vote tomorrow because I agree that something is better than nothing , but we can only expect only some small improvements , and only potential improvement at that .
I have to say that I am not convinced that there will be any real improvement at international level unless it is very slow as is the custom with ICAO .
Therefore , if the Commission does finally get around to sending us a report in five years ' time , we might just get a chance to see what this muddled arrangement has produced .
I look forward to the report .
I look forward to returning to the debate and I hope Mr Jarzembowski is happy with himself because I am not sure that I am .
Who wants incredibly noisy aircraft in Europe ?
Answer : the United States administration , both under Clinton and Bush .
From 1 April next , they want to send old , incredibly noisy aircraft with silencers to Europe .
Europe had already decided that these aircraft , fitted with a so-called hushkit , should be phased out after 1 April .
However , the US Government , which sells high numbers of these hushkits to airline companies in developing countries , has lobbied hard and effectively .
Instead of a general ban for the whole of Europe , the European Commission now wants each airport to document the fact that it does not want these noisy aircraft .
Of course , if you really want to , you can still stop these wretched old things .
But the result will be that an increasing number of these noisy old bangers will move to smaller airports .
From London to Manchester , from Maastricht to Bierset .
This is something I cannot endorse .
Mr President , as an aside , I should like to inform you that the Irish have just won the first race at the Cheltenham festival .
I thought you might be interested .
My views on the present hushkit legislation are on the record .
It was very questionably driven by design criteria and not performance criteria .
So I welcome this adoption of an ICAO balanced approach to air traffic noise reduction as it amounts to a fundamental system change for the European Union .
However , I have many reservations .
This Commission proposal states that noise reduction efforts are now to be assessed on the basis of individual airports , with a view to imposing operating restrictions on aircraft .
It has opted for the airport-based approach along the lines of ICAO Resolution A337 .
I support a package of measures for our larger and busier airports covering aspects such as land-use planning and management , operational restrictions and a ban on the noisier Chapter 3 aircraft .
However , as others have said , the effectiveness or otherwise of this proposal as a means of reducing air traffic noise will only be known after the Commission has submitted its report on its findings in over five years ' time .
I would particularly like to congratulate our rapporteur , Mr Jarzembowski , for his hard work and the close contact he has maintained with both the Presidency-in-Office and the Commission in an effort to find a way forward and - given the critical deadline of 1 April - to prevent a legislative vacuum from occurring .
It is imperative for all of us in this House , if possible , to avoid a second reading .
That said , it is extremely unsatisfactory for us , as legislators to have been asked to rush through such a technical piece of legislation .
I am not happy about the whole procedure .
I would , however , like to sound a note of caution .
Although these proposals are very necessary and overdue in the context of the hushkits regulation and the US complaint and , indeed , the recent opinion of the Advocate General , the UK Government 's position points out some flaws in the Commission 's approach .
So the 1 April deadline still looks rather ambitious .
Mr President , this proposal by Mr Jarzembowski seeks to achieve two things : a uniform approach to what is a global problem , and also a solution to the conflict with the United States .
Like most Members in this House , I give this proposal my support , but it is only qualified support .
There are serious problems with the way in which it is being achieved and also with the nature of the compromise that is being achieved .
I have serious problems with a system which relies on informal negotiations between individual Members of this House , the Council and the Commission .
It restrains the role of the elected Members of this House to an undue degree .
We must find some fast-track codecision procedure which can be used in these circumstances and fully respects the role of the Members of this House .
Secondly , the people who suffer as a result of the noise levels from aircraft and the operation of airports are the people who live immediately in the vicinity , particularly those on flight paths .
We will have to judge this proposal on whether or not their lives improve over the next five years .
And while we have a proposal here that the Commission will report back to us in five years ' time as to whether we are achieving what we set out to achieve , I hope that the Commission will come back here each year and tell us in what direction things are moving - whether the proposals are working , whether things are getting better or indeed in some cases getting worse - so that we can introduce corrective actions , rather than waiting for five years before beginning to take alternative steps .
I realise that a number of amendments which are good amendments in their own right are going to be rejected here tomorrow , but the Commission and Council should bear in mind that they are being rejected in order to facilitate this agreement , not because we disagree with them .
Mr President , Mrs de Palacio , pollution abatement is a noble but difficult struggle , a delicate balance between economic prosperity and human welfare .
Nevertheless , health and the economy are inseparable companions in the long run .
For that reason I too am pleased with the approach proposed by the Commission .
Noise should be reduced where that is needed most .
There is no real need for noise reduction at airports located a long way from where people live , so if a straitjacket were to apply in all situations there would be a slowdown in the economy for no good reason , and it is always the poor who are the first to suffer .
I am also pleased that we were able to get the committee to approve some useful adjustments .
It has to be made clear that the directive cannot apply to small aircraft , because nothing would be gained by banning them , although I am sure the radicals would like to protect deer and wild boars too from the sound of aircraft .
Mr Jarzembowski has once again done a very professional job .
He has had to negotiate with the Council and the Commission under heavy pressure .
Not all my colleagues , however , have taken such a responsible view of the matter .
There were many amendments tabled despite the fact that we are in danger of a trade dispute with the United States of America if we do not use this directive to quash the hushkit regulation before its entry into force .
I strongly condemn the new US steel tariffs , but , in spite of that , Europe must not pick a quarrel .
We , for our own part , can set a good example of how to manage trade policy . May President Bush learn a lesson from it .
I believe we have found a good compromise , and we should proceed from that .
The best way to bring down noise levels , however , is by an international agreement on a reduction in aircraft noise .
A totally silent world is hardly possible nor even desirable .
One day , though , a jumbo jet or the new and large - by European standards - Airbus will be emitting less noise than a flock of crows .
There is no reason for us yet , however , to prescribe limits for the noise made by crows .
Mr President , I am not going to insist on identifying the precedents which have led us to today 's discussion , which I hope will lead to a positive result tomorrow , because we all know what has happened following the negative attitude of a series of Member States of the ICAO and we all want to make progress in the fight against noise at airports .
We are also aware of the decision which the European Union adopted in relation to a certain type of modified aircraft which conforms to Chapter III and the circumstances which have led us to the current situation .
What I wish to do first is to warmly thank Mr Jarzembowski for the wonderful work he has done on a very delicate issue and also Mr Blokland for the series of very positive amendments - in terms of the environment - which he has contributed to this Commission proposal .
I believe that it is very important - and everybody here has said so - that today we find a solution , which , as Mr Sterckx said , and I agree with him , is not the ideal solution , but which at least represents a step forward and prevents further clashes with third countries .
We must understand that we are part of a multilateral system ; that , thanks to the decision of the European Union , things have moved on within the ICAO and the situation has improved and that we now have a proposal which offers us clear opportunities to improve the situation of airports in the future .
I perfectly understand that we have many amendments and that , if we did not have international commitments which are binding of all of us , the honourable Members would probably like to support them .
I would ask you tomorrow to bring that international agreement within our reach ; that we may have a proposal which supports what the 15 countries of the Union have decided , voted for and supported within the ICAO .
I would therefore like to thank Mr Jarzembowski and Mr Blokland and the two committees for their ambitious and at the same time realistic work and efforts , which show common sense and support for the decision of the 15 countries in the ICAO and therefore for the international decision .
I believe that , after removing the requirement for an alternative airport , the definition of an urban airport hugely broadens the scope and this is positive .
We could not reduce the number of movements to 30 000 since , amongst other things , it would contradict the limit laid down in the directive on environmental noise , which this very Parliament approved recently .
I believe that the definition of the competent authority has improved and allows for the appropriate margins .
I would also like to insist once again that we are not obliging any Member State to create a new body , but that the competent authority in each case will be defined and determined by the Member State in question , and it is therefore necessary that the State in question does define and determine it , and I would like to point out that we agree with Parliament that it is essential to make it clear that operative restrictions , according to the acoustic level , are based on methodologies described in the third edition of volume 1 of Annex XVI of the ICAO .
This document has been agreed at international level and we would not accept any less rigorous document .
It is also clear that , if the operative restrictions were not based on acoustic levels , but on the runway and the time , it would be difficult for us to refer to this Annex .
With regard to the obligation to carry out analysis , the amount of information has been an issue on which a careful balance has been achieved : Article 5 , paragraphs 1 and 2 .
On the one hand , we do not want to impose unnecessary burdens on airports or on the States of the Union , but , on the other hand , we must ensure that we have a suitable basis for decision making .
Even in the event that an airport does not propose significant operative restrictions , we believe that it will be to their benefit to make as complete an analysis as possible in order to make decisions in full knowledge of the facts .
We have studied very carefully the rhythm which the airports could impose with the withdrawal of aircraft from the fleets in question and we are convinced that this reference should be made according to movements .
I believe that a minimum of five years is a very tough requirement and we could not therefore reduce this time period even further .
With regard to the developing countries , the Commission has carried out a detailed study which has concluded that these countries have acted in a responsible way by reducing their fleets of Chapter II aircraft and we applaud this action .
We must be fair towards these operators and I believe that the compromise amendment presented is a solution we can support .
The Commission would also like to express its support for a general exemption applicable to genuinely exceptional services , for humanitarian reasons or maintenance work which cannot be carried out elsewhere for example .
Ladies and gentlemen , the fact that decisions are taken in a coherent way throughout the Community is a fundamental step forwards .
This means that we have the opportunity to replace the current patchwork of restrictions with prepared measures within a coherent framework of analysis , in such a way that similar solutions will be applied in European airports which have similar problems .
I believe that we have an applicable directive which conforms to our international obligations and which , furthermore , will contribute to improving the quality of life of the citizens who live close to airports .
In this respect , Mr President , I would like once again to thank the two rapporteurs and the honourable Members for their work and I am grateful for the cooperation and understanding of Parliament , which wanted to participate in this very difficult exercise of adopting legislation in record time , which allows us to prevent other types of problem in the international field .
Thank you very much , Mr President .
I hope that tomorrow the vote and the support of the honourable Members will allow us once and for all to resolve this issue which we have been dealing with for far too long .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0365 / 2001 ) by María Izquierdo Rojo , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , on women and fundamentalism ( 2000 / 2174 ( INI ) ) .
Mr President , I would firstly like to welcome the fact that this House has accepted the proposal to produce a report on this issue , ' Women and fundamentalism ' , thereby allowing us to confront this serious problem and to hold this debate and the subsequent vote despite the difficulties involved and the current pressures .
On behalf of the hundreds of millions of human beings whose rights are denied or restricted as a result of fundamentalist pressure , I would like to thank the European Parliament .
Today the European Union must defend the universality of human rights in a globalised world in which fundamentalists represent serious threats to freedoms , human rights and peace .
This report offers useful proposals which will help to combat them .
The first of them , Mr President , is that we must not allow religious fundamentalism to become a taboo subject , since problems are not solved by ignoring them or covering them up , but by being aware of them and confronting them .
Secondly , fundamentalism cannot be combated by means of fundamentalism under another guise ; the history of humanity is awash with disasters of that type .
On the contrary , fundamentalism is reduced by promoting and exercising democratic freedoms , promoting the emancipation of women , pluralism and ideological and cultural diversity , the promotion of openness and the acceptance of differences and social and economic well-being .
Mr President , one of the key elements which has proved to assist in the fight against fundamentalism is modernity , in a plural and multicultural sense .
There can be no social modernity without human modernity .
The desire to modernise a society while denying women democracy ends in failure ; hence our condemnation of partial modernisation processes on the part of leaders of States which want only to modernise economic and technology aspects , while maintaining the basic principles of obsolete patriarchal societies in tact .
Women are currently the main bringers of social modernity .
However , Mr President , there is no single model for the emancipated woman .
Women 's identity must be personal and individual , differing in terms of religion , tradition and culture .
Stereotypes , dress , values , lifestyles and behaviour must be a question of personal free choice .
Mr President , another of the key elements for preserving society from fundamentalism is secularisation or the separation of public affairs , which belong in the political sphere , from religious beliefs and convictions , which must be free and respected and which belong in the private individual sphere .
The space occupied by religion in a social and political whole must involve a very broad range of possibilities .
Mr President , the accusations being levelled against this report are unfair . It distinguishes and differentiates between fundamentalism and the normal practice of religion in a clear and respectful way , despite the fact that during the eras of certain religions in the past such a distinction has not existed .
Mr President , we are facing a violation of human rights on an immense scale .
Just in the case of women and at the present time , we can identify hundreds of the millions of people whose rights and freedoms are being restricted , violated and denied them .
As a result of the time limits laid down in the Rules of Procedure , I have not been able to dwell on the death sentence by stoning imposed on Safiya Husseini , in Nigeria , nor on the Iranian women who are publicly flogged , nor those women , photographs of whose lynching I have seen , nor did I arrive in time to prevent the execution by stoning of Maryam Ayoubi last year .
Despite the fact that the Iranian authorities had replied to the Commission that it had not stoned women for three years , the UN and Amnesty International have stated that that execution took place .
Therefore , Mr President , I would like this report to be just a first step , followed by other specific parliamentary proposals , which will demonstrate , in each country and case by case , what a human life is worth in the European Union .
Mr President , as draftsman for the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , I should like to congratulate our rapporteur on her exceptional report and for having the courage to tell the truth , however painful .
We recently witnessed the collapse of the Taliban regime , which highlighted the tragic position of women in Afghanistan .
We recently witnessed the trials and tribulations of Safiya Husaini , condemned to death by stoning by an Islamic court in Nigeria for having a baby out of wedlock .
A similar verdict has been passed in Sudan .
All these cases show just how topical this report is .
They also turn the spotlight on the violation of women 's fundamental freedoms and rights by fundamentalist , anti-democratic regimes centre stage in a most dramatic manner .
What happened in Afghanistan with the rise of the Taliban is one very typical example .
Women were deprived of their most basic human rights overnight .
Like every other anti-democratic regime , the Taliban based their power on subjugating women and going back to their roots .
Under these regimes , the sexual conduct , way of life and reproductive functions of women , even the way they dress , are generally controlled by religious leaders , allegedly abiding by scriptures and cultural traditions , while inhumane , violent and humiliating punishment , such as whipping and stoning , is the order of the day .
We must not forget that about 5 000 women are murdered ever year by male members of their families for reasons of honour and that the perpetrators go unpunished .
One hundred and thirty million women throughout the world have had their genitalia mutilated and that a further 2 million women a year are exposed to such practices .
However , I should like to point out here that fundamentalism does not thrive just in developing countries ; it also thrives in Europe .
I think there is a serious problem in Poland .
I have here an indictment signed by 100 public figures accusing the Catholic church of unacceptable interference and attempting to control women 's reproductive functions .
Mr President , as we have stated repeatedly , the Group of the European People 's Party condemns any form of fundamentalism and in that sense , we think it important for this report to be drafted in Parliament , and have endorsed it accordingly .
Fundamentalists have turned the myth of their religion into a streamlined ideology which forms the basis of their polity , and it is absolutely vital for the West to understand this fundamentalism .
Our intelligentsia must make this effort .
At the same time , Europe 's Christian , or post-Christian , society must re-affirm its own , moral identity , this with the intention of being better able to protect its own values , and of understanding what is happening in the rest of the world , or what is happening with the 2.5 million Muslims who live in the European Union today .
The treatment of women under fundamentalist regimes , the topic of this report , is a burning issue .
Denial of their rights and their dignity is unacceptable , but unfortunately , the rapporteur failed to draft a report which draws a distinction between religious perception and the place of religion in society on the one hand , and religious fundamentalism on the other .
As a result , religion is being denied what other institutions and movements are being granted , namely the freedom of opinion and expression of this opinion , even if that opinion is partly seen as not conforming to the development of society . I share this view .
This is why the PPE-DE Group in the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities has not accepted the text , despite however much it is opposed to the oppression of women .
Together with a number of feminist groups in Afghanistan , I have personally in my group launched a support campaign in order to give them the chance to emancipate .
If Europe wants to have any influence at all , and that is , after all , the aim of our campaign - the aim is not to launch an empty slogan , but to exert influence - we will need to learn to understand fundamentalism , whether we like it or not .
I should like to conclude my speech with a reaction of the mufti of Marseille .
It is in English , and I think that he is right and that it should determine our attitude too .
The mufti of Marseille
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the great merit of Mrs Izquierdo Rojo 's report is that it has triggered another wide-ranging debate about the influence of religious fundamentalism on the emancipation of women .
On behalf of the Socialist Group , I welcome the report , which emphasises Europe 's responsibility for ensuring respect for fundamental rights and democratic principles as well as the secularity of nation states .
Throughout the world , however , women 's rights are being restricted or breached on the pretext of religious or cultural traditions or the law .
This does not apply only to Islamists , but also to other religious groups .
After difficult negotiations , the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities is proposing more than 30 paragraphs of specific measures , which have met with the agreement of four groups .
We deeply regret the fact that of all groups the Christian-Democratic Group was not prepared to take part in compromise negotiations .
The rapporteur was willing to do so .
The need to fight against the suppression mechanisms of the fundamentalists should , after all , be the subject of a consensus .
The Afghan Taliban provided us with an example of how they first jettisoned women 's rights , then forced women to wear the burka , and finally denied them education and medical care and cut them off from any kind of paid employment .
In a joint declaration , the Women 's Rights Committee in the European Parliament and the women of the Council of Europe call for an international group of female observers to be set up to see that Afghan women have their unrestricted human rights restored to them .
We condemn any kind of fundamentalism , offence or crime for reasons of so-called honour , such as stoning or genital mutilation or withholding reproductive rights , and that includes in Europe .
Within the EU , we need to influence immigration laws and asylum policy so that reasons for persecution which are gender-specific or not related to a particular state are recognised .
In my country this is the subject of a major debate and there too it is the Christian-Democratic Group which is refusing to compromise .
Afghanistan , a country where , during the Taliban 's reign of terror , women were not allowed to leave their homes , were not allowed to work or receive education , is the most poignant example of a country where fundamentalists , backed by their delusions , oppressed women .
However , on a smaller scale too , there are women across the world who are being oppressed , abused or discriminated against in the name of religion .
In many Islamic countries , girls are genitally maimed , although this is not mentioned anywhere in the Koran .
In fact , the Koran prohibits this practice .
This is no longer religion , but fundamentalism .
Some fellow MEPs labour under the misapprehension that I , along with other MEPs , denounce any religious interference in politics .
This is incorrect .
We welcome the fact that people are involved in European politics .
This comes about via industry , environmental organisations and the unions .
Needless to say , religions will also lobby for their interests and their ideals .
The fact that churches defend their political agendas here among MEPs is a credit to our institution .
I am therefore delighted with the Vatican 's attention to this report , as documented in the authoritative Spanish newspaper , El Pais , among others .
As a first step towards an open dialogue with the Vatican , I should like to say the following in response to their criticism : we simply want women to be able to decide for themselves whether , and if so when , they want to bear children .
The report also focuses on the difficult position of women in developing countries and of lesbians .
These are real problems which would be solved far better if politicians were to join forces with churches .
Cooperation always leads to better results .
Our joint fight against capital punishment or poverty is a good case in point .
Would it not be wonderful if , on the road to yet more cooperation , we could start an open dialogue with regard to the Vatican 's position on condoms ?
Last year , 2.6 million people died of AIDS in Africa .
If the Vatican stops the ban on condoms , we might be able to rescue a percentage of these people .
Let us therefore enter into this open dialogue so that we can together fight fundamentalism at some stage in future , on the understanding that each take up their own responsibilities .
I should like to thank the rapporteur and the fellow MEPs with whom we have cooperated .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think that everyone is agreed that fundamentalism has an extremely negative effect on the emancipation process of women .
It is a source of violation of human and women 's rights and fundamental freedoms , as enshrined in the international treaties and conventions , and exercises its baleful influence not only directly , but also via religious rules , cultural characteristics , customs , political campaigns and social standards .
Women 's rights are human rights , and this must form the basis of our actions .
As I see it , and as we hear , women wish to accentuate the equal qualities of , and not the differences between , people .
Let us transcend our religious differences in order to achieve a more humane world , preferably without violence .
How many wars and how much violence find their improper origins in religious intolerance , often fed by political interests rather than religious perception ?
The unnecessary , pointless violence between Muslims and Hindus in India serves as a recent example of this .
It would be a major credit to this report if , thanks to the suggestions mentioned in it , an extreme danger of fundamentalism , namely the suffering of women and girls in Afghanistan , were turned into an example of how things can be changed .
Allow me to explain .
In the report , we asked the Council , the Member States and the Commission to take a joint initiative to send a special group of observers , specialised in gender equality , to Afghanistan to ensure that women 's rights , as enshrined in international agreements and Treaties , are observed , and that aid and reconstruction policy takes sufficient account of the gender equality issues .
In this way , the tragedy caused by the Taliban , as well as the solution to it , can be used in the fight against other forms of fundamentalism .
This report is also praiseworthy for the fact that it expresses the wish that in the future directive on procedures for granting asylum in the Member States , account should be taken of various forms of female persecution .
Mr President , it has taken a long time to bring this report before the plenary sitting as religion and sexuality are without doubt two very sensitive issues to address , even in the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities .
Now we have come this far , I would like to thank my colleagues who have put in so much effort to draw up a number of new amendments .
I would particularly like to thank them for showing the courage to address the role of Saudi Arabia , something which we otherwise tend to keep quiet about , given that we live , it might be said , in an era characterised by neo-liberal economic fundamentalism .
There are many different sorts of fundamentalism both within and outside the borders of the European Union .
I cannot help but mention last week 's scandal , one of many scandals over the years .
This time it concerned the United States .
The Catholic Church has protected those of its representatives who have sexually abused children in their congregations for a generation .
What is worst is when degenerates of this kind are also defended with the aid of the law .
In this case , I am thinking of the current cases in Nigeria , where women are sentenced to be stoned to death for having sexual relations outside marriage .
I am also thinking of the legal proceedings taken in Portugal against women who have had abortions and against those who have helped them to have these abortions , as well as of the recent referendum on the same issue in Ireland .
These are just a few examples among many which demonstrate the right assumed by men to control women and children as their personal property .
This often takes place in the name of religion and often under the protection of the law .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is always revolutionary to discuss the situation of women , but a few facts need to be made clear first .
Fundamentalisms affect more than just the lives of women , they affect the lives of people in general , and for that reason they must be opposed and rejected on principle for they are at the root of a vision of society that is based on conflict .
It is precisely because of this intrinsic nature that they have such negative consequences for women , becoming a sort of ethical justification for abuse and violence .
Clearly , respect for fundamental human rights is a cultural even more than a legal heritage , which is shared by the Member States of the European Union , a common value which has to contend with practices , customs , religions and cultures with which Europe comes into contact mainly because of migration .
I would like to make it clear , however , as a Catholic , that I am absolutely convinced that Catholicism is not guilty of the forms of fundamentalism that the report appears to suggest it is .
I fully support the call for the adoption of a universal moratorium on executions and the death penalty , an effective , incisive action , a campaign against mutilation , flogging and stoning , such as we have carried out and will continue to carry out for cases such as that of the Nigerian woman , Safiya Husseini .
I would like to draw your attention to a number of issues which I feel need to be addressed , calling upon the Commission and Parliament to reflect on them once again : to reflect on the right of the family , on the minimum conditions for the right of asylum , on integration , with regard to which we need to move away from a form of hypocritical rhetoric which drifts between full integration with the Member States of the European Union and respect for identities , and on the need for a clear separation of Church from State , or rather of religion from politics .
To sum up , we confirm our rejection of any form of violence , particularly violence and oppression inflicted on human beings , be they men or women .
We call upon the Commission not just to guarantee that the Community acquis on women 's rights will be respected in the talks , but also to analyse all these problematic issues further , for there are at least as many unresolved issues as issues which have been resolved .
Thousands of women suffer oppression , abuse or other forms of maltreatment .
Every serious attempt to do something about this deserves our support .
After all , women are equal to men and deserve respect for their talents .
As a Christian , I have adopted this attitude based on the Bible .
However , the report on women and fundamentalism offers no solution to the problem . Quite the reverse , in fact .
The report tips towards a similar kind of intolerant fundamentalism to that which it means to fight .
Respect for the deep conviction of worshippers is nowhere to be detected .
The report arrogantly prescribes what is good and evil .
Religions are treated with a negative and biased approach .
The report 's basic ideology is founded on the belief that people determine for themselves what is right and wrong .
People only have rights .
Any mutual ties of love and care , of solidarity and self-denial are treated with suspicion .
This appears to me to be unadulterated egotism , despite the veneer of human rights .
The statements about motherhood form the most disappointing part of the report .
Motherhood is , by definition , not a purely personal matter , if nothing else because children develop their own personalities .
Furthermore , the father is depicted in an appalling manner as somebody who exercises control over the reproductive capacity of women .
As a father , I feel deeply hurt by this statement .
Is the rapporteur looking to abolish men , by any chance ?
I regret the work that has gone into this report by the rapporteur , but I hope that it will be rejected .
Let us look for other ways of improving the position of oppressed women .
Mr President , Mrs Poli Bortone , as a Catholic , is calling and has called quite clearly for a clear separation of Church from State , or rather , as she said , of religion from politics .
As a lay person , I make exactly the same request , which , I feel , restores dignity to those who have faith or religious beliefs and restores dignity to those with political responsibilities .
Ladies and gentlemen , the problem is precisely this : the separation of religion from political power and political decision-making .
The problem covers more than just the religions we describe as fundamentalist , it is more than just the extreme case of genital mutilation and the Sharia : it is the general , standard situation , which is common in our countries too , the fact that there needs to be a separation of Church from State , of religion from politics .
This is the heart of the matter , this is what we must have the courage to do .
It is too easy to condemn extreme cases or Afghanistan ; it is more difficult to take a look at our own home , more difficult to talk about the continual interference : I refer , for example , to scientific research , to the ban on the use of supernumerary embryo cells for scientific purposes , I am thinking of the Church 's positions on therapeutic cloning and the obedience shown by the political class .
Therefore , the meaning of this debate , of this report , for us and for all the women who live in Arab countries , whether extremist or not , is that the dignity of each individual and the respect for the religious beliefs of each individual will be safeguarded only if we assume our responsibility to separate religion from politics , Church from State .
There you are : this , I feel , is what we must have the courage to do , without limiting our focus , so to speak , to extreme situations .
We must take care .
If we do not make the separation absolutely clear-cut and make indulgent concessions to the claims of cultural relativism , we will not help the women of Arab or European countries who are fighting for recognition of their role in society and their integrity at all .
Mr President , in European society and especially in the European Parliament , where we fight for respect for human rights , the debate on the issue of fundamentalism and its repercussions on people 's lives and on the productivity and creativity of society is of immense importance .
History teaches us - and modern times also show us - that women are the first and most vulnerable victims of fundamentalism and it is this which interests Parliament 's Committee on Women 's Rights .
Violations of women 's human rights are a daily occurrence in numerous areas of the world , in various forms and in various sectors of public and private life .
And if we exercise a little self-criticism , we must admit that it was the destruction of cultural monuments by the Taliban and the terrorist attack on 11 September which made us aware of the situation of women in Afghanistan .
And cultural and religious customs and traditions are constantly cited in Afghanistan - as they are elsewhere - as an excuse for violating these rights .
It is true that women and how they live are always the last bastion of resistance to progress in a country or society .
So what we see is that , while numerous countries accused of violating human rights , especially women 's human rights , are finding the courage to introduce economic reforms which often fly in the face of traditional or religious precepts , when it comes to women and their rights , change is resisted at every turn .
My political group and the rapporteur differ on the role which religion plays in people 's lives .
We do not accept that religion and human rights are in opposite camps .
Anyway , keeping the faith cannot go hand in glove with suppression and violence .
This was the thrust of repeated amendments proposed by my political group in committee ; however , the rapporteur failed to pay them any attention , which is why my political group has tabled amendments before plenary .
Rather than fight our citizens ' religious convictions , our approach is to mobilise all the political means at our disposal to ensure that the principles of the Universal Declaration on Human Rights are applied to all policies , as the European Commission did recently when it took the initiative to strengthen these policies in its foreign relations .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is extremely important that the European Parliament discusses and votes in favour of the report on women and fundamentalism .
This is a political issue of the utmost topicality , which must be addressed carefully but quite firmly .
It is our view that , in the European Union , equal rights for women and men , the right of all of us not to suffer public and domestic violence and to undertake the tasks that are within our ability , which we wish to undertake and which benefit us , is one of the greatest privileges we enjoy .
We wish to share these privileges with all the women in the world .
The violence we see throughout the world , particularly the situation of Afghan women under the Taliban regime , also exists , unfortunately , in other countries in which the dignity and will of women are trampled on for religious or ideological reasons .
We must condemn and fight effectively against the various forms of fundamentalism that exist in the world and which allow such situations to exist .
No one will be able to understand why the European Parliament is not adopting a strong position on this matter .
Many compromise amendments have now been tabled .
We must make an effort to reach agreement and we need to keep an open and tolerant mind on this matter .
We cannot adopt a fundamentalist approach to this issue of intransigence toward the enormously serious situations taking place across the world and , in some cases , for example concerning the decision on reproductive rights , even within the European Union .
The aim of this report is to secure a vote against all forms of fundamentalism .
If the European Parliament does not approve the report , it would , from a political point of view , be extremely serious ; it would send the message to the world that the European Parliament cannot agree on how to fight the various forms of fundamentalism that currently exist .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think we are caught between a desire for clarity and the difficult nature of this subject .
I am slightly uncomfortable with this report .
I accept that it took a certain amount of courage to draw up this report , but I am not convinced that it had to be so ambiguous .
The line between religion and fundamentalism does not seem to me to be clearly drawn .
This certainly does not mean that fundamentalism is bad and religion good , but rather that we must not confuse religion with fundamentalism and vice versa .
Speaking , not as a politician , but as a researcher who has studied the history of women , I know one thing : there is not a single religion that has not created a hierarchy between the sexes .
This is a historical fact that cannot be denied .
All those of us who want to oppose fundamentalism in any shape or form must face up to this historical fact without being hypocritical about it .
In every religion , there is a hierarchy between the sexes .
Some do promote certain women 's rights , but few create and promote gender equality .
That does not exist .
We just have to put up with it , as it were .
Personally , I am in favour of separating church and State , as you can tell from my speech .
My words are addressed to all followers of religion .
Fundamentalist or not , you are well aware that no religion has produced a theory on equality between men and women .
This report makes me uncomfortable as there are some things that are not right .
Recital T , for example , states that fundamentalism and feminism can be reconciled .
Nothing could be further from the truth .
It is possible to cobble together or come up with strategies for emancipation despite fundamentalism , as certain Iranian women have proved to us , but that does not make it true in all cases .
Similarly , when I read in Article 31 that religious leaders must be asked to grant women the right to control their own bodies , I must protest .
They will not do it !
They are fighting against contraception and abortion .
We know it , fundamentalism or not .
Let us think seriously and clearly about all that .
We will undoubtedly disagree , but each person 's position will be clear to us all .
Mr President , we are firm supporters of the fight to uphold women 's rights which are trampled upon by fundamentalists , but we feel that this report does not do the cause any favours .
When it accuses the religious organisations of barring women from leading positions in the hierarchy , it is not attacking the kind of fundamentalism which is a threat - Islamic fundamentalism - so much as the Church , which restricts priesthood to men .
The report contradicts itself when it calls upon the European Parliament - moreover in arrogant , disrespectful terms - to impose its own views on matters of dogma and ideology on the Pope and the patriarchs .
This prompts me to wonder what is happening to the European Parliament : is it the parliament of the peoples or a parliament serving the occult powers ?
The report makes two mistakes .
The first is to equate Islamic fundamentalism with the principles of the Christian tradition , which have been dismissed as obsolete and reactionary , whereas the Christian and Catholic tradition is an integral part of the heritage of values and common culture of the European peoples .
The second is to see Islamic fundamentalism as a degenerate sect of Islam when it is actually the current , authentic interpretation of Islam which is taught in all Islamic universities .
It may be politically correct to disregard these facts but in doing so we are preventing Europe from defending itself against the danger represented by Islamic communities , governed by the severe rules of the Sharia which takes as much notice of women 's rights as it does of our right of the family and all the principles of freedom .
Mr President , I have to say that I am genuinely perplexed - and I am not saying this to take sides - by this report , not least in the light of my experience of the past two years in which , as Vice-President of the ACP-EEC Joint Assembly responsible for Human Rights , much of my time was spent promoting women 's rights and freedoms .
I am perplexed by many parts of the report and I want to go back to the crux of the matter , which I feel has been comprehensively defined by Mrs Bonino in her speech , and state my views clearly once again .
The problem is the separation of religion from politics .
From this point of view , if there is to be such a separation , it has to be understood that there are two ways of looking at these two radically different dimensions of life ; so much so that , in actual fact , the only fundamentalism I truly fear is the fundamentalism of those sorts of idealisms which can no longer see the sense of reality in dealing with each specific subject individually by different means .
Therefore , when this report calls upon us not to recognise States in which women are excluded from government and it is referring not to a normal State but to a State such as the Vatican , for example , I realise immediately that there is something wrong , for we are being asked to trespass on Member States ' prerogatives and interfere in something which does not deserve such treatment .
Similarly , if religion and politics are to be separated , the problem is the freedom of the Church , which must not be conditioned by political points of view or prerogatives .
Therefore , when I read in point K of this report that , when religious bodies carry out activities of a public nature , they are , just by doing so , as good as committing a crime against an alleged European law ; that is , if , by way of example , a religious body were to run a hospital or a school , it would in some way be a threat to European law , I find this extremely disturbing .
That is why I confirm once again my support for the fight to uphold women 's rights , but I must strongly reiterate my concern at the report 's method and subject matter .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , last Friday , 8 March , was International Women 's Day .
I hope that each one of us , men and women , took part in meetings , seminars and conferences to confirm , once and for all , that equality between men and women is vital for the democratic development of our societies .
The values of the European Union laid down in the Charter of Fundamental Rights include the right to human dignity , the right to the integrity of the person , freedom of thought , conscience and religion and equality between men and women .
Therefore , here , in this Assembly , let us accept our responsibilities .
It is up to us , the men and women of Europe , to apply these rights and ensure their application within the European Union and to defend and develop these values in the rest of the world .
Here , I would like to point out how important the adoption of this report would be in this battle , as we must keep on tirelessly reminding ourselves that women are the primary victims of fundamentalism .
They are victims of violence , social , economic , political and sexual discrimination , psychological and physical abuse , oppression , and are refused all the fundamental rights : equality , access to education and politics , and all in the very name of fundamentalism , which is the antithesis of human rights .
We can and must take action .
We must promote and protect democracy and human rights in our Association Agreements .
We must also ensure intercultural dialogue between the two banks of the Mediterranean by increasing monitoring for more active participation of women in the actions and programmes we support .
Lastly , we must support women seeking asylum in the European Union having suffered persecution in their own country in the name of fundamentalism .
The defence of women 's rights and equality between men and women must be one of the cornerstones of our actions which requires specific attention from our Assembly .
In this Assembly , from now on , with the vote on this directive , let us give women the means and the signal to cast off their chains and let us once more assume our responsibilities .
Mr President , the discussion is very interesting but I have noticed that hardly anyone is talking about the text , probably because many of us are confused by it .
The history of this report , in the first place , shows that this initiative is untimely .
What was originally a report on women in Islam has ended up as a convoluted , ambiguous report with no real coherence .
In not wishing to attack Islam head-on , which I understand , the definition of fundamentalism has remained vague .
Yet is fundamentalism not a caricature of religion ?
We are all in agreement with regard to separating the temporal from the spiritual , and , from then on , it is not really within Parliament 's remit to get involved in the ambiguous area of comparative theology .
However , certain points deserve our agreement , in particular the statement that , within the territory of the Member States , customs and beliefs that are counter to human rights , and in particular women 's rights , cannot be tolerated and that the family rights of the Member States take precedence over those of the countries of origin of immigrants .
In conclusion , equality between men and women is not a matter of theory .
Women must be promoted , along with their position and role in society , not simply as women , but because they are part of the same humanity , and therefore the same dignity , as men .
Mr President , fundamentalism causes many problems within societies , and women , in particular , are the victim .
This is illustrated by such things as the situation of women in Afghanistan , the stoning of women , or traditional practices such as female circumcision which , unfortunately , are still being carried out , also in Europe .
In fundamentalist societies in particular , women are often denied fundamental rights and freedoms , and often have no access to adequate assistance , health care and education .
This is why I was pleased with the proposal by the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities to draft an own-initiative report on the topic of ' Women and fundamentalism ' and this is precisely why I am disappointed with the poor quality of the present report .
I regret that we were unable to find a compromise within Mrs Karamanou 's opinion .
The Izquierdo report is right to call attention to the adverse effects of fundamentalism .
However , if the topic and the intention are good , it does not necessarily follow that the report is good .
The report goes too far where it lumps together religion , fundamentalism and human rights violation .
The report is more anti-religion than it is pro-woman .
It has adopted the wrong approach because solutions are sought in half-yearly reports , the setting up of an open university for women only , special mobility programmes for women - as if women needed this - and intervention in countries which act in accordance with their legislation but which , in the eyes of the rapporteur , nevertheless offer women inadequate protection .
The report is also inconsistent .
It is fair to call for the separation of church and state , but it goes on to prescribe requirements for the internal organisation of religious traditions .
Moreover , the report is full of careless formulations .
Our group has tabled amendments , which can improve the report to some extent .
However , even if they were all adopted , there are many instances left of over-simplification , lack of editorial clarity , duplication , obligatory repetitions of EU legislation and proposals which fall outside our remit .
In my country , representatives of human rights organisations , women 's organisations , churches and women in churches have made an urgent appeal to vote against the report .
One thing is certain : women and religion , the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities and Parliament , along with the fight against fundamentalism , deserve a better report than this one .
Mr President , I am also perplexed by the fact that tradition and culture are always used as an argument at the expense of anything else .
Historically , culture and tradition have put women into the situation of inequality they suffer today .
The worst violations against women in the world are currently carried out on behalf of religious fundamentalism .
Religious fundamentalism is also political and , when women and girls live under it , their lives tragically offer them no possibility of escape .
In the name of the freedom of thought which the Members from the People 's Party advocate , quite rightly , the Izquierdo report argues in favour of the separation of the powers of Church and State , that is , between religion and politics .
That should be the report 's most significant argument .
Many women are awaiting our commitment on this issue .
We must defend the values that we , men and women , espouse in order that we may live together in freedom .
In the name of that freedom of choice and decision which is denied to the majority of women in the rest of the world .
We do not agree with the exclusive determinism for women , which condemns them for the rest of their lives .
It is not true that women can participate with the same dignity as men because they are excluded from practically everything which may give them that dignity .
In the name of tradition , religion and fundamentalism , women are stoned , murdered and mutilated .
As I have said , many women await our commitment and we cannot disappoint them .
In the name of freedom of thought , we must vote in favour of this report .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mrs Izquierdo Rojo because she touches on a very important and difficult problem in her report .
To start with , as far as fundamentalism is concerned , I think that we have to analyse the concept outside the European Union .
According to the Treaty , the European Union is a union of independent states .
Religion is a purely private matter for each individual and keeping the faith is a personal decision for each individual , assuming of course that keeping the faith does not run counter to the basic principles which unite all the Member States of the European Union .
On Women 's Day recently , we discussed Muslim women in Europe .
Islam is the second most important religion in the European Union today .
The European Muslim women who spoke highlighted the fact that the Koran is interpreted solely by men .
Women are never involved in interpreting the Koran .
However , any interpretation of the Koran or any other religion in the European Union cannot be respected unless the basic laws and principles of the European Union are respected first .
This means that the basic principle of equality of men and women is a principle on which any other priorities and principles must be founded .
However , outside Europe , fundamentalism really is a very important problem , as many of the speakers have described .
I think that identifying , describing and condemning the problem is very important , but Europe will be guilty by omission if it fails to take very specific measures to deal with it worldwide .
The European Commission has proposed specific measures to mainstream the gender dimension in all forms of foreign policy , in external trade , in development aid , in all the European Union 's individual agreements with third countries and at summits organised between the European Union and various continents , such as the Europe / Africa , Europe / Asia and Europe / Latin America summits .
This proposal is quite specific .
First , last year , as part of mainstreaming in all individual policies , the Commission presented the action plan on development relating to women .
It contains very specific actions on how to take account of respect for women 's human rights , the involvement of women in development aid and the development of each country , and how to apply this action plan , with incentives and , where necessary , with sanctions .
Similarly , we are organising an initial seminar in March for experts from the 15 Member States and delegates invited from all over the world to debate a foreign policy action plan to be complied with by the European Union and the Member States .
We are preparing a Council of Foreign Ministers in 2003 at which the main item on the agenda will be a foreign policy action plan and recommendations .
This is a very important report because it focuses the debate on what is now one of the most serious issues at global level , the crime perpetrated against women on the grounds of religion or cultural mores , a crime which affects hundreds of millions of women .
Thank you very much , Mrs Diamantopoulou .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12 noon .
The next item is the debate on the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0038 / 2002 ) by Mrs Thorning-Schmidt , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on the minimum health and safety requirements regarding the exposure of workers to the risks arising from physical agents ( Noise ) ( 17th individual Directive within the meaning of Article 16 ( 1 ) of Directive 89 / 391 / EEC ) ( 10479 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0546 / 2001 - 1992 / 0449A ( COD ) )
Mr President , I should like to begin with a comment on the Rules of Procedure , and I assume that the time it takes will not be deducted from my speaking time .
I think we should try something new in Parliament today .
What I envisage doing is dividing my five minutes in such a way that I am allowed to talk for four minutes to introduce the debate and for one minute to conclude it , once the Commissioner has made her speech . I propose this in the light of two factors .
First of all , I understand that the Conference of Presidents had an ' away day ' last week , when they decided to have more lively debates here in the House . The second factor is Rule 121 , paragraph 4 of the Rules of Procedure .
I asked the Sittings Directorate , before I came here today , if what I propose was possible .
I was told flatly it was not , but I want to ask permission to do what I propose , given that there is nothing in the Rules of Procedure to prevent such a procedure .
I therefore assume that you will be sympathetic towards organising matters in this way today .
Mrs Thorning-Schmidt , of course I am not going to subtract the time you have spent on this request from your speaking time .
I thank you for having chosen a moment when I am in the chair to carry out this kind of experiment , which makes my life much more enjoyable .
I must say that I do not see any problem with your suggestion .
If you speak as rapporteur and , after the Commissioner has spoken , you ask for the floor to make some point of detail in relation to what has taken place during the debate or what the Commissioner has said , I do not see any problem in our proceeding in that way .
I would now ask you to take the floor , Mrs Thorning-Schmidt , as rapporteur .
Mr President , can I do the same if there is a problem ?
If the Member replies and then there is a need for me to reply , can I do the same ?
Commissioner , my understanding is that , in your capacity as representative of the Commission , you can request the floor whenever you like .
Mr President , with regard once again to the Rules of Procedure , I want to say that my business following the debate is not to criticise anything the Commission has said but , rather , to comment on aspects of what my fellow MEPs here in the House have stated .
I am now , then , embarking upon my speaking time .
Noise is a major problem in European workplaces , and I believe it is important to emphasise that this directive is good for workers and that it does not affect anyone else .
As has been discussed , there are many misunderstandings as to who is affected by this directive .
We know that noise can have incredibly harmful effects .
The possible effects of noise are very well documented .
We are talking about tinnitus and permanent loss of hearing .
I believe that combating noise in the workplace is the best thing we can do to prevent injury at work and to prevent employees being permanently excluded from the labour market .
It has therefore surprised me a great deal during the debate on this issue in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs that , for example , the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , which normally attaches incredible importance to doing something for handicapped people in the EU , has not shown greater interest in efforts to prevent people from being handicapped by damage to their hearing , for that is at all events the best strategy of all .
We also know that the existing noise directive from 1996 is out of date and does not provide employees with sufficient protection .
The common position with which we are now being presented is far better , for an actual limit value is being introduced for the first time .
It is an important step that such a common minimum level should be established for the whole of the EU .
The amendments adopted by the committee improve the common position on a range of points , and I am pleased about the support which many have said they will give .
The biggest improvement can be achieved if we set great store by the preventive strategy , and I believe that that is a right and proper principle .
I turn now to the music and entertainment industry .
This is a much discussed subject in connection with which the Group of the Party of European Socialists has entered into a compromise , by which we stand , with the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party and the Group of the European People 's Party and European Democrats .
I must not , however , disguise the fact that this is an impairment of the common position , and it is interesting that we now see a European Parliament that attaches less importance to protecting employees than the Council of Ministers does .
This is a new development , and I would ask the public to note the fact .
We support the compromise proposal because it has been important to us to avoid having the common position rejected in the European Parliament .
And , as we heard , there was a real risk of that happening .
That would have been clearly unacceptable for , then , employees would only have been protected at the 1996 level .
We have therefore accepted the compromise , and that of course also shows that we have been incredibly sympathetic to what the music and entertainment industry has told us in connection with this matter .
I would also say to my fellow MEPs in the House that we have perhaps sometimes been too sympathetic .
By that , I mean in fact that some MEPs have not been critical enough of what the industry has said .
Rumours of the worst kind have circulated about this matter .
I have been accused of wanting to close down the whole of the pop industry in Great Britain and of wanting to prohibit the bagpipes in Scotland .
It is all complete and utter nonsense , of course .
Naturally , we must listen to what society around us says , but that does not mean we simply have to roll over .
We have a compromise proposal I can live with .
I am in actual fact extremely satisfied with it .
It will mean that the entertainment industry will only be covered by the directive after five years and , in the intervening period , we shall call upon the Commission to carry out an investigation of how the directive will affect the music and entertainment industry .
The Commission will subsequently assess whether it is necessary to exempt the industry from the directive or to regulate it in some other way .
I believe this compromise proposal will make it clear how much exaggeration there has been in this matter and also make it clear that even people in the music industry are very seriously affected by the damage to their hearing that we are in actual fact trying to combat .
Finally , I wish to emphasise that I should like to have seen us achieve more in terms of improving workers ' protection .
That has not been possible , but what is now crucial is that , tomorrow , MEPs support those proposals which in actual fact improve the common position and ensure that we attach more importance to the preventive side .
I urge all my fellow MEPs to support the proposals now tabled by the committee , together with the compromise proposal .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , minimum health and safety standards are the core of European employee protection legislation .
The harmful negative effects of noise exposure are scientifically documented and we do not need to discuss them in detail here .
Noise-induced deafness is one of the most common occupational illnesses .
Measures to protect workers from noise thus have a high priority .
Everyone involved - workers , employers and legislators - should therefore seize every opportunity to keep noise pollution in the workplace as low as possible .
With regard to reducing the noise levels which people voluntarily submit to during their leisure time , however , there is little we can do , other than appeal to the individual to exercise common sense .
In agreeing protective measures for the workplace , however , we must also take account of the scope for their practical implementation - and especially the impact on small and medium-sized businesses .
There is little point in adopting highly complex rules at European level if they cannot or will not be complied with in practice .
In striking a balance , I believe that the amendments proposed by this House generally offer acceptable solutions .
I would also like to thank the rapporteur particularly for her willingness to compromise , which was already evident in the committee .
This defused a potential conflict over a significant change to exposure limit values and action limit values , without sacrificing the justified interests of employees .
With regard to the assessment of the noise exposure level , too , the provisions of the Council 's common position on individual hearing protection should be maintained .
We also endorse Amendment No 8 , which states that Member States may lay down values which are lower than the exposure limit values and the action limit values laid down in this directive where this is necessary with regard to the health and safety of workers .
This is entirely in line with the principle of minimum standards in European social policy .
We also make it clear that the employer is responsible for enforcing the wearing of hearing protectors and the provision of individual training .
As ' prevention is better than cure ' , a worker whose noise exposure exceeds the lower exposure action values will also be entitled to appropriate audiometric testing .
The use of a weekly noise exposure level in place of the daily noise exposure level under certain conditions is sensible , as envisaged in the Council 's common position .
The aspect of this directive which triggered the most heated debate concerned the treatment of workers who are exposed to music , from classical / orchestral music to disco .
In my view , we take adequate account of this special area in the compromise proposed in Amendment 23 .
I hope this is a solution which the Council can also endorse , for an immediate and unconditional inclusion of these events will hardly do justice to the general belief that music - whether in the concert hall or the night-club - is noise and should therefore be treated restrictively from the outset .
Mr President , many congratulations to the rapporteur .
She has produced a very well-balanced report .
It proposes sensible amendments which will not impose unreasonable burdens on firms , but which will improve the directive and reduce the risk of hearing loss resulting from exposure to noise at work .
That is what this proposal is all about .
Too many workers within the European Union continue to be at risk of hearing loss due to exposure to noise at work .
Mrs Thorning-Schmidt has shown herself to be reasonable and willing to listen to reasonable and reasoned argument and evidence .
She did , after all , withdraw many of her initial amendments , tabling new ones which move closer to , or back to , the common position on a number of elements including key action and exposure limit values .
But others in this House are straining to carve a new and retrograde path in the social field .
For the first time in conciliation in the social field we are seeing moves , particularly on the right and centre groupings of the House , to weaken significantly common positions established in the Social Affairs Council , and even , at times , to exclude significant sectors of activity from the legislation altogether .
We have seen this in relation to this proposal on noise and the parallel proposal on vibration .
Compromise Amendment No 23 on the music and entertainment sectors is a response to such a danger .
Do not get me wrong : it might conceivably be necessary to weaken the common position when new information or evidence previously overlooked comes to light , but in my view that has not been the case in the examples I mention .
We have instead seen something tantamount to a panic response to concentrated , manipulative lobbying and adverse media coverage fed by deliberate disinformation and misinformation .
These developments are to be deplored .
At least two factors seem to be at work .
Firstly , lobby groups have woken up to the pressure points in the codecision procedure .
They know how to apply political pressure , much of it far from evidence-based , on Parliament .
They think we are the weakest link , and the signal we are sending them is that they are absolutely correct .
Secondly , too many Members of this House delight in issuing press releases seeking to trivialise legislation that is entirely necessary , justified and proportionate .
They will not let facts get in the way of seeing their own name in print and it is not hard to see why so many ill-informed articles have appeared concerning this proposal .
They have been fed by grossly misleading or totally factually incorrect press releases and briefings from Members of this House .
I hope that we can all grow up quickly and bring a little more dignity and integrity to our role as co-legislator .
My own father finds it difficult to converse with my infant son because of industrially-induced hearing loss .
That seems to me a very good reason to promote sensible legislation like this .
Mr President , if the rapporteur 's original draft report had gone through and had been accepted , it would have decimated industry across the EU .
Yes , by all means protect workers , but do not throw workers out of work !
It was essential that hearing protection should be taken into account , and I congratulate those industries and everybody else who convinced the rapporteur of the need to do so .
If this had not been the case , with the exposure limit set at 87 , hammering steel at 95-100 decibels , bottling at 98 decibels , and pig-feeding at 100 decibels would have ceased to exist , as would the construction and mining industries .
Cement works and part of the engineering industry would have been decimated .
I recognise that the rapporteur has moved and I welcome that .
I welcome the fact that she has moved from daily measuring to weekly measuring in exceptional circumstances , but I would like her to move further to weekly measurements , to go back to the main body of the text as in the common position .
I am very pleased that we have got the compromise amendment on music and leisure , whatever the rapporteur says : to have five years ' exemption for the music and leisure industry , for the Commission to do a report , and then to come back to this House , but to consult with both sides of industry .
I hope it goes through and I hope all MEPs will vote for it .
Otherwise , we will have the ridiculous prospect of bar staff wearing ear-muffs when people go in to order a pint of beer .
I am also glad that we have a chance to debate this because if it had been rejected on a second reading in committee , we would have had no chance to debate this today in the plenary session - no chance to put forward the amendment to exclude music and leisure for five years , and Parliament 's view would not have been taken into account .
So I say to those people who voted against the report in committee : if you had got your way , there is no way we would be standing here today .

Mr President , I will start by expressing my amazement at the speech by Mr Hughes , whom I usually experience as being a reasonably logical and calm person and who suddenly , as soon as there is any objection to this directive , from whatever quarter , is of the opinion that sinister forces are at work .
We are simply carrying out our task as parliamentarians and we listen to everyone , including people who are not directly involved in the process that leads to directives .
In my view , this Parliament is not indifferent to the cause of health and safety , nor to objections concerning the implementation thereof .
I am therefore delighted that we can conclude the second reading of the noise directive - forgive me for not using the correct title of the directive - this week .
According to the Dutch official dictionary , noise is defined as a harsh , unpleasant sound , including background noise , din , racket , roar and commotion .
In other words , it is a noise which any right-minded person will experience as disagreeable and which we can do without .
I am therefore astounded , even dismayed - and many a composer will be turning in their graves - that Beethoven is being likened to a drill .
According to the Council , the Commission and a number of fellow MEPs , being subjected to the noise of a hefty circular saw is actually worse than Tchaikovsky .
I do understand that this is not merely about whether the noise is irritating , but also whether it is harmful .
What I should like to point out is that different types of noise justify a differentiated approach .
I am of the opinion that the music and entertainment industry should fall outside the scope of this directive and be regulated in a separate directive .
The fundamental difference between noise and Vivaldi is as follows : in the music and entertainment industry , sound is the ultimate product , or at least an important component thereof .
Sound plays a central role in this industry .
Noise in a factory is a negative side-effect , which makes no difference to the end result of the activity - quite the reverse , in fact - if it is not there .
Music involves customers ; it involves activities of great cultural value , especially for young people .
We would not prevent professional footballers from playing in excess of 45 minutes per week , would we ?
That is the difference ; that is what matters ; we found a response to it other than levelling unjustified criticism at this side of the House , as though we have no care for musical technique .
We have , but we also care about the people concerned .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , our European constitution , our Treaties , state that we are responsible for improving the workplace environment in order to protect the health of employees .
I have the impression that this has often been forgotten , especially in the context of this public debate .
The ignorance of the press - sometimes the quality press - also confirms this view .
In addition to the usual objections from industry , massive lobbying was , of course , carried out by the music industry as well - not the dark forces , but quite specifically the music industry .
This outcry raises three interesting points .
Firstly : The general public 's lack of awareness that since 1986 , employees in the music industry have been covered by a directive which is still in force .
All employees are covered , except for seamen .
This is now being rectified .
Secondly : It reveals the lack of monitoring in the Member States , for if better monitoring had been carried out , the groups affected - employers and employees - would not be in such a state of shock today .
Thirdly : It also shows , of course - and I say this critically - the very poor representation of employees ' interests .
I would like to send the Commission a copy of a letter which I received from the Swiss Musicians Federation about a hearing in 1996 , which shows very clearly , Mr Pronk , that damage to hearing is always to be taken seriously , regardless of whether someone works in the construction industry , ceramics , or a music company or orchestra .
( Interjection : Or even in Parliament ! )
Or even in Parliament , but fortunately , most of our colleagues are not as noisy as that !
Of course , there are rules at national level .
As a left-wing traditionalist , too , I believe that the state and the employer have a duty to protect workers from workplace hazards .
This is precisely our task , and in my view , with this directive , we have achieved this goal .
Mr President , the rapporteur has come a long way in recent weeks in terms of dumping some of her more extreme amendments .
However , I take little comfort from this .
I hope the rapporteur will not take this personally , as I know how much thought and work she has put into the report .
However , in my view , the amendments that remain are neither necessary nor helpful .
This is not just my own view .
I am delighted to see the extent to which Mrs Lynne echoed this view so powerfully a few moments ago .
In the words of the UK Health and Safety Executive , the body set up to give the UK Government the expert and impartial scientific advice so necessary when dealing with such issues , these amendments provide " no benefit for health and safety and their sole effect will be to place unnecessary and unwelcome burdens on industry , particularly on small firms " .
The Executive advises us to oppose most of the Socialist amendments .
Independently , UK Conservative MEPs had come to the identical conclusion .
One of these is Amendment No 18 , which I see the trade unions are supporting , while curiously claiming that many employers support it , too .
I have not come across a single employer who supports this .
It will be interesting to see whether UK Labour MEPs vote as their government has advised or their trade unions have instructed .
I suspect the answer will be no surprise .
We shall be supporting the amendment to exempt music from the directive , an amendment originally conceived by my colleague Mr Pronk .
However , that still leaves us with the problems facing industry if other amendments also pass .
It is very telling that in the week EU leaders are in Barcelona , calling for EU businesses to become more competitive , and on the very day that the UK Prime Minister , Mr Blair , is spinning the line that he is so much against red tape , his Socialist MEPs continue to pursue the same old agenda , regardless of the impact on jobs .
I urge them , even at this late stage , to vote against these amendments , to vote for jobs , to vote for reform and to vote for Barcelona .
Mr President , I shall begin my short intervention by thanking the rapporteur for the work she has done .
Having said this , I will express my views on certain points of the report which , in my humble opinion , could have been dealt with differently , and on amendments and proposals which are difficult to accept , above all by professionals in the field of prevention ; of course on the basis of the view that there is no such thing as zero risk and that work is an unpleasant activity .
I agree with the rapporteur that combating noise in the workplace is the best thing we can do , but I do not agree that collective protection measures should always have priority over individual protection measures .
In any event , I believe that they are complementary or supplementary , or that individual measures should be applied rather than collective ones .
We must consider the distribution of responsibilities ; it clearly falls to the employer to provide the means , and it is they who have the disciplinary policy measures to ensure they are complied with , but the worker is no less responsible , and cannot ignore their responsibility , since they are the first to be affected if they do not adopt individual and personal protection measures .
I also disagree with you somewhat with regard to the scope , since I believe that , rather than talking about including the self-employed within the scope , it would be preferable to include them by means of the concept of workplaces and the person responsible for them , particularly in view of the increasingly frequent externalisation of many activities in numerous work sectors .
Amendment No 15 deals with an issue which is perhaps purely grammatical .
Where it speaks of hearing protection measures ' likely to be used ' , I believe we should say ' of mandatory use ' .
Furthermore , there are activities involving a different intensity of sound at different times , which must be considered and resolved .
I liked what the rapporteur said about music .
All of this , Mr President , Mrs Thorning-Schmidt , must be done from the point of view of providing quality employment with less risk to the health and safety of workers , and this objective demands legislation which is clear in its principles and in its wording .
Mr President , I should like , first , to congratulate Mrs Thorning-Schmidt , because she has dealt with what is , both technically and politically , a very difficult issue .
Just how difficult this issue is can be seen from the fact that the amended proposal has been pending before the Council since 1994 and the first part of the proposal on mechanical vibration is only now ready for discussion by the joint legislators .
We put health and safety at the top of the social agenda and we have undertaken to improve protection for workers ' health and safety by bringing the directive which already exists - 86 / 188 - into line with Framework Directive 89 / 391 and updating some of its provisions .
I should like to point out that some of the proposals we have heard take us behind the current framework and the specific directive which already exists .
Loss of hearing is clearly the most widely-known harmful effect of noise .
It is the most serious , but not the only effect .
And as far as compensation for workers who have suffered the consequences of occupational illnesses are concerned , one-third concerns hearing problems .
In five countries in which studies have been carried out - Holland , Portugal , Spain , France and Germany - compensation for hearing problems costs EUR 96 billion a year .
The Commission has accepted the Council 's common position in that it enhances the level of protection set out in the Commission proposal .
The reduction in the exposure limit value from 96 db to 87 db is clearly good progress .
The Commission fully accepts Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 14 , 17 , 18 , 20 and 22 , which improve the quality of the text and clarify its meaning .
The Commission partly accepts Amendments Nos 4 , 15 , 16 and 19 and rejects Amendments Nos 3 , 5 , 13 and 21 , together with Amendments Nos 23 and 25 .
Although I agree with the idea behind Amendment No 3 , the second part of Amendment No 4 , Amendment No 5 , Amendment No 13 and the second part of Amendment No 16 , the Commission cannot accept them for reasons of consistency and legislative procedure .
The Commission also rejects Amendment No 21 , because it feels that the manner in which the Member States obtain access to the relevant medical and scientific advice is a question of subsidiarity .
Finally on the question of compromise Amendments Nos 23 and 25 , which temporarily exclude music and entertainment from the scope of the proposal , the Commission is strongly opposed to this derogation because there is no scientific justification for it .
Applying health and safety measures to the music market will affect 3 to 5 million workers in Europe .
Factory noise has been compared with the noise from music or concerts . I think the figures speak for themselves .
Musicians constantly performing in concert are continually exposed to noise levels as high as 130 db .
Constant exposure to this noise gradually gives them problems with their hearing , without which they cannot do their job .
I should also like to remind the House that HINDREC , the European Association of Industry , Hotels and Restaurants , agrees with the proposal currently on the table .
And there is another statistic I should like to give you : the noise level in small pubs is in the order of 75 db , that is , well below the limit value of 90 already set .
Finally to ear protection available on the market .
If you surf the Internet you will see all these new aids , which are very different from standard ear muffs . Basically what they do is to reduce the sound to which each worker is exposed to a level set by the worker , so that they can do their job without suffering this gradual deterioration in their hearing .
Finally , I should like to remind the House that there are another two physical agents in the workplace , optical radiation and electromagnetic fields , and that we need to start work on the next two directives , which are also very important and affect large numbers of workers .
Mr President , two things . First of all , I should like to tell the Commission that I am pleased about the amendments that are being supported .
I am rather annoyed that the Commission has not thought along the same lines as the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs regarding Amendments Nos 3 and 5 , because they specifically emphasise the efforts at prevention I tried to emphasise in my speech .
I therefore hope that the Commission will reconsider them .
I would also ask the Commission to give us a little help today in responding to something said by Mr Bushill-Matthews and Mr Pronk .
Could the Commission first of all explain to these gentlemen that there is also something called sustainable development within employment and that , when we talk about wanting a proper working environment and proper health and safety regulations , what in actual fact we want is a sustainable labour market from which people are not excluded ?
Mr Bushill-Matthews must also agree with me that , in the long term , what is economically most sustainable is not to have a whole lot of people sitting on the ' reserve bench ' .
And , talking about a ' reserve bench ' , I also wish to address Mr Pronk and ask the Commission to help me a little .
Could the Commission explain to Mr Pronk once and for all that people who play football or go to football matches will not be affected by this directive ?
And perhaps we could also , once and for all , have the lobbyists locked out of this House .
Mrs Diamantopoulou , do you wish to make any comment ?
No .
Thank you very much .
The vote is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the Commission communication on unfair practices by airlines of third countries .
Mrs de Palacio has the floor .
Mr President , I am pleased to announce to the House that the Commission has decided to propose to the Council and the European Parliament a Regulation on the adoption of legal measures to react against the unfair competition practiced by third-country air companies receiving State aid .
We have all seen over recent months how , owing to several different circumstances , third-country air companies have received large amounts of public subsidy which in many cases have been used to lower fares and create unfair competition on routes on which European Union air companies compete .
This has created a legal vacuum which has placed our companies at an unfair advantage in comparison with the companies of third countries .
In order to provide ourselves with instruments which can allow us to defend and support our air sector , which is absolutely strategic for the European Union , we are going to propose , and today we have adopted , the proposed regulation on predatory practices within the framework of air transport services .
In the field of sea transport there is already legislation to combat charges which create unfair competition and in other areas , such as aid granted in the manufactured goods sector , we have other instruments .
Ladies and gentlemen , all of this is for a very simple reason : because the air services sector is not included within the multilateral agreements of the World Trade Organisation .
In this regard , it is a question of establishing forms of compensation to counter the advantages that the use of this State aid or non-commercial advantages represent for these third-country companies to the detriment of our companies .
I believe that it is a balanced regulation which contains - as you will see when you analyse it - a definition of what its principles are , of what is meant by guaranteeing fair competition , of what is understood to be unfair charging practice and establishes a procedure which guarantees that in no event will there be either overcompensation nor advantageous actions .
In this respect , by means of a complaint or simply as a matter of routine , it is proposed that the Commission should open an investigation to determine whether or not there is unfairness in the charges implemented by third companies , and , in accordance with the particular situation , there will either be an agreement with the country or with the relevant company , or , if not , measures may be taken , either provisional , for 6 months , or permanent , until such a time as there is a change by the relevant third countries or companies .
I believe that this is absolutely essential if we are to genuinely guarantee that we are going to prevent unfair competition and our air sector being affected by State aid or non-commercial advantages .
Mr President , I think the Commission is right to take action in this direction because we , as the European Union , need legal tools to deal with the specific issue of unfair competition from third countries .
Of course we shall be examining the Commission proposal in the European Parliament 's Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism and studying the details , but I should like now to ask you three very brief questions .
First , have you already got evidence or at least received accusations from various European companies of unfair competition from third countries , America , Switzerland or other countries which we read about in the press from time to time ?
Secondly , you referred to measures to be taken by the European Union in such cases .
What sort of measures are to be taken and how do they stand in relation to the transatlantic agreements already in existence on which the Advocate-General of the European Court has already expressed an opinion ?
In other words , how do the bilateral agreements stand in relation to the European Commission 's multilateral measures ?
Thirdly , a question which bears no relation to this issue but is highly topical and , if you wish , you can answer us .
What is to be done about covering the European airlines ' insurance premiums ?
Cover expires at the end of March .
What is the European Commission 's position on this ?
I would ask all honourable Members , if they can - and I believe this is possible - to summarise their questions in no longer than one minute .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President , I would simply like to pose two questions to supplement the comments made by Mr Hatzidakis .
If we call for new instruments , the question we will be asked is this : What are we doing with the existing instruments , and why are they not sufficient ?
That is the reason for my two supplementary questions .
Firstly : Do we not already have the option of taking action against Switzerland ?
I believe that what Switzerland has done with regard to the restructuring of Swissair into Crossair , Swiss Airlines or whatever is clearly a subsidy case .
Even if the treaty has not yet been ratified , there must be opportunities outside the treaty to proceed against Switzerland .
When will you do so ?
Secondly : If we take action against unfair practices relating to ticket dumping outside the EU , can you tell us what you propose to do to combat internal price dumping within the European Union in the immediate future ?
There are increasingly frequent cases of airlines offering tickets below cost price in order to control the market .
Do you intend to tackle this problem as well ?
Mr President , I have a quick question for the Commissioner regarding the point of providing proof .
If a third country does not provide the information that is required to discover whether they are involved in unfair competitive practices , what would the Commission do ?
Mr President , I shall be very brief .
It is true that two companies have caused this situation , one quite directly and the other in a more general way .
It is also true that various ministers , in their speeches at the last Council and in a letter that they have sent to me , have expressed their concern at the situation .
I repeat , however , that although there have been no complaints , this proposal will enable the Commission to take formal action .
With regard to the transatlantic agreements , the problem is that , at the moment , there is no EU-US agreement , for example .
There are only bilateral agreements with Member States of the Union , and these do not contain clauses that , in general , provide for the resolution of these situations of unfair competition .
Where insurance is concerned , the situation , in principle , has not changed .
We still maintain that on 31 March , the special guarantee for the provision of insurance by the Member States will end for new risks related to terrorism or to war .
Nevertheless , the Transport Council is due to look at this issue and consider practices in the United States and in Japan , because a normal insurance market will not function unless the United States and Japan and their airlines are also involved .

I wish to thank Mr Jarzembowski and Hatzidakis for their questions .
I should like to say to Mr Jarzembowski that this measure will work against any third country that grants State aid which is used by its companies to distort competition and which , therefore , encourages unfair competition .
As for Switzerland , ladies and gentlemen , you are all aware that the transport agreement has still not entered into force , not through any fault of Switzerland , but because of the three European Union countries that have not yet ratified it .
The fact of the matter is that we do not know how long this situation will take to be resolved .
In any event , also with regard to Switzerland , we must be adequately covered from the legal point of view .
I should like to reply to Mrs Foster 's question on proof .
Ladies and gentlemen , in all of these types of mechanism , the States involved must provide proof .
Sometimes , third countries are reluctant to do this .
One possibility is that compensatory rights could be imposed , to be paid by companies engaged in unfair competition , to compensate for and eliminate this unfair competition .
These rights will be limited to artificial price lowering , but under no circumstances can this lead to additional costs to what is a reasonable fare , as defined in the texts we are debating .
I forgot to say in my answer to Mr Jarzembowski that we are investigating unfair competition within the European Union , when it occurs and , to be specific , at the moment we are looking at a problem concerning the use of an airport in Belgium .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , I would like to ask you this : What influence do airport duties have on these practices ?
Mr President , I withdraw the question I was going to ask because it has already been put by Mr Hatzidakis and Mr Jarzembowski .
I thank the Commissioner for her communication but I would like her to say what she means by ' unfair competition ' because I did not fully understand this point .
Unfair practice occurs when an airline that has received State aid in its own country does not use this aid to cover a certain type of cost but to artificially lower prices on routes in which it is in competition with European Union airlines .
With regard to the receipt of airport taxes , one way of receiving these compensatory rights , would be to impose a surcharge on airport taxes .
Thank you very much , Mrs de Palacio .
That concludes this item .
The next item is Questions to the Commission ( B5-0008 / 2002 ) .
Part I
Question No 34 by José María Gil-Robles Gil-Delgado ( H-0079 / 02 ) :
Subject : International adoption of Romanian children
What action is being taken by the Commission ( and , in particular , by its representative in Bucharest ) in order to ensure that the review of the cases involving the international adoption of children which the Romanian Government suspended over nine months ago is carried out promptly ?
Is the Commission aware that such suspension is having a serious effect on the hundreds of Community families who have applied to adopt children on the basis of full guarantees and who have paid out substantial sums of money ?
What action is the Commission intending to take in order to protect the rights of those people ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , child protection in Romania is one of the most important issues arising within the framework of cooperation between the Commission and Romania , and it is an issue which I myself have also dealt with regularly and pro-actively since the start of my term in office .
There is no doubt that there have been serious problems in Romania regarding the protection of children in state-run institutions and also regarding the system of international adoptions .
Romania has signed the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Hague Convention on Protection of Children .
The Hague Convention signatory states have joined with us in expressing their frequent concerns to the Romanian Government about the very serious shortcomings in the Romanian legislation and procedures governing adoption and the way in which they are implemented in practice .
I must tell you , Mr Gil-Robles , that I personally had no choice but to acknowledge that in Romania , there has been a very high incidence of commercial trafficking of children - which is just about the worst crime imaginable - but that on the other hand , adoptions have of course also taken place entirely in accordance with the proper procedures , and that a substantial grey area between the trafficking of children and normal international adoptions has existed .
The Commission therefore brought intensive pressure to bear on the Romanian Government to embark on a radical overhaul of the entire system , starting with the legislation and including the institutions , structures , procedures and decision-making channels - indeed , every aspect of the process .
Nothing in Romania 's system of international adoptions could possibly remain as it was .
To ensure that no abuse of children can occur while these reforms are under way , the Commission resolutely supported the imposition of a moratorium on international adoptions .
I am very pleased to say that the present Romanian Government has succeeded in enforcing this moratorium .
It is not the Commission 's policy to block international adoptions .
Quite the contrary - the Commission 's policy is to help ensure that these international adoptions take place within a system which is entirely transparent , conforms with internationally recognised rules , and excludes any possibility that a single case of child abuse could occur .
I hope that appropriate legislation and administrative procedures will be put in place in Romania within the near future so that the normal systems governing international adoptions can be resumed .
The cases which you referred to in your question , Mr Gil-Robles , and which had already been initiated but where a decision was still pending when the moratorium was imposed are being examined by the Romanian Government on a case-by-case basis , and if it is quite clear that there are no problems with the adoption , the Romanian Government has the option of suspending the moratorium in these individual cases .
I believe that this will help to resolve the problem you describe .
However , let me say again , Mr Gil-Robles , even though this may not be welcome in some quarters : in striking a balance between protecting children in Romania and the needs of prospective parents - whichever country they may live in - our first priority must always be to protect the child .
I think it is quite reasonable to say to families who wish to welcome an adopted child into their lives that they have to wait another few months , rather than run the risk that even a single case of the corruption which was rife in Romania 's child protection system could recur .
Commissioner , I have listened to you with the utmost respect , but there is another question I wish to put to you : why did the Commission , in the EC-Romania Association Council meeting , oppose that Council asking the Romanian authorities to pass this legislation , which they promised for the end of last year , as rapidly as possible ?
We have had a moratorium in place since June 2001 and the Romanian Government has formally declared that this legislation would be ready by the end of last year .
According to my information , however , although it has been approved by the Council of Ministers , it has not been submitted to Parliament and is still floating around , no one knows exactly where .
I am surprised that the Commission , whose intentions the Commissioner has expressed very clearly , is not attempting to kick-start this process .
I fully agree that the priority must be the children 's welfare , but this will not improve by holding up legislation that will enable international adoptions to take place . The way to improve their welfare is to push ahead , as quickly as possible , with this legislation , and not to leave these children in the orphanages until that happens .
Mr Gil-Robles , I regret to say that we appear to be at odds over this matter .
Firstly , as regards the Association Council , there was full agreement between the Member States and the Commission on what we should say about this issue , and also between the Presidency and the Commission .
There were no conflicts here ; rather , there was a common position .
On the fundamental issue , let me reiterate : our policy is clear and unequivocal .
The child 's interests are the priority .
Until the system in Romania guarantees that international adoptions take place in accordance with our required standards , I shall continue to oppose any re-opening of the gates to allow international adoptions to take place without restrictions .
I have said to you that special permission may be granted in cases when adoptions had already been initiated before the moratorium came into force .
The Commission will vigorously resist - I repeat - vigorously resist any situation in which the corruption which we witnessed in Romania has any chance of re-emerging .
I repeat , I believe it is better to tell prospective parents that they must wait a little longer until we have a system which provides an absolute guarantee of protection to the children , rather than run any kind of risk .
I should like to congratulate Commissioner Verheugen and his staff for the consistent concern and attention they have shown with regard to this important issue .
Is the Commissioner aware that 93 % of Romanian people are against inter-country adoption as a solution for abandoned children in Romania , as is the Romanian Government , and that the Romanian Orthodox Church to which 89 % of Romanian citizens belong , wholly opposes such a practice ?
Is he further aware that the payments made by these Spanish families have gone to Romanian foster families over a period of time , and thus these children are not officially abandoned according to international conventions , particularly the UN Convention , which has been ratified by the governments of all the Member States , including Spain and therefore forms a part of the acquis communautaire ?
Baroness Nicholson , I am aware of the problems you describe , and I would like to take this opportunity to point out that the very resolute and determined action by the Commission with regard to the protection of children in Romania has resulted , not least , from the consistent pressure applied by the European Parliament .
It was this House which repeatedly called on the Commission to reject any compromises on the protection of Romanian children , and the Commission is firmly adhering to this course .
I fully agree with Baroness Nicholson that international adoptions are by no means the best instrument to protect children .
Nonetheless , I believe that in the Romanian case , they are an option which we should not rule out entirely .
Mr President , I agree with Commissioner Verheugen when he says that the most important aspect of this type of case is the welfare of the Romanian children .
There are , perhaps , two aspects of this matter that need to be raised : firstly , is Romania adequately protecting its children ?
Are there any alternative systems ?
Can the European Commission adopt measures to guarantee improvements in the way these children are treated ?
Secondly , since Mr Verheugen is a member of a Commission that represents the countries of the European Union , has the Commission adopted measures to ensure that , in the event that international adoptions take place involving citizens of Community countries , guarantees will be provided in the reception countries for Romanian children to be treated appropriately , in accordance with international law , Community law and with the national law of the Member States ?
Commission . ( DE ) Mr Medina Ortega , on the first point , I can tell you that the Commission has allocated substantial human and financial resources to improving conditions in Romania 's childcare institutions for many years .
I am sure that everyone in this House is aware of the appalling conditions in these institutions directly after the revolution , and , indeed , for many years afterwards .
Thanks to the help we provided , much of it as pre-accession funds , steady improvements in the situation have been achieved .
Nonetheless , we are still a long way from a situation which we could describe as satisfactory .
This is why these measures will be continued on an intensive basis .
On the second point , I fully agree with you .
This is precisely the aim of our efforts in Romania and in conjunction with the Romanian Government - to ensure that the system governing international adoptions is fully and unequivocally in line with the standards required by the European Union and international law .
Question No 35 by Proinsias De Rossa ( H-0097 / 02 ) :
Subject : Chemical and electro-shock technology
Given recent concerns over the use of chemical and electro-shock technology in torture and human rights violations , how many companies manufacturing such equipment have received the CE quality mark ?
Also , what is the process by which the CE mark is awarded to such products , and is the ethical question of how this technology is to be used considered as well as the safety of the user of the product ?
Further , what research is used by the Commission as the basis for the decision to award the quality mark ?
The CE conformity marking was introduced into Community legislation by a Council decision of 1990 concerning the models for the various phases of the conformity assessment procedures which I intended to be used in the technical harmonisation directives , and by the Council directive of 1993 .
The latter introduced the CE marking into a number of sectoral technical harmonisation directives .
The CE conformity marking must be affixed to any product falling within the scope of a technical harmonisation directive providing for it .
It signifies that the product complies with the legally binding requirements of the applicable technical harmonisation directive .
The manufacturer is responsible for affixing the CE conformity marking , although the directives often require the intervention of a third-party conformity-assessment body .
Member States are responsible for the designation of such bodies in accordance with the applicable provisions of the directives .
A number of services in the Commission are responsible for technical harmonisation directives providing for the CE conformity marking , although most fall under the responsibility of DG Enterprise .
However , the Commission intervenes directly neither in the process of evaluating the conformity of products nor in the award of the CE conformity marking .
All manufacturers of stun weapons falling within the scope of the technical harmonisation directives providing for the CE conformity marking must affix this marking to the relevant products .
The Commission does not have information about the number of manufacturers involved .
The Commission has already replied to this issue in 1997 . The question was then posed by Mrs Wemheuer .
The Commission then noted that a wide variety of equipment could potentially be used for the purpose of torture .
Moreover , it is not always possible to determine in advance to what use such equipment will be put .
I am therefore of the opinion that it is not feasible to apply a different treatment in the context of these directives to equipment that could potentially be used as an instrument of torture .
Nevertheless , and in order to take account of the concerns of the honourable Member of Parliament , the Commission , and especially the Director-General for External Relations is currently preparing a proposal for a Council regulation concerning trade in equipment which may be used for torture or other cruel , inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment .
The aim of this regulation is , inter alia , to impose controls on exports of equipment which may be used for such purposes in a third country , which will in principle include electric shock equipment .
Thank you , Commissioner , for your reply and I welcome the proposal to prepare a new regulation .
Could you indicate to me when you expect this regulation to become effective ?
Would you not also agree that , while there is obviously some equipment which may or may not be used for torture , stun gun equipment is made to deliberately inflict pain on the person against whom it is used ; that up to 50 000 volts can be delivered to a person by a stun gun or by the stun belts which are also used ; and that it is inappropriate for equipment of this kind which is marketed by the manufacturers of these torture weapons to carry an EU quality mark as a sign of EU approval of these particular instruments of torture ?
I can inform the honourable Member that I will pass on the question of the timing of the regulation to my colleague , Mr Patten .
As far as the other questions are concerned , a recent report by Amnesty International says that stun guns are not used for torture or ill-treatment by the police or prison guards within the European Union .
The use of stun guns is for self-defence and riot control is not in question .
The other issues you raised must be reviewed in the context of this regulation .
I shall be ready to inform Parliament once I have obtained more detailed information from my colleague and his departments .
Thank you very much , Mr Liikanen .
This is not the time to enter into a debate , Mr De Rossa .
According to the Rules of Procedure , the same Member may not ask further questions .
If another Member wishes to ask a supplementary question , he or she may do so , but you may not .
We shall , therefore , proceed to the following question .
Question No 36 by Niall Andrews , which has been taken over by Mr Brian Crowley ( H-0126 / 02 ) :
Subject : Halting the stoning-to-death of Nigerian mother Safiya Yakuba Hussaini
As the Commission is well aware , there is growing alarm at the threatened stoning-to-death of Nigerian mother , Safiya Yakuba Hussaini .
Will the Commission state what , if any , representations it has made to the Nigerian authorities seeking to halt this horrific sentence , what weight it therefore attaches to its programme for the support of human rights and democracy and the new Cotonou Partnership Agreement , and will it make a statement on this matter , including the need to concentrate on measures aimed at improving the status of women in Nigeria , which remains an on-going issue for EU-Nigeria relations .
Mr President , the Commission has made representations to the Nigerian Ambassador in Brussels with regard to this case and President Prodi has appealed directly to President Obasanjo to intervene .
The developments in this case are also being followed closely by the Commission Delegation in Abuja .
An appeal has been lodged by the defendant and will be heard on 18 March 2002 .
In the meantime , the sentence has been suspended by the Islamic Appeal Court of Sokoto .
The European Union is strongly opposed to the use of the death penalty .
With a view to attaining the prime objective of abolishing the death penalty where it still exists , the EU calls for its use to be progressively restricted and made subject to minimum standards .
The EU is also pressing for moratoria to be introduced where relevant .
The Troika recently made a demarche on the application of the death penalty in Nigeria .
The Commission is seeking to end the practice of public and particularly cruel executions pursued in certain Islamic countries .
In the case of Nigeria , the Commission will work through the framework of the Cotonou Agreement , two of the fundamental conditions of which are respect for human rights and equality between men and women .
Where these conditions are not met , the Agreement allows for a process of political dialogue between the national authorities and the Commission .
The country support strategy for Nigeria has identified the strengthening of democracy and respect for human rights as areas requiring action and corresponding programmes will soon be forthcoming , including programmes to improve the status of women .
In addition , within the framework of the Community budget , the European Initiative for Democracy and Human Rights includes Nigeria as a " focal country " .
Nigeria is eligible for support for measures in the field of good governance and this will have a positive impact on the status of women by raising awareness among them of their legal rights .
A project is currently under way to strengthen civil society , especially in northern Nigeria .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for his response .
It is a delicate time , whilst an appeal is going on , to be raising what are emotive issues and I understand how difficult it is for you , Commissioner , to give a full outline of what action the Commission would take in future if the death penalty were to be imposed .
However , could I take this opportunity to ensure that , with the good offices of the Commission , and utilising the partnership agreements we have with Nigeria , there will be a greater understanding , not only of the respect for human rights , but also of our total abhorrence of the death penalty in any form , whether it be by electric chair or by stoning or by any other method .
I would have this strength of feeling with regard to America , as much as with Nigeria or any other country in the world that continues to use the death penalty .
If possible , could the Commission make resources available to make sure this woman has proper legal representation to guarantee that she has a fair hearing and that every resource is utilised to save her life ?
Efforts to increase awareness of the rights of people within the framework of Sharia law are part of all the work we do , especially relating to the situation of women .
We are , in Nigeria , focusing a major part of our development cooperation at state level on a number of states .
This brings us closer to the authorities , and also , in some cases , closer to some of the states where Sharia law has been instituted .
We are trying to position ourselves in a manner which makes a meaningful discussion possible .
The broader issue of the death penalty is quite clear .
It is a global issue and I am sure it is something which we all agree on .
Finally , let me add that I very much appreciate the Member 's approach and his tone given the fact that we are at a sensitive stage in the case in question .
Mr President , Commissioner , I am very grateful for your reply and relieved that the Commission has acted so swiftly in this matter .
The punishment of the woman in question was based on Islamic law .
An unmarried woman had become pregnant , by all accounts as the result of rape .
The question as I see it , however , is not just the status of women , but an attempt at power politics , where Islam is being used in Nigeria to stir up the feelings of the people and create artificial disputes , as I have brought to the attention of the Commission in my earlier written questions .
I would now like to ask whether the Commission has considered any tools that might be used through our policy on development cooperation to lessen this ever-growing exploitation of religious tension .
This will , in any case , be the theme of the analysis of what we can do .
I should warn , however , against the perception that our development cooperation activities with a given country make it possible for us to influence events of this kind profoundly .
The introduction of Sharia law in a number of northern states in Nigeria is a complex and highly political process with local roots .
We have a shared framework of values as expressed in the Cotonou Agreement .
This is what we can discuss and pursue with the Government of Nigeria .
This is not an easy case , but it is one in which the widespread public attention it has attracted and international public opinion can really be of use .
We at the Commission will do what we can to help exert pressure .
Question No 37 by Karin Riis-Jørgensen ( H-0148 / 02 ) :
Subject : Take-over bids
Does the Commission believe that European companies will be given a disincentive to be listed on stock exchanges - and the development of efficient equity markets impeded - if the EU introduces a break through rule de facto eliminating shareholders ' multiple voting rights in the event of takeovers as proposed by the High Level Group of Company Law Experts ?
Does the Commission believe that owners of shares with multiple voting rights would suffer a loss if the EU introduces a break through rule de facto eliminating shareholder 's multiple voting rights in the event of the takeovers as proposed by the High Level Group of Company Law Experts ?
The Commission wishes to thank the honourable Member for her questions and her interest in the Commission 's work concerning the matter of takeover bids .
It is still , however , a bit early for the Commission to provide final answers to those questions .
The Commission has launched a thorough examination of the recommendations made by the Group of High Level Company Law Experts relating to takeover bids and has consulted interested parties in order to decide whether and how such recommendations could be included in a new proposal for a directive .
The Commission is aware of the criticism raised by certain Member States regarding the specific recommendation on multiple voting rights and the possible loss of certain rights after a takeover bid via the " breakthrough " mechanism .
The Commission will , wherever possible , do its utmost to take account of the various opinions expressed during this phase of informal consultation with all interested parties .
I am afraid I can say no more at this moment , but no doubt Mrs Riis-Jörgensen , the committee of which she is a member and myself will engage in dialogue as soon as a more concrete proposal has been formulated .
I would also like to ask Mrs Riis-Jörgensen to contain her impatience until then .
Commissioner Bolkestein , women are not very patient but I will try to be patient and wait for you to come up with proposals which , hopefully , will balance all the interests you have mentioned .
I look forward to a thorough discussion and cooperation .
Thank you very much , Mrs Riis-Jørgensen . That is very kind of you .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
Second part
Questions to Commissioner Lamy
Question No 38 by Paul Rübig ( H-0135 / 02 ) :
Subject : Impact of the WTO disputes settlement procedure on SMUs
In paragraph 39 of the report on openness and democracy in world trade , which the European Parliament adopted in October 2001 , Members expressed concern at the direct and grave effects of some WTO dispute settlement cases on undertakings throughout Europe , particularly SMUs .
Parliament called on the Commission to take concrete steps , both within the EU and at the WTO , to give such undertakings legal recourse to seek compensation .
What concrete steps has the Commission so far taken to this end ?
What steps are planned ?
What is the Commission 's view of the call for WTO punitive duties to be paid from the general budgets of WTO Members rather than by private enterprise ?
The question concerns the impact of the WTO disputes settlement procedure on small- and medium-sized undertakings .
As you know , the WTO disputes settlement procedure is essential in ensuring that the multilateral trade system is secure and predictable .
The suspension of trade concessions , which are sometimes wrongly referred to as sanctions , is the last resort for a State which uses the dispute settlement procedure where the State that is at fault has breached either the agreements or the decisions taken under the WTO dispute settlement procedure .
From our point of view , the main benefit of the system for European businesses , including SMUs , is that it applies great pressure to respect the rules of the World Trade Organisation .
This is the main benefit for our businesses , and therefore for SMUs too .
There are , without doubt , cases where the international agreements have been breached and these must , of course , continue to be the exception .
On this point , we believe that compensation must be preferable to the withdrawal of trade concessions and , within the framework of the WTO , compensation , which is a voluntary measure agreed by the plaintiff State , is a better option .
In addition , this measure is only provisional .
Otherwise , the system would not be as secure and predictable .
I should like to give you two examples .
Firstly , in the case of hormone-treated beef , we effectively lost a case at the WTO .
The Commission submitted a proposal for a directive in 2000 .
We also hope , and I want to make this clear to the House , that the co-legislators are going to take a close interest in this .
We regret that this is not the case at the moment .
In the meantime , we are conducting negotiations with the United States to find an interim solution which , broadly speaking , would enable them to export greater quantities of hormone-free beef .
This is a case where , temporarily , compensation may enable a solution to be found .
Secondly , as part of the reform of the disputes settlement procedure , we recently submitted a proposal to the WTO in order to facilitate recourse to seeking compensation , as a real alternative to the retaliatory measures , in particular by providing for an arbitration mechanism on the amount of compensation .
This would have the huge advantage of enabling all parties involved in a dispute to negotiate on the basis of a figure set by a third party .
Mr Rübig , this is the information that I can give you on the solution that is sometimes envisaged of possibly establishing such a supranational punitive system at the WTO .
We do not believe in such a system .
It would involve a fundamental change in international relations .
That is why we do not feel that the international fine option is , at this stage , the correct course of action , if only because it does not provide an answer to the question of what coercive measures to implement in order to force parties to pay a fine that they wish to avoid .
In contrast , we prefer the current system and the compensation system , which - and this will be my final point - is always provisional since the underlying objective of any system that imposes discipline and respect for these disciplines is to force the State at fault to toe the line .
That is our guiding principle .
Mr President , Commissioner , we all know that the imposition of punitive duties is a very powerful instrument which may threaten the economic survival of individual undertakings .
That is the reason for my question : Which methods could you envisage in future to protect enterprises from the adverse effects of such measures ?
Would compensation , tax relief or other options be a possibility so that individual enterprises do not have to bear the consequences of a dispute settlement procedure ?
Well , I think that the answer to your question , Mr Rübig , is , in that case , to move from a system of sanctions to a compensation system which obviously has the advantage of being much more voluntary .
But the idea that businesses , which may fall victim to a system of sanctions , could have the right to compensation , for one reason or another , is not recognised in either international or Community law .
We have also challenged the American system at the WTO , for example . This system was conceived several years ago and finalised last year and involves compensating businesses that fall victim to antidumping with the income from antidumping rights .
We believe that this system provides an incentive to commit fraud and , therefore , we are not considering compensation systems .
Once again , sanctions are only there to apply discipline and if we can effect the transition to a compensation system , then we would have a system that is more voluntary and is , if I may so , less random and punitive than sanctions .
Many of the problems that affect injured parties in trade disputes , especially SMEs with limited resources , arise from the time it takes for the WTO to make its rulings - often many months , if not years .
No doubt this will be the case with the new steel dispute with the Americans .
But rather than granting compensation , which would probably arrive too late to prevent the business concerned from going to the wall , would it not be better for the WTO to have a system of temporary injunctions , which would require the suspension of such actions on the basis of prima facie evidence of illegal action until substantive decisions can be made ?
Would the Commissioner be in favour of such a system ?
If so , could he suggest how one might go about implementing it ?
I agree that it is a very good idea , Mr Purvis .
The international legal system , and that of the WTO is rather slow although it is in fact not much slower than our national legal systems when dealing with this type of case , but ' summary ' type proceedings , which you refer to as injunctions , might be appropriate .
I have two comments to make in response to this point .
First of all , it is a good idea .
Secondly , as it happens , the WTO disputes settlement procedure is still in its infancy .
It is barely five years old , which , for legal proceedings , is still very young , especially for France and we are , for the time being , working on improving other parts of the procedure .
I acknowledge , however , that this is a question that we must ask ourselves when the time arises .
However , this type of procedure does not provide a response to an objection raised , which is how do we go about ensuring that injunctions or summary proceedings of this sort are observed ?
If they are breached , do we have recourse to trade measures ?
I do not think that the use of law enforcement authorities provided for in Chapter 7 of the United Nations Charter is applicable in this case .
And as soon as this ceases to be the case and that there is no , if I may say so , State authority in command of a police force , you come back to the problem of sanctions .

The idea is a good one , but we must still answer the question of knowing how to implement this , if not through sanctions and compensation pay-outs , which brings us back to the previous problem .
Thank you very much for your cooperation , Mr Lamy .
Questions to Commissioner Wallström
Question No 39 by Mihail Papayannakis ( H-0062 / 02 ) :
Subject : Packaging and packaging waste
Has Greece notified the Commission of its national measures to implement Directive 94 / 62 / EEC
Mr President , an infringement procedure against Greece was opened in 1996 regarding the failure of the Greek authorities to transpose Directive 94 / 62 on packaging and packaging waste international legislation .
In July 1998 the Commission received notification from the Greek authorities on a draft law which would transpose Directive 94 / 62 .
However , this draft law was not immediately adopted into Greek legislation and so transposition did not actually occur in 1998 .
On 13 April 2000 the European Court of Justice condemned Greece for non-transposition of Directive 94 / 62 .
On 2 May 2000 the Commission requested information from the Greek authorities regarding the measures taken to comply with the Court ruling , but no information was provided .
The procedure stemming from Article 228 was initiated against Greece on 8 November 2000 and a reasoned opinion was sent to Greece on 10 April 2001 .
On 2 August 2001 Greece adopted Law 2939 / 2001 , thereby transposing Directive No 94 / 62 into Greek national legislation .
The Commission received notification of this law from the Greek authorities on 26 September 2001 .
This law has satisfactorily incorporated the observations of the Commission concerning the notification text transmitted to the Commission in 1998 and the procedure against Greece under Article 228 regarding transposition of Directive 94 / 62 was therefore closed on 20 December 2001 .
Thank you , Commissioner , for such a detailed reply , full of dates and numbers .
The only question which remains is , when will the provisions of the directive and the law which you mentioned to us start being applied ?
I am asking because there has been very heavy rainfall in Athens over the past two days , coupled with a strike by refuse collectors , and the huge volume of rubbish to which this directive applies has blocked all the drains and the town has flooded .
Can you tell me what is being planned apart from formally introducing this law ?
I think that there are deadlines .
Can you tell me what your views are ?
When , roughly , will the volume of rubbish start decreasing and a different sort of policy - a recycling and recovery policy - be introduced ?
The Greek Government should have already started to implement the directive so I hope that it is now properly transposed and that all the necessary measures have been taken by the Greek Government to make sure it complies with the existing directive .
Question No 40 by Glyn Ford ( H-0092 / 02 ) :
Subject : Water Framework Directive
By 2015 under the new Water Framework Directive 2000 / 60 / EC
The water framework directive has set the objective to achieve good status for all waters in the European Union .
It will address all relevant sources of pollution , including industrial activities .
As a tool to achieve this objective the directive follows a combined approach of emission controls addressing pollution at the source and water quality standards to be achieved for the particular water body .
Complementing existing Community legislation on major sources of pollution , urban waste water discharges , pollution from agriculture and impacts from large industrial installations , the water framework directive foresees emission controls for particularly hazardous substances and water quality standards at Community level .
Commission proposals for these to Parliament and the Council have to be submitted by December 2003 , also taking into account cost-effectiveness and proportionality .
Participation of all relevant stakeholders will be one of the key elements of the directive .
This will be achieved by mandatory public participation when developing and adopting the necessary river basin management plans , but also by broad participatory processes at EU level , facilitating the implementation of the directive .
This process is to ensure input and participation by all interested and involved parties .
Further , Community research efforts under the Sixth Framework Programme will support the implementation of the directive , as will the LIFE financial instrument in the field of innovative and integrated techniques and methods .
Beyond those measures the Treaty provides for clear guidance as regards financing Community environmental policy being , as a rule , the responsibility of Member States .
On state aids the Commission does not intend to propose changes .
I am slightly disappointed with the response from the Commissioner .
While I am fully in support of strong , effective and costed legislation to force improvements in environmental standards governing water quality and other matters , and of the proper policing of such legislation , I would also like to see this stick approach complemented by , as it were , a degree of carrot .
In my own region - and particularly in Cornwall , which is an Objective 1 area - we have very many small and medium enterprises that will find it most difficult to comply with this legislation .
I would like to see some financial incentives or rewards introduced to enable them to stop polluting water .
If we merely have , if you like , the stick approach and no carrots , then I am afraid we are going to find it more difficult to reach these standards and , at the same time , increase suffering in some of the very small enterprises in the UK county hardest hit by job losses , when we are actually spending considerable sums of money trying to create jobs there .
Mr Ford , I wish I had more carrots and more money to provide us with a financial incentive , but I do not have this money and it is actually for the Member States to follow up and ensure that they create the kind of financial steering instruments and the kind of financial incentives necessary here .
That is the only answer I can provide apart from repeating that we have some funds available , LIFE , project funding and research .
But we cannot go into each and every Member State directly and create those incentives .
That will have to remain the responsibility of the Member States .
I have a very specific question : When will the treatment of waste water in Brussels comply with the legislation ?
The implementation of the waste water treatment plans in Brussels is long-awaited and , as you know , we have initiated infringement proceedings against Belgium on this matter .
According to the latest information we have received , it should be ready by 2006 .
Question No 41 by Nuala Ahern ( H-0093 / 02 ) :
Subject : Assessment of radioactive emissions from Sellafield and Cap de la Hague
Has the Commission already made an assessment and if not , will it undertake an immediate comparative assessment of the details of radioactive effluents and emissions released respectively from the Sellafield nuclear waste and fuel processing plant , operated by BNFL in the UK , and the La Hague nuclear waste and fuel processing plant , operated by COGEMA in France , as published in the Commission Radiation Protection Report 127 , Radioactive effluents from nuclear power stations and nuclear fuel reprocessing plants in the European Union , 1995-1999 , and the report prepared for the European Parliament 's Scientific and Technological Options Assessment Programme ( STOA ) on ' Possible Toxic Effects from the Nuclear Reprocessing Plants at Sellafield ( UK ) and Cap de la Hague ( France ) ' , published in December 2001 and November 2001 respectively ?
Mr President , I am wearing my Irish scarf today .
In response to the question , the Commission has compared the following two reports : its own radiation protection report 127 ( Radioactive effluents from nuclear power stations and nuclear fuel reprocessing plants in the European Union , 1995-1999 ) , published in December 2001 ; and the so-called WISE report , drawn up for the European Parliament 's Scientific and Technological Options Assessment Programme ( STOA ) , on the possible toxic effects from the nuclear reprocessing plants at Sellafield and Cap de la Hague in France , published in November 2001 .
In particular , the Commission compared the reporting of radioactive effluents released from the Sellafield and La Hague sites .
The Commission can confirm that the data reported in the two documents were found to be consistent .
The difference between the two documents lies in the fact that the Commission document simply reports discharge data whereas the WISE report presents an analysis of the impact of these discharges on human health and the environment .
A separate analysis of the data carried out on behalf of the European Commission is now available on the Europa website and I will ensure that a copy is made available to the honourable Member .
In order to obtain a more complete picture of the impact of all historical discharges on the northern European marine environment , in 2000 the European Commission launched the so-called Marina II study , which will be completed this summer .
It will provide additional detailed information on radioactive discharges and resulting activity concentrations .
It will also make an assessment of their levels in northern European marine waters and their impact on human health and on the environment .
Thank you for your answer , Commissioner .
I am aware of the Marina study . I am very interested in its outcome .
It will not report for a while yet , as you said .
However , I should like to ask , based on that and the assessment you have already made , what further steps the Commissioner would recommend to control the continued emissions of radionuclides from Sellafield and La Hague .
They are the largest man-made radioactive emissions and pollutants and do not pollute just EU Member States but migrate across the globe .
Indeed , Norway has complained particularly about the Arctic fishing grounds being affected .
What would you recommend as a result of all this assessment and forthcoming studies ?
You recently visited Ireland - you have your Irish scarf on !
You indicated that you are concerned about the emissions from Sellafield .
We also have a recent RPII report , which I would recommend the Commission to study .
You urged the Irish Government to pursue the issue at EU level instead of simply under the OSPAR .
I have also made a complaint . I want to ask you to address that in depth .
I have had to engage a lawyer to follow up the fact that this has not been dealt with responsibly over the last couple of years .
There has also been a recent departure of a Commission official , Mr Curry , to the board of BNFL .
Has the Commission agreed that this is not a conflict of interest ?
Mr President , firstly , I would like to say to Mrs Ahern that the overall objective lies in meeting the OSPAR commitment , the aim being to achieve a substantial reduction in discharges by 2020 .
The Commission is committed to helping OSPAR achieve that aim and the Member States will assist them to that end .
We are , of course , following developments closely .
That is our task , but only after the Marina study is complete will we be provided with a good basis and platform , a scientific assessment of the situation enabling us to judge what exactly we should do and find the correct measures , if necessary , to help reduce discharges .
So once the Marina study is complete there will be another opportunity to take stock and decide on the measures to come .
I have indeed heard and seen in the media that Mr Curry has been appointed to the Board of the BNFL .
Since , to the best of our knowledge , Mr Curry had not contacted us in advance to notify us of this new appointment , the Director-General for Personnel and Administration sent him a letter asking him to clarify his situation further and reminding him of his obligations under the Staff Regulations .
We are looking forward to a reply from him .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the question which interests me is this : what is the legal basis - the relevant legislation and technical directives - for the assessment of radioactive effluents ?
We make use of our Legal Service to assist with our obligations under international conventions and with the basic safety standards which it is the role of the Commission to establish .
We also make use of experts and have expert committees comprising representatives and experts from all the Member States .
We base that on the best available scientific knowledge .
Question No 42 by Pernille Frahm ( H-0100 / 02 ) :
Subject : Brominated flame retardants
In the light of recent research ( e.g. at the Virginia Institute of Marine Science ) showing that brominated flame retardants used , for example , in TVs and computers , have been found in large quantities in fish and in mother 's milk , will the Commission take initiatives seeking the introduction of a total ban on their use ?
Recent research at the Virginia Institute of Marine Science has found the brominated flame retardant penta-bromodiphenyl ether ( penta-BDE ) in freshwater fish .
Previous studies have shown that penta-BDE is also found in mothers ' breast milk .
That is the brominated flame retardant that belongs to a group of ten chemicals known as polybrominated diphenyl ethers , PDBEs .
Three polybrominated diphenyl ether flame retardants are available on the market . These are : penta-BDE , octa-BDE and deca-BDE .
Penta-BDE is used almost exclusively as a flame retardant in polyurethane foams such as those found in vehicle upholstery and household furniture .
At present there is a Commission proposal to ban the use of penta-BDE as from 1 July 2003 .
A major use of octa-BDE is as a flame retardant in acrylonitrile butadiene styrene ( ABS ) plastics , whereas deca-BDE is the flame retardant of choice in high impact polystyrene .
These plastics are used to mould , for example , housings for computers and as packaging for electronic appliances .
Due in part to the presence of brominated flame retardants , including octa-BDE and deca-BDE , in electrical and electronic equipment , the Commission has proposed that Member States set up separate collection schemes and ensure the proper treatment , recovery and disposal of such equipment .
Furthermore , in a parallel proposal the Commission has called for a ban on the use of polybrominated biphenyls and polybrominated diphenyl ethers in electrical and electronic equipment as from 1 January 2008 .
The common position adopted by the Council on 4 December 2001 brought forward this date to 1 January 2007 .
At present , octa-BDE and deca-BDE are undergoing risk assessment within the framework of Council Regulation 793 / 93 on the evaluation and control of the risks of existing substances .
Risk reduction measures in addition to those mentioned above may , if necessary , be proposed in the future .
Mr President , thank you for your answer and for the attention that is being given to this matter .
However , I can remember a time when no one could discover how to replace asbestos . What in reality got things moving was the desire to ban the material .
I can now understand people 's wanting to make collections . That is also all well and good .
However , it is of course not only a question of what happens to the material when it is worn out but also of what happens to it while it is in use .
The problem is that , when in use , it emits materials that are absorbed partly into our blood , partly into our layers of fat and partly into mother 's milk .
Now that there has been an investigation indicating that the quantity of brominated flame retardants in mother 's milk is forty times greater than had previously been assumed , we would ask if it might not then have been a good idea to draw up a long-term plan for when these substances might also be banned in their two aforementioned forms , which I shall refrain from trying to pronounce .
I agree entirely .
These flame retardants belong to a group of chemicals which we must keep an eye on , but that alone is not sufficient .
We now have a ban on one of these flame retardants , and the two others have undergone risk assessment .
In a few weeks or at least in a month or two , we should be able to decide on the next step .
We have not ruled out introducing further bans , but we want to have an opportunity of assessing what needs to be done on the basis of these risk assessments .
We do not rule out any measures for actually dealing with these chemicals which , as has been pointed out , accumulate in the environment .
Furthermore , we must ensure that recycling takes place and that the old materials are collected .
We must have control of where these substances occur .
Madam Commissioner , do you know whether any Member States are already giving serious consideration to the possibility of banning these brominated flame retardants at present , or , indeed , have already introduced such a ban ?
Yes , I am aware that this debate is underway in several of the Member States .
I know that such a debate is taking place in the country I know best and that this is also the case in other countries .
This question has been brought up on several occasions and has been discussed in the Environment Council .
There is a great deal of interest in it .
I believe that we are all agreed that we need to take action to control the use of these dangerous chemicals and , it is hoped , ensure that we can find safe replacements as quickly as possible .
The risk assessments and risk evaluations give us that opportunity .
Question No 43 by Patricia McKenna ( H-0101 / 02 ) :
Subject : Ireland 's compliance with EU environmental laws
During Commissioner Wallström 's recent visit to Ireland she stated that she would use the leverage of structural funding to force Ireland to comply with some key directives such as the Nitrates Directive and the Framework Waste Directive .
Apart from the ongoing legal actions , what does the Commission exactly propose to do to ensure that Ireland complies with EU environmental laws ?
Is the Commission envisaging toughening the current , protracted complaint-making procedure to penalise Member States who consistently fail to comply with EU law and what would these reforms consist of and when would they be launched ?
In light of the numerous environmental complaints filed by individuals and organisations in Ireland , the highest rate per capita in the EU , what kind of supplementary resources is the Commission prepared to make available to ensure that these complaints are processed swiftly and effectively ?
Questions to Commissioner Fischler
Linkage between allocation of Community funds and compliance with Community and environmental law is even-handed and applies to all Member States .
Linkage has already been established between Member State compliance with key aspects of the habitats and nitrates directives , and funding under the Structural Funds Regulation and the Rural Development Regulation .
As the linkage deadline for structural funds approached at the end of 2000 , Ireland dramatically improved its level of compliance with the habitats directive .
The immediate focus is now on the Nitrates directive .
Ireland is currently the only Member State with no nitrate-vulnerable zones .
In its rural development plan , Ireland committed itself to complete designation by the end of 2001 .
As this has not yet happened , the Commission will not approve any modifications proposed by Ireland to its programme under the Rural Development Regulation .
Recently , Ireland brought forward a routine modification which is now blocked by the Commission 's services .
The amount of discussion on designation in Ireland at present reinforces the importance of this action and I look forward to Ireland completing its designation very soon .
The framework waste directive is not an issue since Ireland has submitted a complete set of up-to-date waste management plans .
As regards the toughness of Commission enforcement procedures , steady incremental reforms have already speeded up case handling .
These reforms involve better internal use of information technology and a quicker dispatch of warning letters to Member States .
Furthermore , in 2000 , the Court of Justice imposed its first financial penalty in a case concerning waste management .
As regards the allocation of supplementary resources to speed up the handling of Irish cases , my services keep resource needs under constant review .
However , the honourable Member will be aware that the Commission must operate within overall constraints that are very tight , and that there are many competing demands .
Commissioner , I received your letter today after your visit to Ireland , but the last point you raised , which your letter failed to address , relates to the lack of resources in the Legal Unit of the Environment Directorate to deal with complaints .
This is a major problem that has to be addressed , because the rights of EU citizens are being denied where complaints are not being fully examined .
At the same time environmental damage continues .
We must address that .
In relation to waste , the problem with Ireland is that it is failing to comply with the waste directive .
In today 's Irish Times Wicklow County Council admits to the existence of up to 88 illegal dumps , 19 of which have not even been examined yet .
That council has been suspected of being involved in dumping in some of these illegal sites and the EPA , the body responsible for protecting the environment , has actually granted a waste licence to one of these illegal sites .
Unfortunately our minister has today ruled out any kind of independent inquiry into this .
In the light of the failure of the Irish authorities to comply with EU directives , particularly in relation to waste , is there any possibility that the Commission might consider sending in an independent team to investigate the damage that is being done and the irregularities present in relation to waste in this area in particular ?
I must say , after listening to you , that it is clear that Ireland is where the resources ought to be put to take care of the waste problem .
I also wish that I could have more staff , to be better able to deal with all the cases , but it is in Ireland where action needs to be taken to comply with the directives , including the waste directives .
I know from my visit to Ireland what a very important , controversial and difficult issue this is .
I understand that it is a big challenge to Irish society and its government to handle the waste problem , and I have of course made my understaffing problem known in the Commission 's internal discussions on resources .
Action absolutely has to be taken in Ireland to comply with our directives .
I hope Commissioner Fischler understands that Members of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy fully endorse what the Commissioner has just said about the need for extra resources to ensure that environmental legislation is properly enforced .
But it is not just Ireland that is causing difficulties .
In October last year a reasoned opinion against the construction of the Odelouca dam in Portugal was issued and yet I understand that construction on the dam started in January this year .
What steps has the Commission taken to try to persuade the Portuguese authorities to stop construction of this dam ?
. That is a completely different question and I would like to have the full background so that I am fully updated on all the facts .
I would be more than happy to answer to your question , but please give me a chance to look into that particular case and then come back to me so that I can give you an updated reply .
This is a supplementary point .
What Mrs McKenna said about Wicklow County Council is absolutely true .
Revelations followed daily and the local authority had a heated and intense discussion on this question yesterday .
I have made a complaint to you regarding the illegal waste dumps found in Wicklow .
However , it is now possible that the local authority itself is implicated .
This is very serious and yet the Irish Government is not setting up an independent enquiry .
Is there anything that the Commission can do and will it address my complaint speedily ?
Yes , we take all complaints seriously and we work on all complaints .
We have , as you know , a record number of complaints from Ireland in particular .
We look into those as speedily as possible .
There is also the possibility for me to raise this issue in my contacts with the Government of Ireland .
This is what I intend to do . These are concerns that were very clearly expressed by people in Ireland when I was there .
I will definitely take them to the minister responsible and to the Irish Government .
As the time allocated to Question Time is at an end , Questions Nos 44 to 47 and 74 will be answered in writing
Question No 48 by Alexandros Alavanos , which has been taken over by Mihail Papayannakis ( H-0064 / 02 ) :
Subject : Quota buy-back by tobacco producers
The regulation on tobacco , as last amended , makes provision for tobacco producers to buy back quotas allocated to other producers , who are leaving the sector , in order to improve their business and their financial position .
However , the Commission 's recent announcements and decisions concerning the phasing out of aid over three years have effectively scuppered the quota buy-back programme as tobacco producers cannot afford the outlay and additional investment required when they do not know whether tobacco subsidies will be available for the 7-8 years minimum period they need to recoup their costs .
What guarantees can the Commission provide to induce producers to take part in the quota buy-back programme under Regulation ( EC ) 1636 / 98
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the quota buyback programme in the tobacco sector was introduced to make it easier for producers wishing to switch away from tobacco to embark on conversion .
For specific types of tobacco which face steadily declining markets , the buyback price was increased significantly so that producers have an incentive to cease cultivation .
With regard to the acquisition of quotas from the buyback programme , however , the other tobacco farmers who wish to purchase the quotas have priority .
We can only buy back the quotas which are not bought by other tobacco farmers .
For the coming three years , the Commission has submitted a proposal for a Council regulation which sets the premiums and quotas until 2004 .
Among other things , this proposal provides for a restructuring of the Community Tobacco Fund in order to finance studies in the Member States on the opportunities for conversion of tobacco production to other crops outside the tobacco sector , and on the initial experiences of this conversion .
In this proposal , the Commission has also announced a further proposal for the first half of 2003 , which will be based on the guidelines contained in the Commission communication of 16 May 2001 on the European Union Strategy for Sustainable Development .
To this end , it is essential to ensure that there is precise information available on possible alternatives and the socio-economic impact of phasing out tobacco subsidies . A study is therefore also being undertaken at present to evaluate the common organisation of the market in raw tobacco .
This study should be ready at the end of this year . It assesses the socio-economic impact of tobacco cultivation in the various production areas .
Thank you , Commissioner , for your reply .
I think that the question by my fellow Member , Mr Alavanos , was based on the following argument , which is extremely serious . If you subsidise the takeover of quotas by other producers , obviously the producers who take over this production potential need some time to amortise their investment , about 7 or 8 years .
If you say that you are going to stop paying them a subsidy within three years , then there is no point in their taking over the quotas .
And I should also like you to explain the following contradiction .
You say , Commissioner , that you will carry out a study to see what the possibilities are for other crops .
Quite right too and we have been supporting that here for some time now ; however , you yourself have replied to repeated questions which honourable Members have put to you in the past , saying that this is more or less impossible .
Have you perhaps any more news on this front ?
Mr President , that was not really a question , but of course the Commission is well aware of the effects of this quota buyback programme .
However , I must also point out that this is an entirely voluntary programme ; no one is forced to buy quotas .
For this reason , we also cannot raise any legal expectations should the phasing out of subsidies for tobacco cultivation take place at a later stage .
However , I would also like to point out that we will have an opportunity later this week to discuss the future of the common organisation of markets in raw tobacco in great detail during Thursday 's debate here in the plenary .
The three-year extension and its implications will be a key issue in the debate .
Commissioner , what are tobacco producers in Granada going to live on now ?
What do you think the prospects for employment are for the 2000 or so families who made a living from tobacco ?
Please be so good as to answer in writing if you are not able to give an answer straightaway .
Cetarsa has announced that it will be closing its Granada factory and Mr Prodi has , to stir things up , announced that there will be no more aid for tobacco growing .
I ask you Mr Fischler , as Commissioner for Agriculture , what guarantees can you offer Granada 's tobacco growers ?
Please answer me , but give me an answer that talks about alternative jobs and practicalities and do not try to silence us with rabble-rousing talk , or some nonsense about alternative crops .
Commissioner , please give us a detailed answer .
Mr President , Ms Izquierdo Rojo , let me answer with due stringency .
Firstly : it is quite clear , also from what was agreed at the summit , that the phasing out of tobacco subsidies must be accompanied by an appropriate range of alternatives .
This means that we can only implement the phasing-out process if we are able to offer genuine alternatives .
That is my position here .
We want to use the Community Tobacco Fund in the coming years for precisely this purpose , so that we are able to try out options and genuine alternatives and see what works and what does not .
Only then will a decision by the Agriculture Council and an opinion by Parliament be necessary , based on a Commission proposal which will draw on the findings of this year 's study .
And only then can this phasing out be implemented in practice .
This is exactly why we intend to undertake a study , at local level , of the options available in the most-affected regions : in Granada , in Estremadura , in Thrace in Greece , and a number of other regions .
We will not be fobbed off with far-fetched ideas ; we want to investigate the reality .
I think that this is an entirely fair approach .
As the author is not present , Question No 49 lapses .
Question No 50 by Izquierdo Rojo ( H-0080 / 02 ) :
Subject : Repercussions of Prime Minister Aznar 's disagreements with Morocco
Will farmers have to bear the consequences of the disagreements which have arisen between Prime Minister Aznar and the Kingdom of Morocco ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , without going into the issues raised by the honourable lady , I would like to point out on behalf of the Commission that matters concerning the bilateral relations between Morocco and an EU Member State have no bearing on the European Union 's comprehensive strategy on the Mediterranean countries .
These relations are governed by the Barcelona Process .
In line with the principles which were endorsed by all the EU Member States and our Mediterranean partners in Barcelona in 1995 , trade in agricultural products will be progressively liberalised by all parties .
Against this background , the Community then concluded an Association Agreement with Morocco in 1996 which provides for reciprocal concessions on agricultural products .
The Commission and Morocco recently initiated formal negotiations in order to rework these concessions with a view to deepening the liberalisation process .
Commissioner , your reply has been quite inadequate and confused , because we know from the press that on 15 March negotiations between the European Union and the Kingdom of Morocco on the agriculture chapter will be starting in Rabat .
As I am sure you know , Commissioner , Mr Aznar is the President-in-Office of the Spanish Presidency of the European Union .
I am therefore speaking purely in terms of the EU .
I would like you , Commissioner , to tell me what basic premises you will be working on in these negotiations and whether you think a climate of good relations with Morocco would have been desirable instead of Mr Aznar 's scandalous failure .
I am not speaking in the context of Spain but of the European Union , since the negotiations that will be opening on 15 March have nothing to do with Spain and are completely European , just as this House and my question are also entirely European .
And yet the replies you give to the Members of this House are quite unsatisfactory , as if you have no respect for democratic representation .
This is disgraceful !
I would ask speakers to put questions and to state their opinions but not to put words into the mouths of others because this is not what we are here for and nor do I think that this is the spirit in which we should be working .
Mr President , Ms Izquierdo Rojo , let me make it clear : I began by pointing out that a distinction must be made between Spain 's bilateral relations with Morocco and the European Union 's relations with Morocco .
In my reply , I also mentioned the very negotiations you refer to , which were held on 15 March .
The only detail I omitted was the date when they took place .
However , I really must remind you that the procedure for liberalising trade in agricultural products with Morocco was established as early as 1995 .
The purpose of the current negotiations is merely to decide on the next step in this liberalisation process .
It must be clear that liberalisation must be a two-way street .
It is not merely a matter of agreeing on the concessions we should make to the Kingdom of Morocco ; the question is also which concessions the Kingdom of Morocco will make to us in the trade in agricultural products .
For example , if you look at recent trends in the trade in agricultural products , you will see that interestingly enough , Morocco 's imports such as grain from the USA have increased very substantially .
With regard to the trend in imports from the European Union , the opposite is true .
This is not a one-way street , it is a two-way street .
Of course , we must also be prepared to make further concessions .
Our approach to the negotiations is very constructive .
After all , the talks have only just begun and still have a long way to go .
They are scheduled to close at the end of this year , so there is still enough time to make progress .
Question No 51 by Esko Olavi Seppänen ( H-0083 / 02 ) :
Subject : Breaking up of fishing vessels
In connection with the consideration of the 2002 budget , an appropriation was approved for the breaking up of Member States ' fishing vessels as compensation for the failure to renew the fishing agreement with Morocco .
On what basis is the Commission granting these appropriations ?
Can they be obtained not only for breaking up fishing vessels but also for selling them , e.g. to Moroccans , and can subsidies also be paid in respect of the breaking up of vessels built elsewhere with EU aid ?
Mr President , Mr Seppänen , ladies and gentlemen , on 17 December last year , the Council adopted the Commission proposal to allocate appropriate financial aid to fishermen and vessel owners who had operated under the Fisheries Agreement with Morocco , in order to enable them to undertake conversion of vessels and activities .
A total of EUR 197 million will be allocated to the programme : EUR 170 million in this year 's budget and EUR 27 million in next year 's budget .
The funds are to be used as follows : The share of aid to be allocated to the scrapping or permanent conversion of vessels to activities other than fishing must represent at least 40 % of the global amount .
A maximum of 28 % of the total amount can be used for the permanent transfer of vessels to a third country with or without the creation of a joint enterprise , or for the modernisation of vessels .
At least 32 % of the total amount of aid must be allocated to social measures such as retraining for fishermen who have lost their jobs or part-financing of early retirement schemes .
Thus the permanent transfer of vessels to Morocco through sale or creation of a joint enterprise in Morocco is also eligible for funding .
However , the premium for the creation of a joint enterprise amounts to just 80 % of the scrapping premium , and the premium for export of a vessel amounts to just 50 % of the scrapping premium .
Furthermore , vessel owners who purchased their ship with Community aid and who now wish to export it or transfer it to a joint enterprise with a Community subsidy must repay a proportion of the subsidy received for the original purchase .
The amount to be repaid depends on the age of the vessel .
In the case of a five-year-old ship , for example , half the subsidy must be repaid .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for his reply , which was quite thorough with regard to the use of this aid .
I would still like to home in on one matter with a question that was contained in the original question . Were these ships , which are now being scrapped or sold to Moroccan buyers with EU aid , possibly financed out of other EU funds at the stage when they were purchased .
In other words , I wish to draw attention with my question to how short or long-term EU fishing policy is .
Mr President , the situation is really quite clear : This is a specific programme which was adopted in order to address the particular problem arising from the non-renewal of the Fisheries Agreement with Morocco .
Within this specific programme , the conditions which I have outlined apply .
Outside the framework of this programme , there are only the Structural Funds for the fisheries industry , which govern all scrapping measures and where the same conditions apply universally .
The additional funds and improved conditions for the scrapping or sale of vessels only apply in this individual case .

As they deal with the same subject , Question Nos 52 and 53 will be taken together . Question No 52 by Jonas Sjöstedt ( H-0086 / 02 ) :


Subject : EU export subsidies for agricultural produce
The EU spends nearly EUR five billion each year on subsidies of exports of its own agricultural produce .
These subsidies seriously damage the prospects of other countries , particularly developing ones , of maintaining a viable position on the market in agricultural produce .
The Court of Auditors has also highlighted the fact that the expenditure is not checked in a satisfactory manner .
The EU 's subsidies have come in for strong criticism in the WTO and part of the conclusions of the WTO meeting in Qatar was an objective to review subsidies .
What plans does the EU have for scaling down or phasing out these subsidies in the years to come ?
Question No 53 by Paulo Casaca ( H-0142 / 02 ) :
Subject : Phasing-out of export subsidies
The Commission undertook in Doha to launch negotiations for the ' reduction of all forms of export subsidies , " with a view to phasing out " ' .
This agreement , like any of the others and as is usual with such texts , is conditional on the final outcome of the talks .
This bold undertaking by the Commission is also justified internally , given the considerable inefficiencies and abuses which this system has given rise to , not to mention its dubious impact on fulfilment of the objectives of Article 33 of the Treaty , especially regarding action to ensure a fair income for farmers .
Can the Commission explain , in terms of timetables and procedures , how it intends to act on this objective , on the basis of full compliance with Article 33 , paragraph 1 ( b ) of the Treaty ?
Mr President , I would indeed prefer to answer these two questions together , as their content is the same .
In the Doha Ministerial Declaration , the WTO members pledged to engage in comprehensive negotiations aimed at reductions of , with a view to phasing out , all forms of export subsidies , although the text ultimately adopted in Doha left the final outcome of the negotiations open .
The negotiations will cover all forms of export subsidies , not only our export refunds .
For example , they will also focus on a regime for export credits , the export subsidy element of various food programmes , and trade-distorting practices by state-owned trading companies .
It would be unacceptable to demand a further reduction of subsidies from the European Union alone .
We have already made this very clear in the proposal we put forward as part of the Article 20 negotiations .
Furthermore , the European Union has already reduced its export refunds by 50 % .
In 1993 , export refunds still totalled EUR 10 billion , whereas they currently amount to less than EUR 5 billion .
The Commission is also endeavouring to shape its export policies in such a way as to avoid negative impacts on developing countries ' production when granting refunds .
As far as the common agricultural policy permits , the process of reducing subsidies will continue , with due account being taken of the interests of our own producers and trading companies in this context .
In response to the criticism voiced by the Court of Auditors regarding the use of export refunds , the Commission has devised an action plan which will be implemented during the first half of this year and which will introduce substantial changes to the current system .
As the WTO negotiating round which has now been agreed is scheduled to end in 2004 , it would be premature at this stage to determine the European Union 's positions in detail or , indeed , predict the outcomes of the negotiations .
Our final positions must be established against the background of the overall negotiations .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for that exhaustive answer .
I think that the European Union is in a unique position when it comes to export subsidies .
The EU is in a class of its own as the biggest subsidising power on a global basis .
My question concerns what the plans look like for the years ahead .
Are there any plans for the next two , three or four years to further reduce the EUR 5 billion granted as export subsidies in the past year ?
Mr President , we are indeed the largest market , and we are by far the largest importers of products from the developing countries .
In my view , we should also remind ourselves sometimes that the European Union alone imports more agricultural products from the developing countries than the USA , Japan , Canada , New Zealand and Australia put together .
We therefore have every reason to hold our heads high when dealing with the other developed states .
Furthermore , as you are aware , we have agreed on an open-door policy for products from the poorest countries of the world .
With regard to exports , a key factor in this context is that we can only reduce export refunds in sectors where appropriate reforms of the common agricultural policy are taking place .
If you look at the structure of export refunds , you will see that we spend by far the most substantial proportion of funds on exports of milk products , sugar and sugar products .
Why ?
Because the gap with the world market price is still very high in these sectors , and this price can only be reached by carrying out reforms in these two sectors .
On the other hand , in the last two years , we have more or less phased out export subsidies on grain , and massively reduced them on beef .
Given the pace of the common agricultural policy reforms , further reductions in export refunds can therefore also be anticipated .
Mr President , I should also like to thank Commissioner Fischler for the explanations he has given us , which have been extremely useful .
But I must confess , Commissioner , that I am somewhat disappointed at the lack of force in what you had to say about this commitment to phase out subsidies for farm exports , which is absolutely essential .
According to the press , since last December this type of compensation has risen very substantially in the meat sector .
I must also point out that in 2001 this reduction was closely connected to the rise in the value of the dollar and not to any reform of agricultural policy ; and I must also say that there have been substantial increases in the amounts of subsidies for all products not included in Annex I. This is a situation that concerns me and I should like to ask Commissioner Fischler if he thinks it realistic that these reforms of the CAP that he has been talking about will be carried out in good enough time to be able to gradually eliminate these export subsidies ?
Mr President , Mr Casaca , stringency is one thing , but coherence is another .
Let us take the milk production sector as an example , as I have already mentioned .
Under our current organisation of the market , we have a commitment to guarantee a specific price for skimmed milk powder and butter .
As long as this commitment is in place , we can only export butter and skimmed milk powder with appropriate subsidies .
As you probably know , there is currently no political majority in the European Union in favour of reforming the existing organisation of the milk market .
It is therefore a little over-simplistic merely to point out to the Commission that reforms are required .
That is something which should be drawn to the attention , first and foremost , of the Member States .

With regard to sugar , the situation is as follows : We have pledged , also to this House , that we will undertake a study of competition in the sugar industry this year and that depending on the findings , the Commission will then exercise the option included in the extension of the common organisation of the market in sugar : we can utilise the review clause which it contains and then make further proposals in line with this clause .
The reform process , too , is set to continue .
As you know , the next step is the mid-term review in June this year , but in some sectors , further measures are already planned , for example in the olive sector , the fruit and vegetable sector , and in many others too .
Thank you very much , Mr Fischler , for your dedication to Question Time this afternoon .
As the time allotted to Question Time has elapsed , Questions Nos. 54 to 92 will be answered in writing
The next item is the report ( A5-0063 / 2002 ) by Mrs Isler Béguin , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on the biodiversity action plans in the areas of conservation of natural resources , agriculture , fisheries , and development and economic cooperation [ COM ( 2001 ) 162 - C5-0467 / 2001 - 2001 / 2189 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is my pleasure to present to you the report on biodiversity .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Members here today and those who worked with me with a view to drafting and presenting this resolution to you today .
I would also like to thank the draftsmen of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , the Committee on Fisheries and the Committee on Development and Cooperation who supported all the drafts that your rapporteur presented on the protection of biodiversity .
Lastly , I would also like to thank the NGOs who really made an enormous effort for this report .
We know that they are excellent observers who have a perfect understanding of the status of biodiversity throughout the world .
Mr President , the situation is not rosy and I would like to answer a question that , strictly speaking , has not been raised but which is often implicit in some Members ' comments .
What is the real use of biodiversity , or , in more straightforward terms , why protect nature when there are so many other issues of concern ?
I would like to remind you that biodiversity plays a part in our own survival and that although nature does not need man to survive , we , as human beings , need nature in order to live .
Our responsibility as elected representatives is to preserve a rich biodiversity .
This rich biodiversity holds the assets for the development of future generations .
Each living species that disappears from the face of the planet is an irreversible and irretrievable loss , and if we allow biodiversity to be destroyed , we are slowly but surely destroying ourselves .
We can see this destruction taking place every day .
Is the Brazilian Congress not due to issue an opinion in the near future on a project that authorises the use of 50 % of the Amazon rain forest , which we know represents a huge genetic pool ?
It is not out of disinterest that man destroys or threatens biodiversity - very much the opposite in fact .
It is out of genuine interest .
It is because huge financial interests are at stake , involving the precious wood as well as trafficking in endangered species , the intensive farming of land , the overexploitation of fish stocks or even the pillaging of the age-old practices of indigenous peoples .
In order to put a stop to this massacre , the Convention on Biological Diversity was signed at the Earth Summit in Rio .
Ten years down the line , it is still the poor relative - the Convention 's signatory States have not kept their commitments and so far no country has biodiversity in its list of priorities for September 's summit in Johannesburg .
In just a few days ' time , the Conference in The Hague will be held , which will bring together those party to the Convention on Biological Diversity , the European Parliament , by means of our resolution , must shoulder its responsibilities and send out a strong and clear message .
We call upon the Union to place the issue of biodiversity on the Johannesburg agenda and upon the Commission to present an action plan at this meeting , as it is doing for the European Union .
We must reiterate the fundamental role of biodiversity as the cornerstone of sustainable development and the importance of the full application of the Convention and its provisions .
We also call on the Union to put in place an ambitious policy to preserve its own biodiversity .
The action plans presented by the Commission in the areas of natural resources , agriculture , development and fisheries , which are the subject of this report , may , of course , be seen as a first step along this road , but they are not enough .
We need additional action plans , particularly for forestry and for transport , as all these Community policies had or still have a negative impact on biodiversity .
And although the Commission claims its ambition is to reverse the current trend , it is fully aware of the challenge that it faces .
The report states - and I quote - that ' during recent decades , the reduction and loss of biodiversity in Europe and worldwide has accelerated dramatically and existing measures have proved to be insufficient to reverse present trends ? .
I would add to this the new threats posed by the introduction of certain GMOs and even the conflicts related to the ownership of living things , which give an indication of future ambitions .
To reverse this destructive tendency is a bold challenge , admittedly , but it is one we are prepared to face .
The European Union has still to equip itself with the political and financial means to hope to achieve this objective .
We already have the birds and habitats directives , which enable us to preserve a part of our biodiversity .
We demand that they be applied throughout the European Union , including in the candidate countries and in the outermost regions and particularly in areas such as the coral reef .
We must find ways of preserving these areas .
The second way of making headway in implementing a sustainable ecological development plan , as formally acknowledged at the Gothenburg Summit , is to equip ourselves with effective means of measuring how far the environment is taken into account in the Union 's policies .
The Barcelona Spring European Council is due to adopt six environmental indicators .
This is not enough .
No mention is made of biodiversity .
We also call on the Commission to present a specific indicator for biodiversity by 2003 .
If we want to make progress in the area of biodiversity , we know that we must begin immediately and continue every day to integrate this problem in the policies of the Union , starting with the forthcoming reform of the common agricultural policy , the common fisheries policy , the policy on transport and the Cotonou development agreements .
Although there is consensus between the various groups within Parliament on the ways of protecting biodiversity , several Members hold conflicting views on the impact of GMOs on biodiversity .
Nonetheless , as rapporteur , I hope that the references to the environmental liability of GMOs for polluting the countryside are retained .
To sum up , allow me , Mr President , to presume that no one would even think of planning to destroy a cathedral , for example , or a listed monument to build a motorway .
We must have the same approach towards preserving our natural heritage and biological diversity .
As you will have realised , the large screens are not working properly ; however , the screens serving the President 's bench are working .
- ( ES ) Mr President , farming is an economic activity that depends on biological processes and which accounts for the use of much of the Community 's natural resources .
For this reason , it must play a double-edged and central role in the conservation of biodiversity : first , by consolidating farming practices that are compatible with the environment and , secondly , by ensuring the survival of viable farms and systems of production throughout the territory of the European Union .
Both the relentless intensification of farming and the fact that farmers are leaving the industry , with the consequent decline of rural areas , are having a devastating effect on biodiversity .
A Community strategy for biodiversity must guarantee a method of farming that is more sustainable , in the broadest sense of the word , and which , in addition to the biological aspects , incorporates economic and social requirements and , ultimately , the survival of the rural world .
Furthermore , maintaining this sustainable form of farming is a prerequisite for the European agricultural model , which is based on the protection of multifunctionality in agriculture , as the Council and the European Parliament have reiterated in numerous resolutions .
The CAP is a useful instrument for biodiversity , as are the resolutions of the Earth Summit adopted at the Helsinki and Gothenburg Councils .
On this basis it would be a mistake to confine the protection of biodiversity within the narrow limits of the CAP 's second pillar and , more specifically , within agri-environmental programmes - designed to encourage the extensification of organic farming , the preservation of native species , the protection of natural habitats , etc. for two reasons : firstly , because the second pillar of the CAP accounts for only 10 % of the agricultural budget and , secondly , because although agri-environmental programmes encompass 20 % of the EU 's farmland , they have been implemented very unevenly and these days they are restricted almost entirely to the least productive areas of five Member States .
This state of affairs is aggravated by the fact that there has been insufficient insistence upon environmental protection requirements in respect of market aid , and this has generally resulted in the setting of excessively low standards .
Therefore , we should extend eco-conditionality and encourage more active use of the agricultural market policy mechanisms designed to protect the environment and biodiversity .
We must support these requirements in our legislation on food quality , plant-health products , seeds and genetic resources .
It is crucial that we strengthen the financial element of the CAP 's second pillar as well as making a distinction between its measures for socio-rural development and its agri-environmental measures .
We are facing a major challenge , which is to consolidate Community agricultural policies and to draw them together so that they work in parallel to preserve biodiversity .
Mr President , I should first of all like to say that I am not speaking on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , but on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , where I was shadow rapporteur .
I should like to thank the rapporteur for her clarity of vision .
She spoke about Brazil , but I should like to start close to home in discussing biodiversity .
At present in the fishing industry we are depleting glass eel stocks from our coastlines , with the result that the eel itself hardly occurs in its natural habitat .
This seems to me to be an issue for the Commission and our Environmental Commissioner to look into further and to draft a policy accordingly .
The Fishery Committee 's second point of concern pertains to the development of genetic engineering in fish farming .
Canada and the United States currently have a system which they can set in motion as soon as they receive the green light .
It seems important to me for the Commission to verify to what extent we can stop this development in Europe , or at least are able to hold a reasonable political debate on the subject before we resort to such technology in fish farming .
The third point concerns aquaculture and the implications on the maritime environment .
We need more research on that score too , particularly to find more closed systems .
The fourth point to which the Fisheries Committee would like to draw your attention is the implications of the dissonance which sometimes exists between bird and fish stocks .
Particularly with regard to cormorants , there are serious problems in Europe .
Fifthly , the Fisheries Committee wants research to be carried out into the connection between climate change and fish stocks .
What is the connection ?
Insufficient research has been carried out in that area and we will very much welcome the Commission 's action plans particularly on that score .
The sixth point concerns policy we are currently adopting to close areas in order to protect certain fish species .
It is unclear whether this has truly positive effects on fish stocks or not .
More research by the Commission in the framework of biodiversity would be appreciated in that area too .
Allow me to conclude by at least inviting the Environment Commissioner , Mrs Wallström , to come and exchange ideas with the Fisheries Committee on these specific points , so as to ascertain to what extent she can make a contribution to the Green Paper on fishery , also in terms of biodiversity .
We would welcome such an initiative from the Commissioner with open arms .
of the opinion of the Committee on Development and Cooperation . ( DA ) Mr President , first of all I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Isler Béguin , on her brilliant report .
My only objection is that , because most of the world 's biological diversity exists in tropical areas in the developing countries , I should like to have seen the development aspect given a rather more prominent place in the report .
Paragraph 49 calls for EU support for measures aimed at encouraging indigenous peoples to manage and preserve biodiversity .
I have tabled an amendment adjusting the wording to the effect that the EU should support the role which , in virtue of its traditional knowledge , the original population plays in preserving and managing biodiversity .
That applies especially to protected areas in which it is important for the indigenous peoples to participate in management so that forced relocations and inadequate access to resources are prevented .
I have tabled an amendment with a view to having this aspect included in the report .
In a number of developing countries , there is a clear need to be able to derive economic benefits from the sustainable use of wild resources , if people are to have an incentive to preserve stocks .
In southern Africa , elephant populations have become so large that they destroy biodiversity and , given the economic situation of the countries concerned , it is completely unreasonable that the latter should not be able to obtain an income from their elephants .
Biodiversity is now being lost at an unprecedented rate but , for all that , nothing has really happened since Rio .
Biodiversity has become a concept that has been put on the back burner , and it is now our task to try to keep it on the agenda .
In order to tackle the issue of conservation , it is necessary to protect the whole ecosystem .
The Community 's cooperation programmes have proved to be sustainable alternatives to a protectionist approach , and I am able fully to support this way of thinking .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , species extinction and the loss of biodiversity in Europe and worldwide are proceeding at an ever-increasing pace .
Despite all the measures we have taken so far , we have quite simply failed to curb this trend .
Following the adoption by the Council of the Community strategy on biodiversity in June 1998 , it is gratifying that the communication proposes biodiversity action plans in four areas - conservation of natural resources , fisheries , economic cooperation , and development - and this is of course very welcome in principle .
The Commission 's proposals on agriculture are to be welcomed as well .
I am therefore rather disappointed that the otherwise excellent report by the rapporteur takes such a negative view of agriculture - at least , that is how we see it - and fails to make any mention of agriculture 's contribution to protecting biodiversity .
My group will vote for this report , but we will vote against it on a number of individual points .
You see , I come from a country which would have no future without its farmers .
Austria is primarily an Alpine country , and without our Alpine farmers - whose working practices date back a hundred or even two hundred years - there would be a great deal wrong with our country .
We are well aware that agriculture - especially non-intensive agriculture - also maintains specific eco-systems .
Some habitats , such as those which exist in the mosaic of planted fields and boundaries defined by hedgerows and ditches , are quite simply vital to protect specific flora and fauna and ensure that they can nest and find sources of food .
I do not want to recite a list of the different types of bird affected or tell you which species have survived as a result of agriculture , and I certainly have no intention of telling you all about plant and insect species .
Nonetheless , I think it is important to mention that non-intensive agriculture - let me emphasise this quite specifically - non-intensive and family-based agriculture has made a very substantial contribution to the conservation of wild and , indeed , domesticated flora and fauna .
I believe that if we fail to recognise the contribution made by farmers today , we are doing a disservice to our natural environment and our eco-systems .
We will vote for this report , but in the areas where we think it does not do justice to our farmers , we will vote against it .
Mr President , first of all , congratulations to Mrs Isler Béguin on her report which I think is excellent and constructive .
The protection of biodiversity deserves top priority .
When species become extinct , they are gone for ever , and this is why now is the time for action .
Action plans cannot be non-committal .
They can only be successful if they take account of the socio-economic circumstances of the people in that area .
They must set priorities .
We must tackle hot spots worldwide ; areas that are particularly rich in species deserve special protection .
Action plans must be clear and , above all , concrete .
Public support is important , and nobody gets excited about an abstract idea such as biodiversity .
It is about the conservation of the natural resources , valuable landscapes and endangered species .
We must be well-informed , independent monitoring must be put in place , and we must draw up annual balance sheets of the quality of the natural environment .
This motivates and inspires .
The European Union itself should be a little more consistent .
The bird directive and the habitat directive epitomise biodiversity protection .
These must be implemented effectively , however difficult that may be at times .
The end result must always be at the forefront of our minds .
However , these pearls of nature preservation are in sharp contrast with other policy .
I mean in the first place agriculture , but also fisheries .
Large-scale agriculture and the conservation of biodiversity are a difficult match .
The common agricultural policy must for that reason alone undergo far-reaching changes .
Subsidies purely based on production are asking for trouble .
The fishery implications for biodiversity are less visible .
Seabed disturbance in many coastal waters and deeper waters threatens biodiversity .
This should be met with a forceful response .
Biodiversity must form a guideline in regional planning .
Member States should draft action plans for that purpose .
I ask the Commission to select and support a flagship project annually , preferably in one of the candidate countries .
These projects must set an example to other nature reserves .
The Polish primeval forest could be a good flagship project .
I should once again like to thank Mrs Isler Béguin for her sound report .
Mr President , Commissioner , I , for my part , would also like to express my sincere thanks to the rapporteur and the Commission for preparing this matter for debate .
The proposals have an aim worthy of support : environmental diversity is something that is important to all of us .
I would , however , like to raise two matters in this parliamentary report .
Firstly , in item eight the matter of forests is raised , mentioning the desire to see a bureaucratic , centralised monitoring system for the EU based on certification for forests and all living organisms in them .
The use of forests in the Member States would be controlled by the EU by means of action plans .
At this point we must remember that forestry matters in the EU are covered by the principle of subsidiarity and there is no cause to extend Brussels ' control in these matters unless there are special reasons for doing so .
Furthermore , all those engaged in forestry matters agree that certification should work on a voluntary basis , and on no account should it be managed by the EU .
Secondly , in item 44 it is proposed that all support payments for agricultural production should be replaced with environment-based aid .
We have to remember , however , the situation regarding world trade which we have today .
If production aid were not paid there would no longer be any agriculture on the present scale in the EU in the future .
How would things stand regarding biodiversity then ?
In certain regions of the EU , production aid is , relatively speaking , even more important than in central Europe .
For example , in my country the major problems are not really connected with the state of the environment or biodiversity , but the fact that production must in general be supported , production costs being as high as they are .
For farmers it is a waste of time to talk about additional environmental action , as all production in our country is in practice organic .
I propose that point 44 should be deleted from the text . The same goes for the last part of item 42 , where agri-environmental action would be solely geared towards protecting endangered species .
No self-respecting EU institution should record something like this in the resolutions .
Mr President , we agree with Mrs Béguin 's report because it is underpinned by a particular situation : neither the Convention on Biological Diversity , signed in 1992 , nor the various international conventions incorporated into Community law , specifically the birds and habitats directives , have managed to put a brake on the destruction of biodiversity .
Furthermore , it clearly shows that thousands of species that have not even been identified will disappear .
In fact , 11 000 species of fauna and flora are in danger of extinction .
I believe that is sufficient for us to adopt the appropriate measures .
The rapporteur welcomes the plans that are proposed but points out that there are plans that have still not been carried out such as , for example , those concerning forests .
She also speaks clearly about the need to incorporate environmental policy into our other policies , whether they concern agriculture , fisheries or anything else .
As I have very little time , Mr President , I shall just give one example , because examples are the best way of explaining what needs to be done : the use of EAGGF Funds in the destruction of the last remaining laurel forest on the island of Gran Canaria .
I spent last weekend on the island of Gran Canaria with a group of volunteers who protested to the European Commission - I refer you to the question I asked at the time - that in the lime-tree forest of Moya , the only laurel forest remaining on the island , now that all the water that used to come down during droughts has been enclosed in pipes , all the forest 's trees are drying up .
This is being done with EAGGF Funds .
We must acknowledge all the valuable work done by volunteers , because they give their spare time , unpaid and unrewarded , to fight to preserve this natural resource .
The volunteers are grateful for the answer that Mrs Wallström gave them , because it proved her excellent knowledge of the area - which must be looked after , because it is likely to become part of the Nature 2000 network - and because she asked the Spanish Government to assume responsibility for looking after this area .
Mrs Wallström , your speech gave hope to the volunteers .
This is a clear example of why European Funds should not be used for projects that damage the environment .
Mr President , I join with other speakers in complimenting the rapporteur and welcoming his report .
The extent to which biodiversity impacts on the lives of all citizens and the quality or otherwise of their lives makes this debate extremely important .
Those of us entrusted with the task of ensuring a future for our past must now act with decisiveness .
We must do so , however , in an enlightened and informed way and be prepared to avail ourselves of modern research and technology in achieving this objective .
Controversial areas such as biotechnology must , in my view , be part of this equation .
The role of farmers as guarantors of sustainable and quality food supply must be brought more into focus , because we ignore at our peril the fact that agriculture is a commercial activity .
The unique role of farmers as environmental managers must also be fully recognised , appreciated and rewarded .
In this regard , I ask the House to take serious note of the fact that the profession of farming is in decline .
Farmers are getting older and young people are reluctant to take up farming as a career .
From a biodiversity viewpoint , the role of farmers and the preservation of family-based farm units are important .
They represent an important part of the rural infrastructure .
Biodiversity and sustainable development will not happen if they are planned out of the equation .
In short , and in conclusion , we must adopt a practical approach which safeguards biodiversity , while , at the same time , acknowledging the professional and commercial role of farmers .
Mr President , as the Natura 2000 network is being established almost everywhere in Europe , against the advice of the rural community and with disastrous consequences for man , I regret that the report on biodiversity has been hastily debated in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
This is , however , an important subject , affecting areas that the Union is considering , such as the protection of natural resources and the relaunch of the development policy , as well as the new objectives for agriculture and fisheries , for example .
Drawing up national strategies or action plans on biodiversity could only be contemplated if they were drafted after a broad consensus had been reached , respecting regional socio-economic interests .
As for enlargement and the rapporteur 's proposal to select a flagship project on the protection of biodiversity , we must not forget that the candidate countries want to join the Union in order to make up for their economic and social shortfalls as quickly as possible and to modernise their infrastructures .
Biodiversity is not their main concern .
I regret the fact that the four amendments that I tabled in committee were all rejected , even the amendment in which I called for a CAP that respects the environment as well as those working in the rural community .
Several points in this report give me cause for concern and , in particular , the desire to introduce certification for the timber sector and for animal species seems unrealistic in my view , given the considerable diversity in forests and living species .
What added value does this kind of certification provide ?
What has happened to the desire to increase the financial resources granted to Natura 2000 and to other measures on biodiversity ?
Why continue along a path that is , increasingly , called into question by the people , landowners , farmers and users ?
Who will pay for the introduction of a strict protection system beyond the zones specified in the birds and habitat directives ?
Are we moving towards a situation where the entire territory will be divided into zones ?
What are we aiming to achieve with this maximum protection approach towards biodiversity ?
When reading this report , I wonder whether , in the rapporteur 's mind , man is still included in this biodiversity .
In our view , there is no doubt that he is .
You are right , Mrs Isler Béguin , the alarm bells raised from all quarters in response to the decline of biodiversity are justified .
Yes , there are plant species that are disappearing , animal species that are at risk and , even within the species and breeds which are not threatened by extinction , the reduction in numbers , the consanguinity and the uncontrolled spread of GMOs are giving rise to genetic decline , which is a threat to the environment .
But I wonder whether forcing through regulations without properly consulting the local actors , with the declared objective of transforming sizeable areas where people live and work into sanctuaries - people who have helped considerably to shape current ecosystems - as well as introducing incoherent procedures for implementing Natura 2000 in a number of countries - is the right way to protect biodiversity ?
Is there not a danger that this will have quite the opposite effect and , instead of achieving the desired goal , will provoke an exodus from farming , which will harm biodiversity ?

Therefore , we will support the rapporteur 's reaffirmation of the ' polluter pays ' principle , her prudent approach to GMOs , and her appeal to subsidiarity , but we will not support her call to tighten the Commission 's proposals on agriculture , which would result in the CAP being completely taken apart as of 2003 .
We will not preserve biodiversity without the help of the farmers .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to express an opinion on the action plan as it relates to the preservation of biodiversity in the context of economic cooperation and as it relates to development cooperation .
We have already heard this evening that the greatest degree of biodiversity is to be found in the tropical regions of the developing countries .
These parts of the world have a wide range of crop plants , livestock , wild animals , etc . Moreover - and this is equally important in our eyes - huge numbers of the local , the indigenous , populations are dependent on the existence of this biodiversity .
If the breadth of biodiversity is now reduced , if there are major erosions of the natural world , this will create a knock-on effect which will plunge the people of these tropical regions into poverty .
We also know that , unless action is taken to combat poverty , it becomes very difficult to raise and foster awareness of the need for biodiversity and sustainability .
This is why it is important that this action plan seeks to integrate the principle of preserving biodiversity into the development-cooperation programmes of the European Union .
This means supporting the sustainable use of natural resources , particularly forests , as well as more frequent recourse to environmental-impact assessments of planned development projects .
May I also express the support of my group for all those amendments which emphasise the fundamental role of indigenous populations and their social , economic and cultural rights ?
Now that we are talking about biodiversity and , of course , sustainability too , I should not wish to miss this opportunity to say that we must also put our own house in order if we want to possess credibility in the eyes of the international community .
When I recall the discussions on the resolution concerning the Barcelona Summit , a resolution which referred quite clearly to specific projects in Europe that contravene the principle of biodiversity and fail to protect rare flora and fauna , I am persuaded that it is not enough for us here in Europe merely to keep tabling splendid resolutions designed to protect mountain gorillas in African forests but that we also need to engage wholeheartedly in the implementation of projects and of our own European programmes , such as Natura 2000 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Isler Béguin , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , the Committee on Fisheries and the Committee on Development and Cooperation for their work on drafting the report and this resolution .
Biodiversity is a central issue in terms of sustainable development and the integration of environmental considerations into other policy areas .
It is important in its own right but also forms the basis for activities based on natural resources such as agriculture and the fishing industry .
Biodiversity is also important environmental capital which local societies in many countries depend on for their livelihood .
At the same time , it is disappearing faster than ever before in human history .
I have sad news tonight .
We have now lost the first species on our list of protected species .
The Pyrenean mountain goat has vanished for ever .
We are thus unable even to completely protect the species we have placed on our lists of species we have promised to protect .
Both the EU 's strategy for sustainable development and the seventh Environment Action Programme state that one of their central goals is that of halting the decline in biodiversity by 2010 .
If we are to be able to achieve this goal , it is very important that the action plans for biodiversity which we are discussing today are really implemented .
Safeguarding biodiversity depends on the birds directive and the habitats directive being implemented in full .
However , this is not enough .
If we really want to stop this loss of biodiversity , we have to look at the entire territory of the EU and not just the protected areas .
It is necessary to integrate the question of biodiversity with the policy on the development and use of the mainland and the sea .
The biodiversity action plans are not just ambitious but also realistic .
They mean a great step forwards in terms of integrating biodiversity into agriculture , fisheries and development cooperation policy , as well as into our own environmental policy .
The action plan for the conservation of natural resources clearly shows our firm intention to fully implement the birds directive and the habitats directive and to support the work on Natura 2000 .
This also states how we intend to use general environmental controls such as environmental impact assessment , environmental labelling , environmental audits and other financial controls to promote the safeguarding of biodiversity throughout the EU .
The action plan relating to agriculture states priorities for achieving mutual benefits from agricultural activity and biodiversity .
The most important instruments cover everything from rural development measures to various environmental initiatives in the common organisations of the market for beef , milk and cereals , etc .
The action plan covers all of our countryside , including the Natura 2000 areas .
The action plan for fisheries addresses threats from both traditional fisheries and aquaculture , and it complies entirely with the Green Paper on the future of the common fisheries policy .
The majority , and the most serious , of the threats to global biodiversity are in the developing countries .
The battle for biodiversity therefore has a great deal to do with our strategy for eradicating poverty .
We have a responsibility for helping developing countries so that the natural resources which are crucial to their well-being can be protected .
The action plan for economic cooperation and development provides the tools for this .
These plans for biodiversity are not static instruments but instead will be developed primarily through the use of various indicators .
This has been pointed out during the debate and is naturally also something which the Commission supports and which we have begun working with .
These plans will primarily contribute to the discussion of the reform of the common fisheries policy , common agriculture policy and the regulations on the Structural Funds .
I hope that these reforms will have the scope and provide the controls that are required if we are to completely meet the goals of the biodiversity action plans .
Only then will we be able to achieve the overall goal , namely that of halting the decline of biodiversity by 2010 .
I would like to thank all my fellow MEPs for your valuable contribution to the debate .
Thank you Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0044 / 2002 ) , by Mrs Emilia Franziska Müller , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to food supplements [ 12394 / 2 / 2001 - C5-0640 / 2001 - 2000 / 0080 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , on a point of order , I wanted to announce , before Mrs Emilia Franziska Müller gets started , that the fact that the screen showing the list of names of the speakers has gone wrong may perhaps explain why people might not come to the debate .
Also , we are only getting the German interpretation in our offices .
This is a great help to me because I am doing a course at the Goethe Institute , but other people may find it a little difficult .
There you are , Mrs Jackson , it is an ill wind that blows nobody any good !
I announced this problem just now and the technicians are trying to resolve it .
I hope that they manage to sort it out as soon as possible .
However , you are extremely optimistic when you say that the only reason there are so few Members in the Chamber is because we have got a few technical display problems .
If only that were so !
.
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , about 20 % of all Europeans regularly supplement their daily diets .
In 1999 , European consumers spent EUR 1 615 million on vitamins and minerals alone .
Demand is rising constantly , because people 's living and eating habits have changed radically .
Vitamins and minerals are involved in numerous biochemical processes in the human organism .
It is crucial to people 's health and to their physical and mental capacity that they optimise their intake of these substances .
I believe that the opportunity to enrich our daily food intake with additional vitamins and minerals is very valuable .
When we speak here today of food supplements , we primarily mean vitamins and minerals that are marketed in the form of tablets , capsules and powders .
The directive on food supplements is designed to harmonise the laws of the Member States .
This will give manufacturers easier access to all markets , subjecting their production and marketing practices to a uniform set of conditions .
The directive unequivocally assigns food supplements to the domain of foodstuffs .
Food supplements are not medicinal products , nor can they serve as substitutes for medicinal products .
Through their categorisation as foodstuffs , food supplements are subjected to all the provisions that apply to foodstuffs in the European Union , including the provisions of quality , hygiene and safety legislation .
The consumer must be able to rely on the complete safety of all foodstuffs , particularly of substances such as vitamins and minerals , where stability levels sometimes differ between products .
The new directive targets two specific areas : consumer safety and the completion of the single market in food supplements .
The Council of Ministers has adopted Parliament 's key demands from the first reading .
Parliament welcomes the fact that the Council took account of our position regarding the need to include more substances in the directive .
The substances in question are already on the market but have not yet been evaluated by the competent scientific committee .
These are to be included in the annex to the directive .
In the common position , a period of 18 months has been set for the preparation and submission of a dossier .
The Committee on the Environment has extended this 18-month period to 36 months in order to give small and medium-sized businesses in particular sufficient time to compile the relevant data on their products .
The House now has two further amendments on the table - one for 24 and one for 30 months .
I would personally argue for 30 months , because I believe that two and a half years should be enough time to prove the safety of a product that has been sold to consumers for years .
I attach great importance to the principle that substances should be scientifically tested before they become the object of Community legislation .
As far as doses , and hence optimum consumer care , are concerned , Parliament welcomes the system of maximum safe doses combined with the reference quantities per head of population .
In other words , manufacturers ' dosage instructions must not be based on the limits of human tolerance .
On the other hand , they need not be bound by the recommended daily allowances , which are normally set at very low levels .
On this particular point , the directive manages to take account of both the wishes of consumers and the need to protect them .
The common position has come up with a compromise here that I entirely support .
For this reason we reject Amendment No 6 to Article 5 of the directive .
With regard to product labelling , the directive provides for clear dosage recommendations .
The substance of Amendment No 8 on greater transparency is already clearly covered by Articles 38 and 42 of Regulation ( EC ) No 178 / 2002 of 28 February 2002 establishing the European Food Safety Authority .
For this reason the PPE-DE Group also rejects this amendment outright .
For all the reasons I have outlined , I can have no truck whatsoever with the proposal to reject the common position that is made in Amendment No 7 .
Finally , a few words on the campaign which all Members of Parliament have been forced to endure in the last few weeks and months ; this is a campaign through which a single producer and dealer of vitamin products has been pursuing interests of a purely economic nature .
The company behind this campaign is engaging in image-making at the expense of the sick .
It is breeding anxiety among consumers and exploiting their distress for its own ends .
I sympathise with all those people who have been taken in by the scaremongering and utterly specious arguments that have emanated from the company concerned .
It is clearly not the case that we seek to prohibit vitamin therapies by means of this directive on food supplements or that we are trying to curtail access to natural treatment methods .
What the directive does prohibit , and rightly so , is any attempt to mislead consumers by making exaggerated claims about the curative or preventive powers of vitamins and minerals .
This directive gives consumers in Europe the support of a legal framework that attaches great value to product safety and responsible labelling without restricting the range of products on shop and supermarket shelves .
In short , it is a legal regime that combines free circulation of goods with a high level of protection .
After talks with many organisations - industrial associations as well as consumer associations - I am more convinced than ever that this directive points in the right direction .
( Applause )
Mr President , allow me to start by thanking the rapporteur , Mrs Müller , not only on her sound report but also on the tenacity she has displayed .
The issue we are debating today has caused a huge stir .
As we know , there are different traditions , as well as do 's and do not 's in Europe .
Like the United States , Great Britain and the Netherlands have , in fact , very flexible legislation whereby , once registered , all vitamins and minerals can be freely bought , sold and used .
However , there are also products , certain vitamins and minerals , that are not without risk .
In Germany , another Member State , rules are very strict .
Food supplements are only available on prescription and at the chemist .
This is sufficient reason , also as far as the European citizens are concerned , to start to harmonise the internal market .
This harmonisation should be subject to two criteria : firstly , the indication of a recommended daily intake as a guideline to the consumer and secondly , the establishment of a definitive list of permitted products .
Products not yet on the European list will be permitted if their file has been submitted to the independent scientific committee for testing .
Honest European businesses are satisfied with this directive , unlike cowboys such as one Mathias Rath , who , just across the German border in the Netherlands , runs a very lucrative business using his own products .
Adoption of this European legislation will ensure that his trade , which is primarily aimed at Germany , will fizzle out because consumers will be able to buy safe vitamins and minerals at the chemist or the supermarket anywhere in Europe .
I am also inundated with an incredible number of e-mails , thousands of e-mails and letters .
Rath drove the anxious citizen to action with false arguments , no less .
Let me be quite clear : nothing is being taken away from the consumer .
There is a 30-month period during which businesses can prove that their products are indeed safe , and I will continue to monitor the scientific committee with regard to registration . I am pleased that Europe is calling an end to a practice which is only aimed at excessive profiteering on the backs of many people who are seriously ill .
Mr President , Commissioner , I should first of all like to congratulate Mrs Müller on her consistent , expert and tenacious approach .
Her work currently has great significance .
The food supplements market is growing fast .
Food supplements can make a positive contribution to health .
Anyone who can afford it is keen to buy good health .
However , it is obvious that quality is not always guaranteed .
We must therefore separate the chaff from the wheat .
The consumer is entitled to a safe product and sound information .
In the field of food supplements , large industrial interests are at stake .
We have already gathered this from the thousands of e-mails , four books , video cassettes and postcards in support of the cause of the producers .
In the magazine ' The Rapporteur ' , the vitamin lobby campaign was described as counter-productive .
If only !
Unfortunately , a number of fellow MEPs , mainly from the liberal and green groups , have fallen for this lobby .
I recently received 35 letters from anxious consumers .
I did not receive them directly but via the industry , which immediately makes one wonder .
The letters were written by people who said that they benefited from taking multi-vitamin tablets and that they had heard that the European Parliament would ban them henceforth .
A clear example of misinformation .
Multi-vitamin tablets can still be taken .
Only when they contain substances or compounds which do not feature on the extensive list must the manufacturer prove that they are safe .
Is that too much to ask ?
Anyone who claims that hardly any damage has occurred involving food supplements to date is probably right .
However , their use has so far been restricted .
Only latterly has the market grown and do high-dose tablets appear in the shops .
Safety must be the main concern .
Producers have 18 months in which to demonstrate that their products are safe .
This appears to me to be sufficient time , but I have no problem with extending this period to 24 months .
The directive is of huge importance , and it is futile to regulate safety for each Member State individually .
We do not do this for food either .
With regard to food supplements , there is currently no internal market , but many different , national rules .
We must set up this internal market for food supplements .
In my personal opinion , the internal market is a great good , provided , however , that it prescribes common standards at a high level , which is where this directive comes in .
The Commission has laid down a solid foundation for the establishment of maximum safety levels for vitamins and minerals , and that also forms the basis for consumer confidence .
I would urge you to vote for this directive .
Mr President , Commissioner , the consumption of vitamins and other food supplements by our society is a genuine trend rather than a fashion .
The market that this generates is huge . The considerable lobbying that has been carried out on this issue is proof of this , if it were needed .
Let us turn directly to the main question which is niggling a number of my fellow Members who oppose this directive and that is should we legislate ?
I have no hesitation in saying ' no ' and I have at least three reasons for this .
First of all , the proposal for a directive provides a specific response to a reality , namely the lack of an internal market , which has damaging repercussions both for the economic actors in this sector and for consumers .
By way of example , it is currently virtually impossible for a vitamin manufacturer based in the UK to export and place his products on the market in Belgium or in France , for instance .
Secondly , it is useful , even so , to recall the two major battles waged at first reading regarding the inclusion of substances with psychological effects - fibres and plant extracts , in particular - and the essential labelling standards to enable consumers to make an informed choice .
Parliament made its view heard .
I would add , and this is my third point , that no high-quality food supplement , regardless of its ingredients , will be banned under this directive .
I stress the point that we must stop brandishing the prospect of bans and of a Europe that castrates .
Manufacturers will have three and a half years , depending on our vote , to submit their dossier and prove that their products which are not currently listed in the Annex are safe , and if a ban has to be imposed eventually , it would therefore be placed on doubtful substances .
Anyhow this is the least of our problems , as far as I am concerned .
Since I am speaking of the purely health-related aspect of this matter , I would also like us to stop saying that vitamin abuse poses no danger .
This is wrong , simply wrong !
We must say that excessive consumption of all fat-soluble vitamins such as A , K , E and D are problematic , and , to give another example , excess vitamin A has known harmful teratogenic effects and can result in foetus malformation .
We can allow political opposition to this directive therefore , but in no case can we allow scientific falsehoods to go unchallenged .
To sum up , and for all the aforementioned reasons , we are dealing with flexible and balanced legislation which takes into account the interests of consumers , manufacturers and distributors and which lays a basis for the harmonisation that is necessary in this sector .
The majority of my colleagues in the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party will vote in favour of this very good report by Mrs Müller and I too would like to congratulate her .
I believe this directive is an unacceptable assault on the right of citizens to choose how they look after their health and well-being .
Huge numbers of EU citizens choose to take supplements to reduce the possibility of their falling ill and needing to seek medical advice to obtain prescribed drugs .
People should have the right to opt for a healthy approach , rather than waiting for disease to set in and then having to resort to pharmaceutical drugs , many of which have dangerous side effects .
I am not surprised that the pharmaceutical industry is supporting this directive , since it plays right into their hands and means more business for them .
Products which have been widely and safely used for many years in several EU Member States are being restricted without any health and safety justifications .
I believe this is lawnmower harmonisation at its best , where everything is chopped down to the lowest common denominator .
Consumers should be free to choose their own level of potency and nutrients , provided that they are safe and appropriately labelled .
Availability of supplements should not be restricted for any reason other than safety .
This proposal is profoundly flawed , in that it is based on the old-fashioned research which relies on RDAs of vitamins and minerals .
For the past fifty years , RDAs have formed the basis of conventional nutritional wisdom .
However , according to many reports which I have read on this issue , RDAs are set far too low and should be revised upwards .
Instead , legislators should rely on the upper safe limits , which are a much better device .
For example , the RDA for vitamin B6 is just 2 mg while the upper safe limit is 200 mg .
Two studies published in the New England Journal of Medicine in 1993 demonstrated that taking supplements containing 100 IU of vitamin E for at least two years reduced the risk of heart disease in both men and women by approximately 40 % .
Despite this , the RDA for Vitamin E remains a measly 10 IU .
I believe that countries with a restrictive policy should relax it , but not on the condition that we tighten our system and restrict the access of our consumers in our countries to vitamin and food supplements .
Mr President , two different types of argument have been put forward for this directive .
The first concerns public health , the second harmonisation of the internal market .
I consider that the public health arguments are weak .
There is no major public health problem from people overdosing on vitamins and minerals .
Nor will the risk of overdose disappear with this directive .
If we really want to make a vigorous contribution to public health , we should possibly address the subjects of alcohol , tobacco or something else rather than the area covered by this directive .
The fact is too that the EU is not allowed to introduce harmonisation on public health issues .
This is clearly stated by the Treaties .
There is also a risk that consumers who use certain dosages of particular preparations will find this more difficult once this directive has entered into force .
The real motivation behind the directive is harmonisation , in other words the opportunity to be free to sell everywhere .
This is not a strong argument in my opinion .
In my view , sometimes other considerations must be more important than a free market .
I consider that , in areas such as this , different EU countries should be allowed to have different rules - more liberal or more restrictive - depending on the wishes of the voters .
I consider that supranational rules should only be used to combat real supranational common problems .
This is not the case here .
We have witnessed a furious and quite unpleasant lobbying campaign .
Its methods and its content have been counter-productive .
Several of the arguments put forward against the proposal have been exaggerated and sometimes also incorrect .
Parts of this proposal are positive , such as the requirement for declarations of contents .
On the whole , there are , however , no strong arguments for implementing the far-reaching harmonisation proposed .
There is also a risk that the system which has been drawn up will benefit major industrial interests at the expense of small enterprises .
The directive which is before us today has two principal key objectives : first , to harmonise national legal provisions on food supplements so as to reduce and eliminate considerable problems facing the free movement of food supplements ; second , to establish an appropriate level of consumer protection in the use of food supplements in the European Union Member States .
To achieve these two objectives , it is necessary , as the rapporteur has said , to appropriately define what food supplements are ; it is necessary to put in place a scientific assessment of all the ingredients and their minimum and maximum doses ; it is necessary also to outline the key criteria for requirements with regard to consumer protection ; and of course , the quality of standards has to be looked into as well .


The protection of the European Union 's 370 million consumers is of paramount importance .
Under the Amsterdam Treaty , Parliament has the power of codecision with the Council in the area of consumer protection and public health matters .
I have always supported the need for improved labelling provisions so as to ensure that the consumer information is transparent and effective .
The fact of matter is this : we live in an internal market where there is free movement of goods , services , persons and capital .
We need to guarantee the safety of our food chain from farm to table .
It is important that we have the framework proposal to put in place uniform systems for the full certification of food supplements .
If there is any possible likelihood of endangering public health by means of the implementation of any particular proposal , one must always veer on the side of caution , and I compliment the rapporteur on her report .
Mr President , there are no known cases of serious , harmful effects that have been caused by consuming vitamins and minerals that fall within the present directive .
In contrast , we all know that in the European Union , half a million people die prematurely from the effects of smoking every year .
It is therefore astonishing that minerals and vitamins will soon be subject to stricter legislation than tobacco .
In the report , producers of food supplements are being met halfway by extending the period of approval from one and a half years to three years .
This does not solve anything for the , mostly small , companies , since the required tests are too costly .
This will lead to a ban on food supplements which have been sold legally in certain Member States without any problems for many years .
Since permitted quantities in tablets have in many cases been reduced , this will mainly have the effect that consumers will end up buying larger quantities of tablets in order to consume the same levels .
However , I have more fundamental objections .
Since different regions of the European Union have different eating habits and eating cultures , the need for food supplements varies greatly .
I have come to the conclusion that it is impossible to draw up European legislation in this area to suit these different cultures .
At first reading , the PPE-DE Group called for a referral back of Mrs Müller 's report because it contravenes the Treaty .
This was met with little support at the time .
Meanwhile , it is my understanding that the support for rejecting this legislation has grown considerably .
I therefore hope that there will be a sufficient number of Members who have the courage to reject the Council 's common position .
Many consumers share this hope .
Given the numerous reactions , this is a considerable problem for many consumers .
I should like to hand you the many thousands of signatures that have been collected for this purpose .
Mr President , this is a bad directive .
I do not say that on the basis of any emotion or the fact that Doctor Rath has lobbied me .
Oddly enough I have not received many e-mails , so my machine has not been stuffed full of e-mails from Doctor Rath or anybody else .
I do not know why that is , but I am very quick with the delete button .
I do believe this is a very bad directive , not in its intention but in its method .
It is designed , as everybody has said , to bring about a common market in food supplements .
It may well bring that about , but in doing so the risk is - and there is a risk - that some products currently on the market in some countries will cease to be available .
I , like many British MEPs , have received many letters from people in the region that I represent .
These are not circular letters that they have just signed , they are letters that they have written themselves .
The people who write them fear that they will no longer be able to buy over 300 food supplements that their good health depends on .
We do not need to go into why this fear has arisen and who stirred it up , if anybody has stirred it up .
The fact of the matter is that the Commission has created a situation , by bringing forward the directive in this form , that has given people reason to voice and to have such fears .
I have no quarrel with the German Members or with the rapporteur . She has done a valiant job .
They are standing up for the system they have in place .
They believe our - British , in this instance - more liberal system may allow unsafe products onto the market .
We contend that consumers should be able to exercise as wide a choice as possible and that there is no evidence that products on our market are unsafe .
Where is the evidence that they are unsafe ?
Why should we have to prove that they are safe when people buy them every day and believe that their health depends on them ?
I say to Commissioner Byrne : be careful .
This directive tries to reconcile very different national approaches to allowing these products onto the markets and it fails in that attempt at reconciliation .
Small businesses have been allowed too little time to submit the required safety dossier on their products .
We may put that right tomorrow , but why , Commissioner Byrne , is it that there is no cost impact assessment on small businesses in this directive ?
When it came forward two years ago there was no cost impact assessment attached .
Just as important , we need to have the whole process of reviewing what there is on the market much more out in the open .
It should not be done by secret committees .
MEPs on the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy will insist that we are much better informed on this , so that we can keep track of what is happening on behalf of our anxious constituents .
We hope that we will be able to block any heavy-handed attempt to deprive people of the products they know and continue to need .
Mr President , I must confess to being quite astonished !
We are speaking about products that are on the market today and are asking why we need to provide evidence of their safety !
I can tell you why : because it has to be done for every last bit of artificial colouring that goes into your Uncle Joe 's Mintballs and for every preservative that is added to jam , and because we have always resolutely proclaimed in this forum that consumer safety is important .
For this reason a product cannot be deemed marketable unless it can be proved safe and harmless .
This is surely easy to demonstrate for any product that has already been on the market for some time .
Moreover , I must also express my astonishment at the references to divergent systems .
I do not know what you are talking about .
I understood neither Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's reference to these divergences nor Mrs Jackson 's .
In Germany you can go into any drugstore at all , into any supermarket , and you will be perfectly free to buy vitamins , calcium or whatever you want in various different dosages .
I have nothing against that .
Nor do I object to these products remaining freely obtainable .
I do wish , however , to see the introduction of a maximum dose - yes , a maximum dose is something I do want to see .
People like myself , for example , who have the misfortune to suffer from kidney stones , must not take too much Vitamin C , because it crystallises .
People like me must also be careful with calcium , and we have to know these things .
This is why labelling is needed ; this is why safety is paramount .
Anyone who stands up today like Patricia McKenna and says that the adoption of this directive would force products off the market is misleading people .
I take no pleasure in saying this , Patricia , because our opinions often concur .
It is not true that a single safe product will disappear from today 's market .
All manufacturers must be able to demonstrate the safety of their products .
Every single manufacturer must be able to do that .
For each and every product we buy - for all our cosmetics , our pharmaceutical products , our artificial sweeteners - we expect proof of safety .
And are we now saying that we do not expect the same for food supplements ?
Surely food manufacturers will then come along to us and say , ' Why must we prove that our muesli bars are safe ? '
And they would be right to do so .
They would then be exempted in future too .
At that point they could start making their products with genetically modified organisms and whatever else .
Why should anyone then have to demonstrate the safety of any product ?
Goodness knows that I have been involved for long enough in matters of consumer protection in this House .
I believe my reputation goes before me in that respect .
I tell all the people who call me that none of the products they can now buy will be taken off the market .
I shall ensure that they are informed in future about any product they buy and whether it is safe .
It makes no difference to me whether the evidence has to be produced within 24 or 30 months , but the evidence must be produced .
I congratulate Mrs Müller on her excellent report , which will have my unreserved support tomorrow .
Mr Blokland , I had a quick look at the list you gave me and I thought it best to pass it on to the Chairman of the Committee on Petitions , who can give you a response .
You will , of course , receive another response regarding the outcome of the document you entrusted to me as well .
Mr President , last year in Britain alone , 5 000 people died from overdosing on alcohol .
They drank themselves to death in one session .
Yet I do not see a directive before us to require alcohol to be submitted to all sorts of safety tests , or for bottles of Guinness or Strasbourg wine to carry the strongest possible health warnings .
So why on earth are the manufacturers of food supplements being told that they must jump through a series of expensive hoops , which may be so costly as to drive some of them out of business , in order to keep their products on the market ?
My colleague , Frederick Ries , says that not all vitamins are safe , but of course you can kill yourself on anything if you eat enough of it .
You can stuff yourself with baked beans until you die , but unlike alcohol or most pharmaceutical products , vitamin and food supplements do not have a track record of killing people .
On the contrary , I , like Mr Blokland , have a stack of letters which testify that many do a great deal of good .
This directive , therefore , is like taking a sledgehammer to crack a nut !
Better labelling would have been sufficient to provide such protection as is needed , but perhaps that would not have been enough to satisfy the big drug companies , which are seeking to control a lucrative market .
I remember the Commissioner telling us not long ago that under his regime we would have less interference of the kind which angers many European citizens for no good reason .
However , when it comes to Brussels proving that it wants to treat people like an interfering nanny , this directive really does take the biscuit .
I will begin by distancing myself from the very aggressive campaign which we Members and , especially , the rapporteur Mrs Müller have faced while debating this issue .
Naturally , everyone has the democratic right to argue for what they believe in and to attempt to influence decision-makers and decisions but , in this case , matters have gone beyond the limits of what is acceptable .
I am one of those who would like to reject the common position .
This is not because I always have to be against regulation or harmonisation in the area of public health but because , in this particular case , I consider that it is neither desirable nor necessary to harmonise national legislation .
Just as Mr Blokland said , different countries have very different traditions and , as far as I know , no one has ever died from taking vitamins and minerals .
The problem with the directive is partly Article 5 , which concerns establishing the maximum daily intake .
The European Parliament will have no insight whatsoever into , or influence upon , how this is determined . What , however , is most likely is that it will be done using the committee procedure .
Another problem is the appendix which states which vitamins and minerals are to be permitted as food supplements .
The opportunity of small companies and manufacturers to make their influence felt in the market worries me considerably in that respect .
Many companies and products will disappear and , most importantly of all , consumer choice will thus be limited .
We are currently exposed to stress and to a number of environmental poisons and chemicals , which means that a varied and healthy diet is not always sufficient to ensure that we keep healthy and well .
We need vitamin and mineral supplements , sometimes in high doses , to be able to balance the functions of the body .
Good knowledge of nutrition , Mr President , could also prevent illness in all contexts .
We should encourage people to take care of themselves and take responsibility for their own health .
This directive sends out the wrong signals .
Mr President , obtaining food supplements as health products from the Internet is not encouraged by this report .
I well understand the life stories of the individuals who are concerned by this directive , but my own experiences tell me something different .
In my opinion , substances that are used to treat and alleviate the symptoms of serious illnesses , of illnesses that may not yet be curable at the present time , should be covered by legislation on medicinal products and have nothing to do with the consumption of foodstuffs .
In other words , products with pharmaceutical ingredients which are advertised as possessing medicinal powers must be subject to licensing as medicinal products .
The aim of the directive is to harmonise maximum permissible quantities of active ingredients throughout the 15 Member States and to improve national conditions on the basis of criteria relating to the harmlessness of products to human health as a preventive measure of consumer protection .
The national food and pharmaceuticals industries are vying for an extremely lucrative market in foodstuffs enriched with active ingredients .
A new type of food product is being advertised here , and the advertisements often focus on additional health- and performance-enhancing qualities , sometimes proven but often imputed , of these products .
I believe that it is important and that it befits our responsibility to ensure that the line between medicinal and food products does not become blurred or negotiable .
In this expanding market , the pharmaceuticals and foodstuffs industries will move heaven and earth to enrich food products with additives which are not naturally found in those products .
The report is based on transparency , disclosure and safety for consumers .
For this reason I support it .
The directive will never absolve patients and consumers , however , from the imperative obligation to read the small print : ' If in doubt , please consult your doctor or pharmacist ' .
This is why scientists and researchers have a legal entitlement to improve this common position .
Mr President , circulating the streets of Strasbourg this morning was a mobile advertising hoarding asking this Parliament how it could ignore the wishes of 450 million voters .
The obvious answer is ' very easily ' : it has been doing it for years .
And if this Parliament accepts the common position on this directive it will prove my point .
It is a totally unnecessary intrusion into the freedoms of millions of people .
Never have I received so many communications from ordinary people asking me to reject it . The Commission is entirely wrong to assert that lobby groups are scaremongering .
As far as I can see the pressure is coming from ordinary people who are very worried by this proposal .
It is those ordinary people whose interests are under threat .
Accordingly I will be voting for the UEN Amendment No 7 , calling for the rejection of the common position .
I urge every Member of this House to do likewise .
Mr President , I would like to start by thanking Mrs Emilia Müller , and Mr Corbey and Mrs Roth-Behrendt too , for the courage they have displayed , despite the immense , absurd amount of pressure to which they have been constantly subjected by people with no scientific knowledge and no integrity .
I would like to inform Commissioner Byrne that , in order to speed up the adoption of this directive , I have withdrawn an excellent amendment which sought to ensure the safety of consumers , particularly , in that it specified that all food supplements should be prepared according to good manufacturing practice .
This amendment was intended to ensure that food supplements are prepared in such a way as to guarantee not just the highest quality of ingredients but also their innocuousness when taken repeatedly over long periods of time .
I therefore call upon Commissioner Byrne to deliver a formal undertaking to the effect that the provisions of the regulations to be drawn up stipulating that food supplements must meet high quality and safety standards in order to prevent small artisans - or health quacks , even - from marketing low quality , potentially dangerous products , will be made clearer and more explicit .
In view of Parliament 's clear , great responsibility in matters of the citizens ' health , we must be highly focused in our work in order to ensure that all the individual Member States of the European Union are provided with rules making high standards of quality and safety a priority .
One last plea to Commissioner Byrne : in calling for this new documentation we should request that it be differentiated according to the composition of certain products , for this would reduce the expenditure for small and medium-sized businesses considerably .
Mr President , it is not every day we have to congratulate a rapporteur for sheer civil courage in standing up to one of the most unscrupulous lobbies of our time .
I do not believe that I have seen anything like it before .
Like most of us , she has been accused of being a stooge of the pharmaceutical industry , of being ignorant and insensitive .
We should say to those who made these accusations that we cannot be bought in this House and that we cannot be bullied either .
We owe our constituents our judgement , and mine is that for all its flaws and deficiencies , the directive is one that should be commended , with amendments , to those many people who are frightened and nervous , who depend on these food supplements to preserve their health , and some of whom even believe it is a matter of life or death .
They fear this directive because they have been told that these products will be banned , that testing will be prohibitive , and that what remains will be swallowed up in a restrictive and prescriptive regime .
We owe it to them to make certain that is not the case , and shallow populist rhetoric is not the way to do it .
We need to make certain that small producers can come forward and be reassured that it will not be a costly and prohibitive process .
Time after time , we see that this is ignored in directives .
It has been ignored in the PPP directive .
The people who have the greatest need of our protection now are the small producers and we should help them .
They should be able to register their product for simple and cost-effective evaluation .
It should be a positive list which is rapidly expanded , with maximum dosages linked to real needs and not to outmoded daily allowances .
People such as Mr Davies have said : ' well , we have not done this for alcohol ' .
My God , we have tried !
We know what lobby it is that stops us doing this on alcohol , which stops us having the labelling that is necessary .
Two wrongs do not make a right .
We have to look at this directive in terms of the way in which it will be interpreted .
The more people make claims about their health , the more we see that this needs a safety evaluation .
You cannot have the one without the other .
If you make the claims , you must expect to see them tested , but they should be tested fairly , simply and in a cost-effective way to leave a regime of light-touch and user-friendly practices .
That is what my country has had and I believe we can keep it .
It is also possible to fit that in to the framework of this directive .
( Applause from the left )
Mr President , I believe that this directive represents a terrible infringement of our right to these products .
Commissioner Byrne , your proposal , if implemented , could remove hundreds of vitamin and mineral supplements from our shelves , in the UK and Ireland in particular .
These products are safe and have been accessible to consumers for years .
But instead of going for a scientific safety assessment , the directive is based on an outmoded Recommended Daily Allowance dating back to the Second World War .
This directive will force consumers to purchase these products on the Internet , where there are no controls .
Is this what you really want ?
Consumers will not forgo these products .
I believe that this directive is an own goal .
The European Commission has stated that its goal is the extension of the internal market .
However , many Member States have put national interests first and lobbied to keep their markets closed .
This is because the liberal regime in Ireland , the UK and the Netherlands is not acceptable to other Member States such as Germany and France .
This means that products that are safe and widely available will be withdrawn from the market .
The only criterion for taking products off the market should be one of safety .
As I said , this is an own goal and we will end up importing products from the US via the Internet .
Is this really what you want ?
Mr President , the EU 's internal market is a fundamental pillar of European cooperation .
It has given Europe free trade , competitiveness and welfare .
There is however no need , in terms of the market , for uniform rules on the sale of vitamins and minerals .
Member States have different traditions in this area .
In Sweden , as in the UK and Ireland , individuals can buy many preparations with strengths up to the maximum recommended daily intake over the counter .
This tradition must be respected and take precedence over the requirement for uniform rules .
What is really behind the proposal to regulate the sale of vitamin and mineral supplements at EU level ?
Opponents shift the blame onto the pharmaceutical industry on the grounds that it wants to sell more tablets .
Those in favour of the regulation also point the finger at the pharmaceutical industry , but in this case as being opposed to the proposal because it wants to see even higher volumes of sales .
I personally believe both sides are wrong .
I have not encountered any lobbyists from the pharmaceutical industry on this issue .
The main driving force behind the eagerness for regulation is instead an overprotective mentality among EU civil servants and politicians .
Naturally , it is inappropriate to overdose on vitamins and minerals , but there is a huge margin between overdose and harmful levels .
With the help of information on the bottles , most people are able to manage their daily vitamin intake themselves .
We should trust individuals to do so .
I myself am a dialysis doctor and have seen many cases of poisoning .
I have seen two young women poisoned by nutmeg and an older man suffering from severe nicotine poisoning , but I have never met anyone with vitamin or mineral poisoning .
Kidney stone patients have to be very careful about taking much more than just vitamin C and calcium .
It is Mrs Roth-Behrendt 's doctor whose job it is to tell her what she should be careful of .
Doctors have more important things to do than prescribe vitamins and minerals in higher doses than those accepted as food supplements .
Mr President , today , we are debating the vitamin directive at second reading .
I must say that I am pro-European and in favour of harmonisation , but not in this manner .
I am pleased that the majority of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy are willing to grant producers of vitamin tables 36 months instead of 18 months in order to prove that their products are safe .
While this is not a problem for large pharmaceutical producers , it does cause problems for small businesses , especially financially .
In principle , it is wrong that they should have to prove that their products are safe while these may have been on the Dutch , British and Irish markets for dozens of years .
I am in favour of proving the safety of new vitamin tablets , but not of the old tablets .
The Commission , the majority of the Council and Mrs Roth-Behrendt are saying , in fact , that all the old tablets are unsafe .
This is why I shall be voting for rejection of the common position .
Mr President , Commissioner , for 60 years we have had two traditions in Europe and had no significant health problems .
As long as we have acceptance of the upper safe limit , consumer choice should prevail .
Millions of people in Europe have bought vitamins and minerals of their choice .
Not only have they had no problems , but their health and well-being have benefited .
Now we are faced not with a health measure but with a single-market measure which threatens to omit 300 items on this list from the ' positive ' list of items available .
These 300 items are currently legally and safely on sale in the shops of my country and yours , Commissioner .
They are not oddball items - they are things based on boron , calcium , copper , iron , manganese , potassium , selenium , zinc and so on .
If these items fail in 18 short months to get the scientific committee 's approval or to get their dossier in , then they will come off the market .
That is not a problem for large manufacturers , but it is a very serious problem for the small ones .
The cost and time to them may be prohibitive , and if items go off the market , then it is the consumer who will suffer .
If they do go off the market they may , as we have heard , go abroad , go offshore or appear on the Internet , at some risk to the consumer .
What we need , Commissioner , is a simplified procedure for the items that have been omitted so that they can come onto the list quickly , and for that we need the 36-month timescale .
However , may I say also that Emilia Müller has suffered one of the worst assaults by people outside this Parliament that any Member has had to put up with .
It is one thing to be e-mailed ; it is one thing to be lobbied ; it is one thing to be mass-lobbied ; but to endure threats of violence , bullying and harassment as she and her family have is something which this Parliament will not accept .
I say that to whoever is doing it outside : lay off , because we will not allow our fellow Member to suffer in that way .
She has more integrity in her little finger than those people have in the whole of their bodies and I demand , Mr President , that you suggest to the President of this Parliament that this matter be referred to the Legal Affairs Committee , with a view to seeing how a Member of Parliament under that sort of assault can be protected and allowed to do her job properly as a Member of this Parliament , as a rapporteur and as someone for whom we have great affection and respect .
I too fully condemn this sort of behaviour and I will certainly inform the President .
I do not know whether the President will decide to refer the case to the Committee on Legal Affairs but , in any case , I agree that something has to be done .
There is a great difference between all the pressure and lobbies and being subjected to threats and abuse .
Mr President , firstly I would like to express my sincere thanks to the rapporteur , Emilia Müller , who has attended to her task in difficult circumstances .
Many of us have been pestered and obstructed to an unreasonable degree by those who have masqueraded as philanthropists and defenders of the sick .
I have had thousands of messages a day sent to my own private e-mail address , sometimes as many as 8 000 unnecessary messages in one day .
It is not really any longer a matter of public opinion when one and the same person sends 900 messages on the same day .
That is simply criminal harassment .
I can just imagine what it has been like for Mrs Müller !
Parliament should explore , not just in this case but especially in preparation for any future situation , practices of national parliaments that would guarantee Members ' inviolability , safety and right to work in peace .
All this harassment , with people being urged to express their opinions , has been absolutely pointless .
It has seemed to be more of an unscrupulous marketing campaign on the part of a private business , which did not even intend to influence the work of Parliament .
Presumably the party that got the campaign off the ground also knew that alternative treatments and vitamin cures and treatments are not banned or prevented in the EU .
A simple thought has many times crossed my mind : the means is the message .
If the means to lobby us has been so unscrupulous , it is hard to be convinced of the sincerity of the issue that lies behind it .
The two main purposes of the directive are , on the one hand , the approximation of national laws so that a single market for food supplements can be created , and , on the other , to establish an appropriate level of consumer protection in all Member States .
For that reason , with this directive there should be an appropriate definition of food supplements , a scientific assessment of all ingredients should be carried out , requirements relating to consumer information and labelling should be specified , quality standards should be developed , and an adequate monitoring system should be guaranteed .
All this should be totally acceptable to the honest players and even directly to their advantage .
Whilst the directive will help guarantee access to the markets for all manufacturers , Parliament has been especially keen to take account of the problems of small manufacturers .
For that reason , Parliament wishes to extend , by way of its own compromise proposal , the eighteen-month deadline proposed in the Council 's common position to 30 months .
If these conditions are met I see no reason to reject the common position .
Mr President , what has happened to Mrs Müller should actually have repercussions .
The word ' duress ' occurs to me , as a lawyer .
I am full of admiration for her , and I shall most certainly be supporting the common position .
I also feel , however , that this position touches the limits of moral acceptability .
You see , I come from a country where vitamins are still available in pharmacies only .
When anyone goes into a chemist 's shop and buys vitamins , the chemist will say , ' Don 't take too much , and please read the enclosed instruction leaflet ' . It will cause great confusion in my country if that all changes .
It will create the impression that vitamin supplements are really quite harmless after all .
This is not the case . Vitamins have side-effects .
The impact , of course , is not immediate .
It is like when you drink too much .
Not until you come staggering out of the pub do you begin to feel the effects on your health . It may have tasted good , but it will catch up with you at some point .
We are far more aware than we were ten years ago that vitamins do indeed have adverse effects .
I really do find it irresponsible to set them loose on consumers in this way .
To tell you the truth , Mrs McKenna , I am deeply disappointed .
I thought you would be encouraging us to eat oranges , lemons , bananas , curly kale and other health foods .
No , you are recommending artificial substances to us , substances that are simply mass-produced by an industry where many people earn great fortunes .
I fail to understand your thinking .
Mr President , I would like to express my satisfaction at the outset at the progress that has been made on this proposal for a directive on food supplements .
First of all , the objective of this legislation - and I must emphasise this - is not to ban food supplements .
It has to do with maximum safety levels .
I regret very much that I have to disagree with my friend Mr Bowis , for whose opinions I have the utmost respect , when he says that the position at the moment is that there are upper safe limits .
That really is not the position .
This will be the position after this legislation comes into place .
That is the purpose of the exercise .
This exercise will be based on scientific evidence and scientific evaluation .
It also dismays me to some extent to hear people in this House - also for whom I have enormous respect - express the view that this legislation is motivated by , of all things , lobbying of the pharmaceutical industry .
That is a slander .
It is absolutely wrong .
It is unfair to say that I or the people who work for me would be motivated by such things .
But sometimes people who make these allegations are the ones who are inordinately concerned about the role of industry .
But what about the role of industry that profits from this piece of legislation not going through ?
What about that ?
Have they questioned themselves to determine whether they have been subjected to such a degree of lobbying from that industry that they have themselves been duped by that industry and tried to tar the Commission and those who advocate the passing of this legislation with a brush in a way that I find quite reprehensible ?
The subject is not an easy one .
We currently have very different attitudes , rules and practices among Member States .
These impede the free circulation of food supplements within the European Union , and can deprive consumers from access to a wide range of these products .
So the case for harmonisation is obvious and is strong .
I believe that the vast majority of stakeholders share that view .
You will not , therefore , be surprised that I cannot support the views of those who propose , with Amendment No 7 , to reject the common position .
A substantial number of Members of Parliament and of the Commission have been subjected to an orchestrated and misleading campaign against the adoption of this directive .
This campaign has only been waged by those who do not share the general European interest .
I should also emphasise to Mr Blokland and others who make reference to being lobbied by consumers who have written letters , that may be the case .
I suspect they may very well be people who have been seriously misled by those who profit by this legislation not going through the system .
The consumer organisations who are there to look after the best interests of consumers have not been misled .
They are in favour of this legislation .
BEUC has come out and said that it supports this legislation .
This is a strong endorsement , in my view , rather than anecdotal accounts of individual consumers who , in my opinion , have probably been misled by the statements made by many which are simply untrue .
They have misrepresented the aims of the directive , used misleading arguments and misinformed consumers .
This was made clear during the debate in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
Mrs Müller has done an excellent job as rapporteur .
Her contribution to the advancement of the draft directive has been invaluable .
I sincerely congratulate her and thank her .
I would also like to acknowledge the responsible and very constructive role of Mrs Corbey , as shadow rapporteur .
The common position provides a very good framework for the regulation of food supplements in the European Union .
It is designed to ensure that a very wide range of such products is available to consumers .
The underlying criterion for a single market in food supplements is safety : adequate and appropriate labelling designed to inform consumers .
Of course , these products must be used in the context of a diversified diet and in line with manufacturers ' instructions .
The deadline for preparing dossiers for the evaluation of substances that are already on the market is an important issue .
I have listened carefully to the concerns expressed , concerning small and medium enterprises , that a period of 18 months for the preparation of evaluation dossiers may be too short .
If that were to be the only amendment to the common position , I would be prepared to consider an extension of the period mentioned .
I can , therefore , accept any one of Amendments Nos 1 , 3 , 4 or 5 that relate to this point , provided that this would contribute to the adoption of the common position without further changes .
I have also taken careful note of the interventions with regard to good manufacturing practice for food supplements , which is the subject of Amendment No 2 .
I would like to reiterate what I said at first reading .
The adoption of principles of good manufacturing practice by legally binding measures for specific categories of products is not appropriate in the case of foodstuffs .
This already exists in relation to foodstuffs in many pieces of horizontal legislation .
I am happy to take comfort from Mr Nisticò 's contribution on the basis that he is certainly one of the MEPs I know here who is a scientist himself .
He supports this legislation .
He has asked me to take careful note of the risks to ensure the elimination of low-quality products when this framework legislation goes through the system .
I am happy to say that will be taken into account .
The vast majority of these principles are covered by horizontal legislation , particularly in the directives on hygiene and control .
These will apply also to the manufacture of food supplements .
In the draft directive , we are referring specifically to the issue of purity criteria for the vitamins and minerals to be used .
We have improved the relevant provisions following your amendment at first reading .
We also foresee adopting specific technical rules with regard to the margins of tolerance for the amounts of vitamins and minerals declared to be present in food supplements .
We believe that these rules are important for ensuring the quality of these products .
I am firmly of the view that this array of horizontal and specific rules fully covers all concerns expressed that these products should be manufactured to high-quality standards .
I cannot , therefore , accept Amendment No 2 to adopt provisions on GMPs for food supplements .
However , I reiterate that I will give priority to adopting the technical rules on margins of tolerance mentioned in Article 9 ( 1 ) .
Amendment No 6 refers to the criteria that will be used for setting the maximum levels for vitamins and minerals in food supplements .
This point was the most difficult one to reconcile in the Council .
The text of Article 5 is now carefully balanced .
It is my belief that any disruption would jeopardise the whole proposal .
Finally , Amendment No 8 proposes an addition to the text that concerns principles for the functioning of the Standing Committee on the Food Chain and Animal Health and of the Scientific Panels of the European Food Safety Authority .
I believe that these issues are adequately covered in the recently adopted general food law .
They should not , therefore , be repeated in this specific directive .
For this reason I cannot accept Amendment No 8 .
But I repeat and emphasise that the role of the European Food Safety Authority in this area will be of paramount importance and that this work will be done by independent scientists .
The evaluation of that work by the Board of the European Food Safety Authority will be done in a fully transparent way - indeed , in public .
In conclusion , the Commission considers that the common position as such is satisfactory on all substantial points .
The Commission would be ready to accept a technical modification of the common position to extend the period mentioned in Article 4.6.b. as in one of the amendments - Amendment No 1 , 3 , 4 or 5 - if that would help the adoption of the directive at second reading .
The Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 2 , 6 and 8 and certainly does not support Amendment No 7 , that calls for the rejection of the common position .
Thank you Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank you all for excellent teamwork for the almost a year and a half during which I have been dealing with these two reports .
It has gone incredibly well .
In the common position , the Council and the Commission have accepted the majority of the just under a hundred amendments we submitted on the first reading .
I am very pleased to see that the Council and the Commission are now in agreement with the European Parliament on the fundamental principles .
The first and most important principle is that only by-products from animals approved for human consumption may be used in feed , cosmetics and medicinal products .
I say this with a slight reference to the preceding debate .
We will thus obtain a ban on intra-species recycling , that is , animal cannibalism .
The new regulation will in fact be sufficiently flexible to be adapted to technological developments and new scientific findings .
The common position has in fact been welcomed by the industry concerned in Europe .
Please consider that the final vote tomorrow puts 200 000 jobs across Europe at risk .
Do not forget that this industry is not located in densely populated areas . Instead , we are looking at companies in rural areas .
Every day that passes without clear ground rules , more and more small and medium-sized companies are in danger of being forced to shut down .
To be blunt , I could say that Europe 's producers , and consumers too , are standing and stamping their feet while we here , at the very last stages , are engaging in trivial disputes .
Let me first talk about Amendment No 25 , which is a compromise .
As is always the case with compromises , this means that no one has got exactly what they want .
We have all had to give in quite a bit , and I am a little uncertain as to what the end result of this compromise will be .
However , the amendment does give the Member States which currently permit the use of catering waste under extremely carefully controlled conditions a transitional period of four years .
Towards the end of the debate on the matter , a number of details concerning sludge and waste water came up .
Amendments Nos 2 , 4 and 14 should in fact be set aside in favour of Amendment No 21 , which is intended to promote the safe handling of these materials so as to avoid serious environmental consequences .
This is therefore a practical way of dealing with this issue .
I myself would really like to see Amendments Nos 3 and 5 put into effect .
Unfortunately , this is more or less impossible for technical reasons .
These amendments concern the marking of category 1 material .
The already adopted Regulation on TSEs contains clear requirements that direct risk material be marked .
Amendment No 5 is about the marking of category 2 material .
I think this would be desirable , but that the amendment should be rejected because it would have unreasonable consequences .
If the amendment were to be adopted , all fertiliser - natural fertiliser - within the EU would have to be marked , and this would affect approximately 1 200 000 000 tonnes a year .
This means that we would be able to choose whether the fields were to be blue , green or purple each spring , and it would all look a bit peculiar .
Amendments Nos 6 and 16 must in actual fact be adopted .
Otherwise , the report 's main principle that only raw materials which have been approved for human consumption may be used in animal feed would be undermined .
The amendments do not in fact involve any changes to the requirements which currently apply to sampling and / or post ante mortem inspections of slaughtered animals .
It is only the final assessment based on existing rules which is affected by this regulation .
Amendments Nos 7 and 8 concern the handling of catering waste .
In this case , I recommend voting in favour of Amendments Nos 22 and 23 whereby catering waste generated from means of transport operating internationally should , with all its risks , be treated in accordance with the most stringent requirements of the regulation , in category 1 .
On the other hand , catering waste in category 3 should be handled under existing structures and systems for collection , transport and disposal in line with the EU 's waste directive .
The common position contains a somewhat strange proposal regarding endangered species of necrophagous birds , namely lammergeiers in Spain .
Amendment No 24 states that it is permitted to use category 1 material to feed this specific small group of birds .
I have checked this very carefully .
These birds have to have this special food .
It sounds a little odd , but sometimes nature is , by nature , odd .
Amendment No 12 on the permanent marking of imported pet food is particularly controversial for the United States .
Regarding dyeing the raw materials which are to be included under categories 1 and 2 , it is laid down that products in categories 1 and 2 are to be marked once they have turned into fat and processed proteins .
Such processed material must then be permanently marked when it comes to imported pet feed , as exactly the same requirements must be set for imported products as for our own products .
Amendment 15 concerns the separation of facilities .
Right from the start , the European Parliament demanded completely separate sites .
I can accept separate buildings if they really are separate - and not just separate parts of one building under the same roof .
There are also a number of amendments which were rejected by the committee and which , for various reasons , should be rejected once more .
We are concerned here with deleting references to biogas and composting .
This regulation does not regulate biogas plants and composting systems .
On the contrary , Article 6.2 says that national legislation in this area should apply until new EU environmental legislation is passed .
The only point of the reference in Article 1.2 is to give the Commission legal justification for requesting scientific statements on biogas and composting .
If we delete household waste , that is , from private kitchens , from the definition of catering waste , we are doing ourselves a disservice .
We know that catering waste is a very serious channel of infection for both swine fever and foot and mouth disease .
I personally think it is quite difficult to ban household waste being used as feed .
It has been a tradition in our European culture for thousands of years but we are now living in a new world and in another time , in which food , feed and ingredients are moved from place to place in a completely different way from 50 years ago , for example , when feed and food circulated in relatively small and recognisable cycles .
Once more I would like to thank my colleagues , the shadow rapporteurs , the Commission and the Council for excellent teamwork over the past year and a half .
Mr President , could I first of all thank Mrs Paulsen for the constructive way in which she has conducted the dialogue between the groups to come up with some compromise amendments ?
I am pleased that my group has been able to sign all the compromise amendments , with the exception of Compromise Amendment No 25 .
We very much support the ban on the use of catering waste in animal feed , not least because the likely cause of the foot and mouth disease outbreak in the United Kingdom was the use of pigswill as feed .
I am also pleased to see that catering waste from abroad , such as may come from aeroplanes landing in our country , has been upgraded to category 1 .
However , two problems emerge from this situation .
The first is the use of used cooking oil in the United Kingdom as animal feed .
Unfortunately , we will not be able to hide this oil behind the piles of fridges currently found in my own country and I am afraid that much of this oil will find its way into the drains of the country , causing environmental damage and also , I suggest , public health problems as it congeals and solidifies in the sewers of our major cities .
We also have a problem in Germany , where there are centralised plants for treating catering waste , unlike the on-farm situation in the UK , which was not very satisfactory .
Many of these installations are brand new and run according to the highest standards with typical German efficiency .
We should recognise the situation in Germany and Austria and allow an extension on the use of some of these brand new plants .
That is why I am pleased to support Amendment No 10 , which was proposed in committee by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf and calls for the Commission to come up with a legislative proposal by June 2002 requiring Member States to supply proof that these plants can operate safely .
Compromise Amendment No 25 contradicts this because it calls for a four-year extension on the use of these plants .
If , as I have been advised , the authors of the original amendment were to propose an oral amendment stating that this new legislative proposal could come forward in four years ' time , then this would avoid such a contradiction .
That would be a good way forward and my group would be prepared to support such a move .
On the issue of sludge , could I ask the Commissioner to clarify the situation ?
We have many slaughterhouses and meat processing plants that discharge effluent into domestic sewage systems in our major towns .
Although this process involves some initial filtration , there is no way that one could describe this discharge as sterile : it contains pathogens of all sorts .
Determining that the sludge from the sewage treatment plants in these large cities had to be incinerated under this directive would place unacceptable costs on slaughterhouses .
The European Union has already been responsible for the closure of many slaughterhouses and , in fact , in many cases , there would be no space for separate sewage treatment facilities .
Therefore , could I ask the Commissioner to make it quite clear on the record that the primary filtration products of these plants would be covered , but that the sludge from sewage treatment would not have to be incinerated and could be spread on the land as before ?
Mr President , it is indeed a remarkable situation in which we find ourselves today .
We are speaking about a second reading , which the rapporteur has prepared brilliantly , and I admire the way in which Mrs Paulsen has tried to navigate a course between Scylla and Charybdis , Scylla being the thirteen Member States that have accepted the common position , and Charybdis being the two that have not , namely Austria and Germany .
Austria and Germany did not approve the common position for clear reasons .
Austria has been undertaking schemes involving the composting of biomass and the use of biogases for energy production , schemes which would no longer be possible under the common position . Germany would be prevented from sterilising and reusing catering waste .
When I listen to this debate today , and when I look back on the past few days , it surprises me that the United Kingdom , France and other countries accepted the common position .
I have just heard Mr Goodwill saying that he and his group did not sign Compromise Amendment No 25 , which I signed along with all the other compromise amendments .
I signed them because they are compromises .
The ideal world is different .
I have a different conception of the ideal solution too .
But among the sources of the compromise amendment are not only Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf 's Amendments Nos 10 and 1 but also Mr Whitehead 's amendment , which provided for a four-year transitional period .
Mr Goodwill referred to fears in his country that foot and mouth disease had been caused by the use of pigswill as feed .
To my knowledge , this has not been proved .
Swine fever , yes , but as a cause of foot and mouth disease it is new to me .
I had certainly heard this being mooted in the past , but that is only one aspect of the issue .
Another point - and this is part of the compromise , Mr Goodwill - is that if I go back to my own Member State and say that there is a disposal problem with reheated cooking oil , they will tell me in Germany that this poses a dioxin problem which they refuse to contemplate .
We must be very careful .
This is a very fine line we are treading today , and we must avoid the mistakes of the past , when cost issues and disposal problems were often invoked to the detriment of animal health , and hence of human health too .
If I say today that I can support our proposed compromise on catering waste , I must explain part of the background against which I make that statement .
Nobody has been able to tell me what happens with catering waste in the other Member States .
In Germany , there are modern high-performance facilities which undertake state-of-the-art sterilisation of catering waste then recycle it into animal feed .
That is a fact .
In other Member States no one can tell me what happens to it .
Some say it is burned .
Nobody really knows .
No one knows the standards , and in private conversation any Member will admit that some of it ends up in landfill sites .
That is precisely what we do not want .
I should like to have a clear set of rules .
In five years ' time , if we have legislation banning the recycling of catering waste for any purpose other than the production of biodiesel , so be it ; that is what we shall do .
But it must then apply to all Member States .
At the moment , Germany , Austria and other countries are being penalised for their high standards .
If I appeal tomorrow for us to support all the compromise amendments , I shall be doing so because they are compromises .
I must then ask you to be fair and support the compromises too .
Mr President , Commissioner , the matter under discussion is very intricate and complex , and is one that will have a very far-reaching effect on the food industry .
For that reason , I wish to thank the rapporteur : we are grateful to you for your excellent work . In the main this report can be adopted .
I would , however , like to draw attention to one point , and that is Amendment No 15 .
There are Member States where processing is on a very small scale .
The requirement , therefore , that different categories of activity should have a separate building is unreasonable as far as these countries are concerned .
For example , in my own country we have two plants , both of which already have clearly separate and properly supervised production lines .
If we were to find ourselves in a situation where we had to construct separate buildings for one more separate production line that would be unreasonable considering the small volumes being processed .
In my opinion the issues mentioned previously in the Council 's formulation have been taken proper account of , and I would hope the Council 's and the Commission 's position will enter into force with regard to this matter .
Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking the rapporteur , Mrs Paulsen , for the excellent work she has done to get this regulation on health rules concerning animal by-products through .
I also know that Mr Staes is pleased with the cooperation and the way in which we have been able to reach compromises as well as with Mrs Paulsen 's work with the shadow rapporteur .
Thank you for that .
This is a very technical and complicated matter which can be difficult to get to grips with .
At the same time , it goes without saying of course that we must guarantee safe food for the citizens of the EU and , that being the case , we must do so throughout the entire chain .
Therefore , how we treat animals and what we feed them on is naturally important .
I am very pleased about the principles which the European Parliament and the Council have agreed on , in other words that only by-products from animals approved for human consumption may be used as animal feed .
The most important thing is possibly also the ban on re-use within the same species , that is , the fact that we are rejecting cannibalism .
I understand the Council 's position in seeking to prohibit catering waste in animal feed .
It is difficult to guarantee safe and risk-free handling of catering waste .
How can we know what mixed household waste actually consists of ?
Now we have tabled a compromise amendment , Amendment 22 , where exceptions are made for catering waste in category 3 , and we submit Amendment 25 in which some Member States are permitted to feed catering waste for a transitional period of a maximum of four years .
I am not entirely happy about this amendment but I am still willing to accept it so that we can get the report through .
At the moment , there is a kind of moratorium on the use of meat and bone meal in animal feed .
This means that the Council could at any time decide to permit the use of meat and bone meal once more .
The Verts / ALE Group has therefore submitted Amendment No 20 .
I ask my colleagues to vote in favour of it as it does provide a kind of assurance that the Council must bring the issue up again before any decisions in that direction can be made .
Mr President , at first sight , this report on health requirements for animal by-products appears to be very technical .
It forces us to face a genuine problem for society and to take into account two realities that are not easy to reconcile .
Firstly , the legitimate concern of consumers with regard to the BSE epidemic and the terrifying human form of BSE , namely Kreutzfeld-Jacob 's disease . And secondly , the necessary concern for farmers and all employees of the meat industry , whose work is being jeopardised by the frightening - and mounting - burden of restrictions that are being heaped upon them in the name of the precautionary principle .
Despite the fact that , several years ago , the fifth quarter or meat by-products were re-processed and sold , which met slaughterhouses ' overheads .
We now send these by-products - and quite rightly , I am sure - to be destroyed at great expense .
As a result , meat is constantly becoming more expensive for consumers whilst farmers are no longer paid a fair price for their animals .
The common position , on which we are due to vote , is creating a number of technical bottlenecks , since it is based on an extreme concept of the precautionary principle .
For example , is it a good idea to ban spreading sludge , manure and stercoral matter from slaughterhouses on land and to send 20 million tonnes of this waste to incineration , when we do not yet know how to process the two million tonnes of animal feed that we have ?
Is it a good idea to involve several thousand local and regional slaughterhouses in building hundreds of sewage treatment plants and incinerators when BSE detection tests are making swift progress ?
We will therefore reserve judgment , Mr President , on this extremely pernickety and excessively cautious text which will place such harsh restrictions on slaughterhouses , that many will be at risk of closing down , with all the consequences that these closures will have on the transportation of animals and the spread of epidemics .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , may I begin by expressing my sincere thanks to all the honourable Members whose hard work and constructive attitudes have brought us to this point .
It is unquestionable that the prevention of epizootic diseases which lead to food crises is of great importance , not only to the future of European farming but also to the entire population of Europe .
The crucial task now is to find a suitable means of meeting the needs of a multifunctional agricultural system as well as those of consumers .
In accordance with the subsidiarity principle , I therefore call for the preservation of the tried and tested national systems for the disposal and recycling of organic waste .
The collection and use of biogenetic waste for the purposes of composting or for use in a biogas plant are highly commendable from an environmental point of view and must therefore remain possible in future .
In Austria in particular we have found these processes extremely useful .
I should also like to address the extremely controversial issue of recycled catering waste .
The Austrian example shows that application of the highest possible standards of hygiene , coupled with official monitoring , banishes any concerns regarding a possible risk of epizootic disease .
This has been confirmed once again in the recent past .
I would therefore regard a general ban on the use of pigswill for animal feed as an unduly draconian measure .
In addition , we must not forget the investments that have been made in the municipal collection of organic waste and in the officially licensed decoction facilities , investments made in the belief that the future lies in an exemplary system of environmental protection .
In recent years , 250 new decoction facilities have been built in Austria .
I shall therefore lend my support to all compromise amendments that guarantee the continued existence of proven monitored systems for the recycling of organic waste .
I consider it very important that we formulate our decisions on this sensitive subject in such a way that the general public can follow our reasoning .
The public would certainly not want to see the prohibition of an exemplary practice .
Mr President , I congratulate Mrs Paulsen very warmly on her diligence and skill in bringing through another complex piece of food safety legislation .
She always manages to steer between national positions and never loses sight of that corpus of food safety legislation which we are slowly bringing together .
I would like to look at the very wide definition of catering waste in the annexes and in Amendments 22 to 25 .
I will leave aside the feeding of carrion birds because I wish to look at a different form of carrion , that is the catering waste represented both by the recycled swill in some countries and by recycled cooking oils in others , including my own .
Catering swill arouses deep misgivings in my country because of the role it played in the recent foot and mouth epidemic .
Cooking oil is seen to be a problem after the dioxin scandals of recent years .
The rapporteur has brought the two together in a complex series of amendments culminating in No 25 , which I will support .
I acknowledge her efforts .
The UK 's problem , as Mr Goodwill has mentioned , is that we need to have an effective and rewarded system of collecting used catering oils for fuel - not feed - reuse .
That will take time .
If no other outlet is provided , users will dump it in drains and ponds . They will become sumps of noxious material .
One constituent demonstrated to me in the most vivid terms what exactly those consequences will be .
Therefore , Commissioner , we really would like a statement of intent on whether the four-year transition period is achievable .
I hope it is ; otherwise , good intentions will founder here for sure and the old saying that the best can be the enemy of the good will be vindicated .
Mr President , Commissioner , I want to begin by thanking my esteemed colleague , Mrs Paulsen , for all the sound and skilful work she has done on this report .
I support most of the content of the report and am pleased that the Commission is prepared to propose transitional arrangements for the cleansing of waste water .
I think , however , that we are going too far in a number of areas .
During the last part-session , we debated Mr Olsson 's report on the extent to which the existing BSE decisions had been implemented in the Member States .
That was depressing , and there was not much to rejoice about .
There are too many countries which cut corners , and that creates too many holes in the system for BSE to be combated effectively .
Something needs to be done about this . We owe it to ourselves and , especially , to those countries which comply with the decisions .
I am unable to support the proposed amendments to the regulations governing post-mortem inspection of blood , for which I do not believe there is any scientific justification .
Nor have I been given any estimates of its economic significance for the Member States and the regions , and I fear it would involve major costs for smaller enterprises and , in particular , for slaughterhouses operating on a very small scale .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I warmly welcome the Commission 's initiative to introduce uniform European rules on the use of animal by-products .
Optimum control and traceability of animal by-products are vital prerequisites of greater consumer safety .
In particular , I support the amendment which was adopted in committee on the use of kitchen waste for animal feed .
The feeding of untreated kitchen and restaurant waste has often been regarded in the past as a possible source of swine fever and foot and mouth disease .
For this reason it is especially important that all such untreated catering waste which is transported into our countries should be eliminated .
It undoubtedly makes sense to process catering waste in accordance with strict regulations , so that the entire operation can be supervised down to the smallest detail .
Our declared aim in all of this must be maximum safety for consumers .
Strict processing regulations , by which I specifically mean rules governing sterilisation and the destruction of potential pathogens , and firm European regulations on traceability and control are indispensable and reduce the risk of the spread of epizootic diseases such as foot and mouth disease and classical swine fever .
Consistent checks by producers , but also by farmers , must supplement the system .
The vital thing is that farmers and consumers must be able to rely on the safety of feed products .
This requires a system for the conditional authorisation of catering waste for use as animal feed , a system that can be closely monitored .
This is why I firmly support the amendment tabled by the Environment Committee .
Mr President , Commissioner , I join my fellow Members in congratulating Mrs Paulsen for the work she has done as well as her collaboration .
The aim of this report , as previous speakers have said , is to draw up sanitary rules with a view to improving food safety .
One of the fundamental aspects of this proposal is to ban re-use within the food chain of certain animal products , namely animal carcasses and downgraded animal by-products .
However , the draft text submitted to Parliament at second reading - and I am referring to Article 4 here - indicates that all matter of animal origin collected during processing waste water in slaughterhouses and other premises must be classified as category 1 , and this wording and change in the text gives us cause for concern .
A provision of this kind would cause huge problems in terms of storage , collection and disposal , since the sludge from processing waste water during slaughter would no longer be able to be spread on land , but would have to be incinerated , which would add to the millions of tonnes of animal feed that we have to dispose of .
The costs incurred by these new restrictions would force many slaughterhouses and cutting rooms throughout the European Union to close down their business that has become increasingly difficult in the wake of the various crises that we have experienced .
I can only reaffirm that , at local level , the professional workers , employees , citizens and local authorities , if they failed to grasp the scientific justification of this text , would find it hard to understand that , after all their efforts ( sanitary measures , tests , slaughtering herds ) , the European Union is asking them to make a further effort which goes beyond the financial limits that they are able to cope with .
I therefore believe that it is essential that we provide clarification on this matter and that this specific treatment only applies to equipment with specific risks , thus ensuring increased food safety and feasibility for our industries and tradesmen .
We must also step up our research programmes so that we have the most effective techniques possible for the processing of animals that are slaughtered and intended for human consumption and also pursue our other food safety policies to improve traceability , monitoring of imports from third countries and safe livestock feeding , as our priority must be to tackle the root of these problems .
Mr President , Commissioner Byrne , there is a popular saying that politics is a dirty business .
Does it become even dirtier when politicians have to deal with such unsavoury matters as pigswill and abattoir waste ?
Would it not perhaps be more consistent if we did not deal with these matters at all but simply proclaimed an outright ban ?
If we commit ourselves to the search for sensible solutions , does this necessarily make us somehow corrupt or venal ?
All sorts of inferences like these have been doing the rounds lately .
I do not believe they have any substance .
The European Parliament has shown courage .
I should like to pay tribute to Mrs Paulsen for her systematic work on this issue and for her close cooperation with our committee .
As draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , I have had the task of representing the interests of the farming community .
I believe we have successfully integrated their concerns into this common position .
May I also thank you , Commissioner Byrne , for our long conversations and debates . They were no bad thing .
They were fruitful and , besides , they were quite enjoyable too .
Here we are looking specifically at high-quality protein which is to be fed to non-vegetarian animals .
We do not intend to make vegetarians of them , any more than we can induce carrion-eating birds to stop eating carrion .
It would be the death of them .
Similarly , when it comes to human foodstuffs , we want a system that will recycle all the high-quality nutrients .
We cannot adopt a set of rules at the expense of the hungry people in the world , whereby anything that is no longer good enough for us is simply destroyed or abandoned .
We are not legislating on catering waste here ; it is merely a matter of the Commission presenting its own legislative proposal , to which we accord the same systematic and meticulous treatment that we gave to meat and bone meal .
I do not understand the position of some people who are saying that meat and bone meal can be fed but catering waste cannot .
Then there are others , of course , who are saying that catering waste can be fed but not meat and bone meal .
So both positions exist .
That is why I tabled my proposal .
Your compromise proposal , Mrs Paulsen , is fine .
Tomorrow I shall move an oral amendment in which I shall alter the time scale in my amendments , which are similar in substance to the compromise ; this alteration relates to the time before the entry into force of the proposed regulation .
I believe the alteration will make the amendments compatible , and we can then adopt them as they stand .
We shall then have a sound solution .
Thereafter , Mr Byrne , I hope that , on your initiative , we shall soon have the new version back here on the table .
Then we shall engage in some more of the good old cut and thrust , and we shall revel in it .
Politics is not a dirty business ; it is actually a most enjoyable occupation !
Mr President , the recommendations under discussion today put forward by my colleague , Mrs Paulsen , are a continuation of the important work she has been so very commendably involved in as Parliament 's rapporteur regarding updating the legislation on food safety .
We have been able to respond to food crises in the current parliamentary term in a way that has been both consistent and wide-ranging .
Our common goal is to restore complete consumer confidence and levels of safety .
I would like to say that I agree with the view expressed just now by Mr Pesälä regarding Amendment No 15 .
The traditional , common sense way in which catering waste is used for feeding has for the present unfortunately proved problematic as a result of inadequacies in the processing of feed .
Serious animal diseases have thus been able to spread .
For that reason Parliament now requires the Commission to promptly submit a legislative proposal banning the use of catering waste of animal origin as feed and obliging Member States to provide proof of its safe disposal .
As an exception , the production of feed from catering waste could be permitted if it has been properly sterilised in an officially authorised plant .
Parliament can also feel pleased with how the codecision procedure works and the cooperation established with the Council in the area of food safety .
That is why it is unfortunate that the most prominent element in publicising the work to improve food safety , the establishment of a new Food Safety Authority , has proved such a difficult task in the Council and that the agency is commencing its work in a temporary location .
This is also likely to hamper the recruitment of qualified staff for the agency .
In this respect the Council should be capable of making the right decisions swiftly and showing consumers that the long-term work done to guarantee the supply of safe food is more important that seeking to obtain short-term benefits for individual countries in the Council .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , when we discuss this report dealing with animal by-products that are not intended for human consumption , we must not speak exclusively of waste products .
The basis for a very specific distinction is provided by the submission from the Commission , which divides the materials into three categories .
They must be separately registered , stored , treated and marketed , and evidence of each operation must be recorded .
The items that must be destroyed and removed from the food chain are quite clearly defined , as are the conditions for their removal and destruction .
We are all agreed that contaminated and inferior material has no place in the food chain .
On the other hand , we can treat and then re-use important nutrient carriers that were properly prepared for their original use .
Strict rules govern the procedure for such recycling .
Here we have the example of pigswill .
To allow the use of pigswill , the Committee on the Environment adopted Amendment No 10 on the recycling of catering waste .
There is pressure to adopt this particular amendment within a short time frame .
The directive on swine fever enters into force on 1 November and imposes a blanket ban on the feeding of catering waste .
And this is why I ask you , Commissioner , whether Compromise Amendment 25 that has been set before us lifts this ban .
A legal loophole must not be created here , because the existing processing facilities produce hygienic feed which contributes neither to the spread of classical swine fever nor to that of foot and mouth disease .
I believe Amendment No 10 was good , which is why the committee adopted it .
It is for this reason that I asked my absolutely clear and unequivocal question about the new compromise amendment on the table .
We should take particular care to ensure that we make clear and unambiguous statements and that we leave no scope for confusing double standards and overlaps between different regulations .
This sort of thing affects small and medium-sized abattoirs .
For that reason , we must support Amendment No 2 to Article 4 .
May I reiterate my sincere thanks to Mrs Paulsen for this report ?
It is a matter of the safety of our food chain , which is , after all , very closely connected with the health of consumers .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , feeding catering waste to livestock instead of indulging in waste tourism - that is my political demand .
When shall we create an authoritative and objective system of public information in the EU ?
In Germany , catering waste is fed to fattening pigs under the strictest of rules .
Confidence in the processing facilities is high .
My country is the most populous in the EU ; about a quarter of the entire population of the Union lives in Germany , and there is a correspondingly high output of catering waste .
There is no evidence of any epizootic disease having occurred in our country through the feeding of treated catering waste to livestock .
What are we actually doing to ourselves with this planned ban ?
In my view , we have started to place pigs before people as far as food intake is concerned .
Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf has already raised this point , and I too find it monstrous to do this in a world where people are starving every day , where slum children have to rummage about in rubbish heaps for food scraps .
What life of luxury is Europe trying to lead ?
This , you may well say , is an emotional argument , but it is extremely important to me , Commissioner , that we restore some rationality to our examination of the feeding of catering waste .
It must surely be possible for us , through our own efforts and with the aid of the media , to present these issues in a rather more objective manner .
The treatment of catering waste must , of course , comply with appropriately high sterilisation standards .
That is the only way to guarantee the destruction of foot and mouth and swine-fever pathogens .
Plants supervised by the public authorities are surely the best safeguard .
Along with the numerous previous contributors to this debate , may I say thank you very much to Mrs Paulsen for the work she has done , but I also hope that we can reach a practicable solution and that we can send out long-term signals from which the feed industry , waste processors and farmers can take their lead .
Mr President , this proposal is the second major component in our defence barriers against BSE .
The other is , of course , the regulation on TSEs .
It is a hugely important proposal , key to the safe processing of the millions of tonnes of animal by-products produced in the Union each year .
The continued absence of a sound , comprehensive and regulatory framework to deal with these by-products is quite dangerous .
First of all , I would like to single out for particular appreciation your rapporteur , Mrs Paulsen , for her enormous efforts and tireless work over these months in pursuing a rapid agreement with the Commission and the Council towards early implementation of the proposed regulation .
A great many of the key provisions of the regulation under discussion result from her personal commitment and determination .
I am greatly encouraged that all three institutions are in general agreement on three key principles : the requirement that only animal by-products derived from animals fit for human consumption should be used in feed , cosmetic and pharmaceutical products ; the prohibition of intra-species recycling ; and the need to tighten certain provisions in order to improve the control and traceability of animal by-products .
However , I regret that , despite the very good progress made on the proposal , the question of how to deal with catering waste remains a main obstacle to final agreement .
The feeding of catering waste carries a major threat of transmission of serious animal diseases such as foot and mouth disease and classical swine fever .
For example , the outbreak of foot and mouth disease in the UK last year , which caused such enormous losses to both the farming and non-farming community , is reliably known to have originated from swill feeding .
I might also add that the outbreak of classical swine fever in the Netherlands in 1997 was also caused by the feeding of pigswill in neighbouring Germany .
Nobody would wish this to occur again .
Given the huge damage which has arisen from recent outbreaks of these diseases , the insistence of Member States on very high levels of protection is understandable and shared by the Commission .
I am fully aware of your concerns that a total ban may not be appropriate , especially in Member States with strict controls .
However , I am equally aware that the Member States are not prepared to take any risk arising from the authorisation of swill feeding .
They have already decided on a ban in the swine fever directive , despite several opportunities to reconsider the need for a ban .
There are no indications of a reversal of this position .
Parliament must also accept that there are contradictions in any proposal to retain swill feeding .
For example , Parliament is demanding the full traceability of ingredients in animal feedingstuffs and a ban on what might be described as cannibalism .
How can this be consistent with a derogation allowing the use of waste collected from restaurants and hospital kitchens to feed pigs and poultry ?
Similarly , how can Parliament ask to exclude catering waste from the strict control rules of the regulation , fearing that these rules would compromise the practice of composting , and at the same time demand that the Commission propose a new regulation on the safe disposal of catering waste ?
The Commission , having heard the insistence of 13 Member States on the necessity for a ban , and in the interests of consistency , remains opposed to any relaxation of an outright ban in this regulation .
We must therefore reject Amendments Nos 1 , 10 and 25 .
We are also opposed to these amendments on institutional grounds , as the insistence on a deadline and on the content of future proposals undermines the Commission 's right of initiative .
Furthermore , the disposal and recycling of catering waste is and will be governed by existing and future environmental legislation on biodegradable waste .
Finally , the Commission has already officially declared that it is ready to propose transitional measures , to be adopted by comitology whenever this is justified and appropriate , in order to allow the affected industries time to adapt to the new requirements introduced by this regulation .
I would also refer you to Article 32 , which might give further assistance in this area .
Turning to the details , we cannot accept Amendments Nos 3 and 5 on the requirement of the marking of unprocessed category 1 and 2 material .
Acceptance would require the marking of cadavers , including pet animals , and 1.2 billion tonnes of manure .
I leave to your imagination the potential for the Eurosceptic press to exploit this requirement in order to undermine our credibility .
We also cannot accept Amendment No 9 , as detailed and sufficient requirements regarding accompanying documents and record-keeping are established in the annex to the regulation and may be supplemented if need be by comitology .
We can , however , accept Amendments Nos 22 and 23 on catering waste making reference to environmental legislation , as they would ensure that the goals of the regulation are achieved without undermining separate collection schemes .
Therefore , Amendments Nos 17 and 19 are unnecessary and cannot be supported by us .
Amendments Nos 22 and 23 also clarify that the highest risk catering waste from international means of transport should remain subject to the control rules of Article 7 .
Therefore , they are preferable to Amendments Nos 7 and 8 .
We cannot accept Amendment No 18 , aimed at excluding household kitchen waste from the definition of catering waste , as this is would be inconsistent with the existing EU legislation on classical swine fever .
Turning to another important issue - sludge from slaughterhouses - we cannot support the first part of Amendment No 2 , as it virtually destroys the effect of Article 4 by removing from the scope of the article material from waste-water systems from all slaughterhouses and other premises from which specified risk material is removed .
It should be noted that the TSE Regulation does not establish any rules in this area .
But as an aside , and in answer to Mr Goodwill , I should point out that I have written to Dr. Jackson on this particular subject .
I have sent a copy of the letter to a number of Members and I will ensure that a copy is sent to you .
It explains the position with regard to sludge and gives the kind of reassurance you sought earlier in your presentation .
We could accept in broad terms the second part of Amendment No 2 , which seeks to clarify that animal material collected when treating waste water is a category 1 material only if contains BSE specified risk material .
However , Amendment No 21 , which has the same objective but is clearer , is acceptable .
Amendment No 4 cannot be accepted as , when combined with Amendment No 2 or with Amendment No 21 , it would be superfluous and confusing .
We cannot support Amendment No 14 , which would provide a 3-year transitional period without conditions to apply during this period .
I repeat that the Commission has already officially declared that it is ready to propose transitional measures to be adopted by comitology whenever this is justified and appropriate .
We can support Amendment No 24 aiming to extend the derogation on the feeding of certain animals with category 1 material to endangered and protected species of , for example , vultures .
We cannot accept Amendment No 11 , as it would extend that derogation to any endangered or protected species .
We can support Amendment No 20 requiring Member States to submit a report on the implementation of the Regulation , except for the reference to the lifting of the ban on meat- and bonemeal . This is already comprehensively covered by the TSE Regulation .
Similarly , we can support the principle of Amendment No 13 , which has the same objective as the first part of Amendment No 20 , subject to editorial change .
Finally , we can accept Amendments Nos 6 , 12 , 15 and 16 to various articles and annexes , as they are in line with the basic objectives of the Regulation .
I wish also to note that Parliament has not made any further amendments to the second proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Directives 90 / 425 / EEC and 92 / 118 / EEC as regards health requirements for animal by-products .
Thank you Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0459 / 2001 ) by Mrs Sornosa Martínez , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the implementation of Directive 91 / 271 / EEC on urban waste-water treatment [ 2000 / 2318 ( INI ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , the real reason it has been possible to draw up the European Parliament 's own-initiative report on the implementation of the directive on urban waste-water treatment is that we in the Committee on the Environment concerned ourselves with this directive and followed its development very closely .
With this report we have shown that there are serious shortcomings in the implementation of this directive , despite the fact that it has been in force for a long time - it is more than ten years old - and that , furthermore , it is extremely important for all European legislation on water .
We know that many Member States have failed to comply with this directive .
In 1998 there were many agglomerations of more than 150 000 inhabitants that had still not resolved the issue of waste-water treatment .
Many Member States had still not submitted information on the condition of sensitive areas .
Currently , many other cities of more than 15 000 inhabitants are still not treating this waste water in this way .
We know that throughout this time the approach of the Member States has been so carefree , having implemented neither this nor other directives on the issue of water , that I believe Member States have been censured on more than 42 occasions for failing to comply with 17 directives in the field of waste water .
Member States have been censured because they have not provided the information that the Commission asked them for and because , of course , they have not complied with this legislation when they should have , and they failed to comply in full in 1993 , 1998 and even in 2000 .
But , Commissioner , the Commission also considered that their behaviour towards the European Parliament was unsatisfactory , since the information we were provided with was insufficient and , in some cases , wrong .
I should like to say that , initially , this report had an annex , which , following two debates in committee , we were forced to remove , because the data that the Commission had supplied us with was wrong .
In our view , the Commission has shown neither the necessary strength nor will in this case to demand that the Member States provide data and demand that they comply with this directive .
I wish to say , Commissioner , that when we in the Committee on the Environment requested that this own-initiative report be drawn up , what we really wanted was for you to consider us as your ally , in order to strengthen the binding nature of this directive and to enable the Commission to force the Member States to comply more energetically with the directive .
In this report we ask you to admonish the Member States , to initiate proceedings against those that have not complied and to continue using all legal means within your power , all in order to ensure that this legislation is complied with .
We also asked you , of course , to continue keeping the European Parliament informed , requesting information from the Member States and holding seminars .
Lastly , we ask you to adopt all necessary measures to ensure that , with the proper will to create such legislation , and the willingness to provide as much information as possible , compliance with this legislation can be enforced .
Commissioner , there is currently a serious discrepancy between the enormous quantity of legislation we have approved and which we are continuing to approve but with which , nevertheless , the Member States are still failing to comply , which is why we have before us two own-initiative reports - on nitrates and habitats - by the European Parliament .
These have shown us that the Member States are also failing to comply with other environmental directives .
It is my view that , as European citizens , it is our right to have the Treaties protect the environment .
In the European Union we already have certain principles ( such as the precautionary principle and the principle of prevention ) .
We also have objectives , such as the strategy for sustainable development .
We have tools , such as the Sixth Framework Programme and legislation .
The European Union is even considered to be the world leader in protecting the environment .
But , Commissioner , if all of this is really nothing but words , nothing but reports , if the Commission does not demand that the Member States comply with this legislation in its entirety , it will be quite useless .
You can count on us to be your allies in ensuring that this legislation is complied with , because otherwise , we will lose credibility and I believe that we are here precisely to support the Commission and to prevent ourselves losing this credibility .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the 1991 directive on urban waste water is intended to guarantee the construction and maintenance of sewage-treatment works in all large towns and municipalities of the European Union .
Since these measures involve considerable financial expenditure , very liberal implementation deadlines were set .
As my honourable colleague Mrs Sornosa Martínez has said , we must conclude today that not all Member States have made use of the time at their disposal ; on the contrary , they have engaged in delaying tactics and - regrettably , in view of their failure to submit reports , we must also say quite bluntly - in obfuscation .
The Belgian metropolis of Brussels , which is so keen to call itself the capital of Europe , sets an appalling example in this respect .
The fine report compiled by Mrs Sornosa Martínez mercilessly exposes the inadequacies .
Most Member States have not even fulfilled their reporting obligations for the first date in 1998 , let alone for the second date in 2000 .
That is bad enough .
What is far worse , however , is that the Member States ' waters continue to be polluted by untreated municipal sewage .
We are addressing many demands to the Commission today .
It cannot act , however , as long as it does not have the power to do so .
I believe that the large number of default actions and legal proceedings instituted before the European Court of Justice proves that the Commission is doing its duty .
It is unquestionably the Member States that are in the dock .
As Members of Parliament , we too should take action in our own countries .
The call for wider direct powers of on-the-spot scrutiny for the Commission in the Member States , enabling it to intervene in the same way that it can already intervene in the realm of agriculture , is vehemently rejected by most of the Member States .
Be that as it may , if we identify such gross violations by national governments of their obligations to implement European legislation , we must also find out why this is happening .
I should like to mention at least three reasons .
The first is the high cost , to which the European Parliament has drawn attention time and again since the directive was first debated .
It is estimated that an eleven-figure sum in euros is needed for investments alone in the 15 Member States .
Current estimates also put the cost of implementing this one directive in the applicant countries at about EUR 30 billion .
The second reason is that many directives require the Member States to submit reports , which considerably increases their administrative workload .
I urge the Commission to examine , as a matter of urgency , whether this task cannot be simplified , perhaps by means of standardised returns .
Some initial moves have already been made in this direction , of course , within this very domain of activity in connection with the various directives for the protection of water resources .
The third reason is that those Member States which have transposed the directive have gone about the designation of sensitive areas in very different ways .
Should the Commission not spell out the precise criteria for the designation of sensitive areas ?
That might perhaps make the directive easier to implement as well as having the desirable side-effect of enhanced comparability .
I should be grateful if the Commissioner could respond to these points too .
Mr President , very briefly , this is a very sorry story .
It has been a bad story for some time and it is particularly embarrassing if you are Belgian , of course , or indeed anybody visiting Brussels , because the city of Brussels is one of the cities which has been in breach of this directive for the longest period .
My questions to the Commissioner , which she might like to consider answering either now or later at some time , are , first : does she not agree that the situation in this directive proves the need for a much more thorough impact assessment to accompany legislation such as this ?
I recall that when the urban waste water directive went through , the impact assessment was very feeble and never really gave any figures as to the likely costs .
I am told that in the United Kingdom between 1989 and 2005 , GBP 26 billion will be spent on upgrading the water system to deal with this directive .
That figure was not known at the time when the directive was brought through - not in my country and not in any country ; so the question is : can we obtain better , more effective impact assessments ?
Not just cost-impact assessments in terms of a global figure , but impact assessments as to the disadvantage of doing nothing set against the advantage of doing something .
Secondly , I wonder whether I might ask the Commissioner to be very bold , because this really does come down to the question of Mrs Wallström 's debates with the Council of Ministers .
One of our problems is not only that the Commission does not produce impact assessments , but that the Member States are not honest about their capacity to put in place what they sign up to .
What we really need is a system whereby each Member State is asked at a Council meeting whether or not it can comply with the legislation that its ministers are about to sign up to .
A very good place to start would be the new directive on packaging waste .
I am sure that every Member State wants to send its minister to Brussels to agree to environmental directives ; that is just our problem .
They agree to far too much ; they do far too little ; and this waste water directive illustrates the problem .
I would like to congratulate Mrs Sornoza on doing this report so well .
We had many problems getting the information out of the Commission , for the simple reason that the Commission did not have the information because the Member States had failed to furnish it .
Mr President , honourable Members , I would like to thank the European Parliament , and rapporteur Mrs Sornosa Martínez in particular , for the work which she and Parliament have put into this resolution .
Water is one of the areas which I prioritise in my capacity as Commissioner for the Environment , and I am especially interested in this question .
Treated waste water is one of the most important tools for protecting our water and human health .
I have examined the information on the Member States ' implementation of the directive and share very many of the opinions put forward by Parliament in its resolution .
Water quality has improved in larger rivers and many lakes but , nevertheless , the majority of Member States have either not done enough or they have acted too late .
They have also been late in submitting information on the implementation of the directive , which has slowed down the Commission 's assessment work .
At the Commission , we have used a number of controls to ensure that the directive is implemented .
These include traditional controls - including legal measures , which can now also include the imposition of fines - and financial support within the framework of the EU 's funds .
We are currently taking proceedings against seven of the 15 Member States , and further proceedings will be brought .
The new controls are focused on raising the level of public awareness and on exchanging skills and information .
A year ago , we ran a name , fame and shame seminar .
I have also ordered wide-ranging reports on the implementation of the directive .
This exceeds what the Commission is legally obliged to do .
We think that the reports should be written in a way that is easy to understand and that they should be accessible to the public .
The Commission has already responded to most of the demands in the resolution .
This is the case regarding legal measures to ensure that the directive is implemented , the publication of information on implementation of the directive by the Member States , including details of court cases , the condition that the requirements in the directive must be met if financial aid is to be received , the development of a comprehensive monitoring and assessment system linked to the Geographical Information System and , last but not least , cooperation with , and support for , the candidate countries .
Thank you Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Statement by the President
Before turning to the topic of this morning 's debate I should like to make a brief statement in the presence of the President-in-Office of the Council on the grave developments in the Middle East over the past several days .
We have been watching with growing disbelief the violence and reciprocal atrocities that have plumbed new depths of horror in recent days .
Military operations have now reached levels unknown in two decades .
The region , and especially Israel and the Palestinian Territories , seem to be edging frighteningly and inexorably towards an all-out conflagration .
We have a responsibility in our Parliament in this unfolding tragedy to do anything that we can to prevent the holy places being transformed into killing fields .
We must actively support the unanimous call yesterday evening by the United Nations Security Council for an immediate ceasefire .
The EU 's High Representative knows that our Parliament stands squarely behind him in his efforts in favour of peace and for a ceasefire .
Equally , I would like to take this opportunity this morning to place on the public record our Parliament 's deep debt to the personal courage and unshakeable commitment of the European Union envoy , Mr Moratinos .
He may not thank me for saying this , but I had the opportunity to speak to him at length yesterday about his diplomatic efforts on our behalf to keep channels of communication open with all sides .
He is , for Europe , one of our unsung heroes .
I want to pledge to this House to take any action on behalf of Parliament which has a chance of promoting peace and of trying to draw this region back from the edge .
I have taken steps to invite Mr Shimon Peres and Yasser Arafat to seek to break that infernal cycle of violence by inviting them to come to address this House .
I hope they will be in a position to take up this offer .
We would welcome them as champions of peace through the hardest of times .
I , in cooperation with Mr Solana and the good offices of the Spanish Presidency , remain open to the suggestion to travel to Ramallah with the Knesset speaker , Avraham Burg and to meet there with Abu Ala in the Palestinian Legislative Council should circumstances permit .
Because the risk is looming of an all-out conflagration we have to do whatever we can .
In the name of this Parliament , for humanity 's sake , the essential appeal I want to make this morning is : please stop the violence , start the dialogue and give peace a chance .
( Loud applause )
Mr President , I should like to congratulate you on having made this statement , which is proof that you are fulfilling your duty .
My group invited two high-profile speakers , one Palestinian and one Israeli , to address us here last night and they described life in reoccupied Ramallah .
They told us how the camps were being bombed and also described the horrors of the attacks in Jerusalem .
They told us how the city of Ramallah was plunged into darkness and bombed at the very moment when President Arafat was receiving Mr Moratinos , and how bombs fell just a few metres from where they were meeting .
I think that you were right just now to recall our decision to invite President Arafat and Mr Peres .
I believe that you are right to remind us of this and to extend the invitation .
We also decided to send a high-level delegation to the area ; this was Parliament 's wish .
I suggest that we act on this decision and that this delegation be a high-level one , comprising , for example , the presidents of our groups or even Parliament 's President .
Mr President , I must first assure you of the Socialist Group 's support for your statement .
I would also like to express our support for the resolution adopted by the United Nations Security Council . The latter represents a turning point in history because , for the first time , explicit reference is made to the need to recognise a Palestinian state , as advocated by the European Union .
I believe it should be emphasised that the UN , the European Union , the United Sates and Russia need to work together if we are to find a light to guide us out of the darkness of the current conflict in the Middle East .
This message should go out loud and clear , Mr President of the Council , particularly because it is important for the Council of Ministers to present a united front on this matter , and support the work of our representative in the Middle East . Parliament made its views clear through the resolution adopted by an overwhelming majority in the February plenary .
I believe it is now time for the Council to act likewise and agree on a common approach it could wholeheartedly support . It might then be possible to move forward and break the present infernal cycle of violence .
All that remains for me to say , Mr President , is that the initiatives you proposed and which were also part of our resolution , do reflect our common desire .
Mr President , our group , too , thanks you for your statement , and we are right alongside you as regards a peace settlement , or the attempt at one , in the Middle East .
This debate is not about the Middle East , as we want to discuss enlargement , but it is our profound conviction that we will be successful in the fight against terrorism only if we , that is the United States of America and the European Union , support the peace process between Israel and Palestine with equal determination and in the same way , something on which there could be stronger signals from the West , to which we belong .
I am much obliged to you for your initiative .
Mr President , I should simply like to thank you for your words and say that , if ever a delegation did go to Ramallah and Jerusalem , I hope that it would be able to meet not only representatives of the institutions but also some representatives of civil society in Palestine and Israel , because I believe that peace will only be restored in the Middle East if civil society is mobilised .
Mr President , I should like , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , to thank you for your support and for what you have said today .
We are in a dreadful situation in which people are being killed every day in these areas : children , young people , the elderly , the innocent .
Moreover , we must do everything to support you and , as a Parliament , call upon the other parties to do something .
I think , however , that it is important that , as elected representatives of the people , we take this task upon ourselves and , at this time , express sympathy , as well as the horror and fear that we feel .
I thank colleagues for the endorsement of that statement and of the possible initiatives that we might take .
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on enlargement and we are very pleased that the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Piqué i Camps is here today to lead this debate .
Mr President , before turning to enlargement , which is the topic of today 's debate , I should like , if I may , to say a few words on the situation in the Middle East .
Firstly , I wish to endorse the statement you just made . It is entirely appropriate and has my full support .
We have long been involved in intense political and diplomatic activity aimed at finding a solution to the current situation in the Middle East and to the violence spiralling out of control in the region .
As is well known , the approach adopted by the European Union and the Council is based on the firm belief that there can be no military solution to the conflict .
I feel we are all agreed on that .
A peace process is therefore the only option , and that process must involve the peaceful coexistence of two states in the region . On the one hand , there is the State of Israel , with internationally recognised borders and the right to feel secure , and on the other a Palestinian State that needs to be viable in every sense , especially as regards its political , economic , social and territorial dimensions .
In the present circumstances , however , our main aim must be to achieve a ceasefire .
I should therefore like to take this opportunity to express my support for the United Nations Security Council resolution , as is right and proper . On behalf of the European Council I would like to add our voice to those calling for an immediate ceasefire .
It would then be possible for us to work together on security issues .
The political dimension could be brought back into the process .
This is essential to reaching a solution .
Economic issues must also come into play , given the terrible living conditions and dreadful situation currently prevailing in the Palestinian Territories .
There is a great deal to be done .
A number of initiatives and ideas have been put forward . I should like to endorse the initiative launched by the Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia .
I believe it represents a good basis for further progress . It would be helpful if it received the support of the Arab League at its summit in Beirut at the end of this month .
It is essential to get the peace process back on track . I should emphasise once again how important it is for the international community to work together to that end , as stated in that Security Council resolution and by a number of speakers in the House today .
We all realise that the United States has to be involved in any solution to the conflict .
Nonetheless , we are also convinced that it does not have to be the prime mover in finding that solution .
The European Union , the United States , Russia and the United Nations must work together . In addition , the whole Arab world as represented by the Arab League , and certain states in particular , must also be involved in this concerted approach .
It should then at last be possible to convince both sides of the need to put an end to this fruitless cycle of actions and reactions . We are all aware of what the outcome has to be , and this makes the suffering and deaths even more senseless , if that were possible .
I therefore believe we must persevere with this approach . I am very grateful for what you have said and for the support of the House .
We shall persevere along these lines . We are working on a declaration for the European Council to be held in Barcelona the day after tomorrow .
The declaration is being drafted in the clearest , most categorical and specific form possible . I trust that this declaration will be endorsed by other international players present and also that it will be a step towards attaining that longed-for peace which often still seems to be light years away .
Mr President , I should now like to move on to the subject of this first speech , namely the enlargement of the European Union .
It is abundantly clear that the impending enlargement represents one of the greatest strategic challenges the European Union has faced since its creation .
As you are aware , it is one of the key priorities for the Spanish Presidency .
The overriding political importance of this venture was made quite clear at Nice , when a road map setting out our objectives for the half year was devised .
A clear timeframe was then drawn up at Gothenburg . It was stated that negotiations with all those countries sufficiently prepared should be completed by the end of 2002 .
The next step was taken at Laeken , when the terms of this final stage of negotiations were confirmed . It was also stated that if the present rate of progress was maintained , up to 10 countries could be ready .
In addition , specific terms were laid down for the conduct of negotiations .
These terms must and will be adhered to , to ensure a successful outcome . On the one hand , there must be compliance with the acquis , and on the other , with the Berlin financial framework .
It is worth emphasising the magnitude of this challenge .
It involves bringing into the Union countries that were military dictatorships with planned economies barely fifteen years ago . I am referring to the countries of Eastern Europe , most of which belonged to a military alliance opposed to the North Atlantic Alliance .
I would remind you again that I am only casting my mind back fifteen years at most .
As a result of the fundamental changes that happened so quickly , this enlargement has taken on its own specific characteristics . It differs significantly from previous enlargements , and therefore has its own particular nature .
In line with the programme , my country 's main aim whilst it holds the Presidency-in-Office of the Council in the coming six months is to achieve common positions on the chapters which have fallen to us by virtue of the timetable . It will be for our Presidency to close these outstanding chapters .
I am referring to the budgetary and financial aspects of the common agricultural policy , and regional policy , notably the Structural and Cohesion Funds , in addition to financial and budgetary provisions . Finally , there is the chapter on institutions .
Obviously , we are dealing with very difficult and complex chapters .
They represent approximately 80 % of the Community budget . This in itself is an indication of the size of the challenge we have before us .
No effort will be spared in the pursuit of our aim . One reason is that we are aware that any delay could jeopardise the entire venture .
The debate on these chapters was opened with the Commission 's presentation on a communication concerning the financial framework for enlargement . I imagine that further details will follow .
The Commission also presented horizontal documents on regional and agricultural policy .
These issues have already been dealt with in the Council .
They have been debated seriously and in depth . The Commission has now undertaken to present draft common positions during March if possible , or failing that , in early April , depending on the outcome of the discussions .
I have to say that the Presidency-in-Office of the Council is favourably inclined towards these documents . We believe that they provide a fair and sound basis for negotiations .
Their content is reasonable , balanced , and in line with the acquis and the Berlin financial ceilings , as agreed at the Laeken Council .
We are now at a critical juncture . Consequently , we shall try to ensure that the possible attempts to reform common policies do not interfere or overlap with the enlargement negotiations , because if they do , enlargement will inevitably be delayed .
The Presidency is fully committed to discharging this responsibility successfully . Nonetheless , as I mentioned earlier , we are aware that these are the most complex and sensitive chapters of the negotiations .
We do not envisage opposition to reforming the main policies on expenditure . Rather , it is a case of stressing the importance of keeping to the agreed timetable , and therefore following a different course from that set for the enlargement negotiations .
In discharging its responsibility , the Presidency knows it can count on the good will of the Member States . They are all aware of the significance of the task in hand .
We also trust we can rely on the Commission 's support .
The Commission has presented the horizontal documents on regional policy , agriculture and the financial framework for enlargement . It has also canvassed the opinions of the Member States .
As I mentioned earlier , the next stage will come within a few days when the Commission presents to the Council draft common positions acceptable to the Member States and negotiable with the candidate countries . I have to say that the Commission is doing an excellent job .
The Commissioner responsible deserves particular recognition . He is present here today and I should like to take this opportunity to thank him for all he has done .
The Presidency also hopes it can rely on support from the candidate countries . They are making a great effort to adopt the acquis and implement it effectively , but they will also be called upon to make an effort to be realistic at the negotiating table .
A preliminary debate has already taken place in the Council in its various configurations : the General Affairs Council , the Agriculture Council and Ecofin , for instance . It has become clear that Member States have different points of view and sensitivities .
That is only to be expected .
Nonetheless , I am convinced that in the course of these discussions we shall arrive at consistent positions we all agree on . They should also be acceptable to the candidate countries because , ultimately , we need to come up with a solution amounting to a fair compromise between a whole range of demands .
In the first place , there is the political priority of enlargement .
Secondly , compliance with the rationale underpinning the negotiations , namely the transposition and effective implementation of the entire acquis . This applies to everyone , and there is no scope for differentiated systems .
Furthermore , as I mentioned previously , it is essential to comply with the budgetary ceilings set in Berlin .
Lastly , it is important to take on board the reasonable expectations of the candidate countries and respond positively .
I am confident we will all work together to reach such agreement , overcoming the difficulties we are currently experiencing as a result of the sensitive nature of these chapters in the negotiations .
We intend to adopt common positions on these chapters with financial implications and try to provisionally close the chapters that could not be closed earlier because of the specific difficulties involved . In addition , we propose to set in train a range of measures designed to facilitate the process .
Firstly , the committee charged with drafting the Act of Accession and related instruments will begin work .
The committee is to start operations at once , cooperating closely with the candidate countries .
Furthermore , during these six months , the Commission will submit the action plan on compliance with the third criterion for enlargement . This is the so-called Madrid criterion regarding effective implementation of the acquis by each of the candidate countries , a crucially important issue at this stage in the negotiations .
This issue is on the agenda for the Seville European Council in June of this year .
During our Presidency we also aim to open all outstanding chapters with Bulgaria and if possible , with Romania too .
Obviously this will only happen if the Commission and the two countries concerned supply the Council with the necessary information and comply with other requirements .
Bulgaria and Romania have certainly made a great effort to move forward . This was recognised at Laeken , and I am pleased to be able to commend them for it in the House as well .
It is important to continue sending out positive signals to these two countries regarding our commitment to their participation in the enlargement process . Hopefully this will come about very soon .
I should like to deal with Cyprus separately .
Reunification is not a precondition for accession , though clearly a solution to the current situation would make things very much easier .
Throughout its Presidency , Spain will fully support the United Nations ' efforts to resolve the situation . It is to be hoped that the prospect of enlargement will be an incentive to put an end to the division of the island .
Lastly , further to the Laeken conclusions , the Spanish Presidency will press ahead with the pre-accession strategy for Turkey . The aim is to move to a new stage in Turkey 's preparation for approximation to the acquis , taking into account the extent to which the country has complied with the Copenhagen political criteria , and with a view to setting new objectives in the accession process .
We have many important commitments and tasks to deal with during these six months in order to maintain the momentum of the negotiating process .
The ultimate aim is to ensure that we are in a position to conclude negotiations with those candidate countries that are genuinely ready by the Copenhagen European Council at the end of the year .
We are convinced of the importance of bringing the enlargement process to a successful conclusion .
It is morally necessary for Madrid , Barcelona , Berlin or Rome to be deemed as European as Prague , Budapest or Ljubljana . Furthermore , non-enlargement would have very serious implications both for the present Member States of the Union and for those prevented from joining it .
As Spain 's Foreign Minister , I am delighted to inform you that eurobarometer 's readings put my country at the top of the list of countries whose citizens are most in favour of enlargement . The Government of Spain is certainly fully behind the people on this .
The political situation in Member States where elections are due to take place shortly must not be allowed to affect the enlargement process . The latter must not be affected either by the tragic events of 11 September .
Our joint determination to attain the goals we set ourselves at Nice , Gothenburg and Laeken has to prevail .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , I wish , on behalf of the Commission , to thank firstly you , Mr President , most warmly for your statement on the situation in the Middle East and to make it clear that the Commission endorses the whole of what you have said .
I believe that the present time requires us to demonstrate that all the political institutions of the European Union share common ground and a determination that the violence in the Middle East should come to an end and that common sense must be given a chance .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me now turn to the subject of our debate .
In terms of enlargement , 2002 will indeed be a most decisive year .
The European Councils in Gothenburg and Laeken , and Parliament 's decisions on the subject , have given rise to such political momentum and created such a level of response that this process can now be delayed no longer .
Any delaying tactic would now have unmanageable and perilous consequences and could lead to the political and economic stability now achieved across the whole region between the Baltic and the Black Sea being jeopardised .
It is still , then , our objective to welcome all those candidate countries that are sufficiently prepared as new members before the 2004 European elections , and prospects for this are good .
Negotiations are progressing according to plan , and we are adhering fully to the timetable .
The Spanish Presidency 's excellent cooperation gives me confidence that , under it , negotiations will be successfully completed on all the chapters - with the exception of the financial package and the ' institutions ' chapter - with the ten countries that , at Laeken , were named as potential candidates for membership in 2004 .
As envisaged in the road map , the Commission will , in the coming weeks , be submitting drafts of the common positions on the chapters on agriculture , regional policy , budgets and institutions .
Apart from that , we intend this year to open all the outstanding negotiating chapters with Bulgaria and Romania and to present a more developed and enhanced strategy to prepare these countries for accession .
I would now like to deal with a number of political issues which have , in recent weeks , and to some extent in recent days , shown themselves to be potentially problematic or possible obstacles .
I will start by referring to the discussions on the Bene ? Decrees .
It is the Commission 's view that this is not just a legal problem , but primarily a political and moral issue , a solution to which has for some years been sought by the Commission and by many others in many , many confidential discussions .
The Commission takes the view that those Bene ? Decrees that refer to the expropriation of property conflict both with present-day Czech and European legislation , and are therefore obsolete and of no further effect .
It should therefore be our common endeavour to get back to objective reality on this issue and not have the process of enlargement laden down with issues that belong to the past .
An understanding has to be reached which will allow all the parties concerned to maintain stable and lasting relations with each other in a spirit of good neighbourliness and to shape Europe 's future together .
The question that is significant in terms of coexistence within the European Union is whether Czech legal practice on the reconveyance of property results in discriminatory effects .
I have noted with satisfaction that the Czech government , for its part , is examining this question , and I also welcome Parliament 's request for an independent opinion on the matter .
The Commission , too , is at present re-examining all the legal aspects of this issue .
I am already able , though , to tell you today that the Czech government has declared to the Commission its readiness to act and ask the Czech legislature to change the legal position if it should transpire that present legal practice cannot be reconciled with European law .
Another issue to which we have had to give closer attention this year has been that of the future of the Kaliningrad region .
On completion of Poland and Lithuania 's accession processes , Kaliningrad will become a Russian enclave within the European Union .
The Russian government has raised a range of issues on the problems of access , cross-border travel and energy supply .
It is my belief that we have to consider these topics in the overall context of the development of the Baltic region as a whole .
Substantially more than just agreement on a transit order is at stake , and a great deal more than a solution to the question of visas .
As regards transit arrangements and the visa issue , we are seeking an arrangement within the framework of the existing Schengen acquis .
The Commission has already , over the past year , set out its thinking on the issues to be dealt with and emphasised its willingness to enter into dialogue .
Such discussions need now to be continued in a purposeful way within the framework of the existing EU / Russian bodies .
I would , though , like to make it clear that separate negotiations with Russia on the Kaliningrad issue cannot be carried on within the framework of the enlargement process .
We are unable to engage in negotiations on the rights of third parties and , above all , cannot come to any agreements to their detriment .
The decisive question will be how the Kaliningrad region can successfully be included in the dynamic of the Baltic region 's development .
The real problem will be the growing socio-economic gulf between Poland and Lithuania on the one hand and the Kaliningrad region on the other , which will ensue if a way cannot be found to make possible Kaliningrad 's involvement in the region 's increasing economic dynamism .
We must reduce this gap if the spurt of growth that will result from enlargement is not to give rise to social and political tensions in this part of the Baltic region , for the real danger is of the development gap leading to potentially explosive social and political tensions .
Let me add to what has been said on the subject of Cyprus .
Last week , I had the opportunity to hold a series of political discussions in Cyprus , notably with the leaders of the two communities , Mr Clerides and Mr Denktash .

I came home from Cyprus thoroughly encouraged , with the impression that both leaders of the negotiating teams in the ongoing face-to-face discussions on a possible resolution of the Cyprus question are striving in earnest and with determination and commitment towards a lasting political solution .
No breakthrough has as yet been achieved , and there are as yet no definite agreements , but I could see that convergence has been achieved to an extent that would have been considered impossible even only a short time ago .
So I want again to encourage both sides to pursue these discussions in a constructive fashion and make use of this window of opportunity to come to a sustainable and durable peace settlement in good time for the accession negotiations to be completed .

I derive particular satisfaction from the fact that both Mr Clerides and Mr Denktash assured me that it is still their objective to reach political agreement by June of this year .
The Commission remains in close contact with the United Nations in order to ensure that any political solution is compatible with the provisions of European law in force .
It is from our point of view crucial that Cyprus , being subject to international law , should be able to act at an international level , speaking with one voice in the institutions of the European Union and should be able to implement and enforce within its own territory the international undertakings that it enters into .
On 30 January , the Commission presented its proposals for a common financial framework for enlargement , our objective being to guarantee the coherence of the negotiations on agricultural policy , structural policy , and on the budget chapter .
Over and above that , we want enlargement to come about under conditions acceptable to all sides .
There must not be second-class membership , nor will there be .
Enlargement must , though , be on a sound financial footing and also manageable in the long term .
In preparing the common negotiating position in the coming weeks , the Commission will be guided by the following principles : Firstly , that the ground rules have been clear ever since the 1999 Berlin decision on Agenda 2000 .
The Berlin global upper limits will not be exceeded even if we now accept up to ten new Member States , whereas the decisions taken in Berlin assumed six .
Secondly , the new Member States are , in principle , to participate in all common policy areas , in certain cases only after agreed transitional periods , although it should be noted that such transitional periods may be requested both by the candidate countries and also , in individual cases , by us .
Thirdly , the new Member States are not to be financially worse off after joining than they were before it .
It goes without saying that we cannot tolerate a situation in which those who will be our poorest members will , in the early years of their membership , be paying for their richer counterparts .
It is , then , absolutely unacceptable that the new members should be in a net position from the very start .
Fourthly , our proposals are not under any circumstances to prejudice the form that Community policies may take in the future .
That also applies to agricultural policy .
The Commission 's proposals do not , therefore , in any way prejudge the next financial perspective for the post-2006 period .
You will be aware that our package is , above all , one of structural aid , as it is in this area that there is the greatest need .
Perhaps I should just quote some figures .
Of the overall package alone , 76 % is allocated to structural and cohesion measures and to measures in the rural development area .
Of the financial package as a whole , 76 % will take the form of direct investments in the development of these countries .
It is only in the cohesion fund , but not in the structural fund , that we are proposing to increase resources , thus putting the emphasis on projects in the areas of the environment and transport infrastructure , where the need is greatest and in respect of which the candidate countries have , in the course of negotiations , entered into commitments which we must help them to meet .
The Commission considers it particularly necessary to emphasise the development of rural areas in order to actively promote structural measures in rural areas and make use of the opportunity for restructuring .
It is true that , in Berlin , no exact calculations were made as regards direct income aid for farmers in the period up to 2006 , but I must point out that the Commission remarked at three points in the memoranda that accompanied Agenda 2000 that the acquis is a unity , that there cannot , in the long term , be two agricultural policy systems alongside each other and that direct aid forms part of the acquis .
We must , then deal with this issue at the negotiating table .
After accession , the new Member States will pay full contributions to the budget , whilst some of the structural and agricultural policy measures will become effective in budget terms only after a certain time delay .
As in previous enlargement rounds , the Commission will therefore provide for the facilitation in principle of lump-sum compensation in the budget .
Practical details of this can , of course , be decided only at the very end of the negotiations .
From the Commission 's point of view , the package now on the table is balanced both in terms of policy and content .
The plan is still in place .
Negotiations are progressing at a brisk pace .
The next stage is clearly mapped out .
Up until the European Council in Seville , the task in hand will be to work out a common EU negotiating position on agricultural policy , structural policy , on the budget chapter and on the institutional chapter , and the course taken so far by discussions in the Council leaves me confident that that will also be achieved .
In addition , the Commission will be presenting a report to the European Council in Seville on the realisation of the action plans to build up administrative capacity in the candidate countries .
At the end of October this year , the European Council , under the Danish Presidency , will consider the progress reports for 2002 and the Commission 's actual recommendations , which will relate to the question of with which candidate countries negotiations may be formally concluded at the European Council in Copenhagen at the end of this year .
This can , at the same time , introduce the concluding phase of negotiations .
Continued close cooperation and Parliament 's political support will be indispensable to reach a satisfactory conclusion .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , our group , that of the European People 's Party / European Democrats , supports the general directions taken both by the President-in-Office of the Council and by Commissioner Verheugen .
In saying , at the end of his speech , that Parliament 's support is indispensable , the Commissioner was expressing a truth .
We , too , hope that the whole process in which we find ourselves will lead to an outcome that will enable the Council , the Commission , and Parliament to declare themselves satisfied with it and to adopt what the negotiations have produced .
Like Commissioner Verheugen , the President-in-Office of the Council again put the emphasis on timing .
It was indeed our Group that proposed that the negotiations should be conducted in such a way that the first countries to join the EU should be able to take part in the 2004 European elections .
This makes it necessary that we should complete negotiations by the end of this year and by the beginning of 2003 at the latest .
I hope that this will be possible under the Danish Presidency , for the completion of the negotiations would complete the cycle that began when the Copenhagen criteria were laid down ten years ago .
It is also beautifully symbolic in a particular way that the Presidency at this important stage is held by Spain , a country of the South , thus focusing attention on the significance of the centre of Europe and expressing our common political intention that EU enlargement - which of course involves Cyprus and Malta , but mainly the central European states - should not be about the interests of a few Member States of the European Union , but about our common interest , that of all the Member States of the European Union .
There is of course still much work to be done , as we all know .
We should not now give any country a guarantee and tell them that they are in whatever happens ; rather , every country must make the effort so that we can achieve satisfactory outcomes at the end of the day .
We know that many chapters still have to be negotiated on .
Whilst hoping for results on them , we also say - and , whilst not being an expert on agriculture myself , I do say this for my own part also - that our farmers have , in the European Union , Agenda 2000 to protect their legitimate expectations , and we see the mid-term review , to be presented by Commissioner Fischler , not as being about various things that actually have nothing to do with enlargement , but we want to safeguard our farmers ' confidence as well .
Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office , Kaliningrad has been mentioned , and , Mr Verheugen , I emphatically support what you said .
I recently spoke with the Mayor of Pillau , which is in the Western part of the Kaliningrad region , where there is very great interest in the possibility of direct contact with the Commission in Brussels and a concern that not everything should be done via Moscow , which is a long way away .
Perhaps , in our discussions with Russia , we might also ensure that there are immediate and direct links between Kaliningrad , formerly Königsberg , and the European Union and its Member States .
I also wish to mention the Ukraine , the western part of which , as we know , was formerly eastern Poland .
However much we , naturally , have to guarantee border security - and we must make every effort to ensure that the Mafia , drug trafficking and serious crime cannot get into the European Union across Poland 's eastern border - we should , at the same time , be flexible in order that the people there who have ties across the border , who live in Western Ukraine and are of Polish origin , may also have flexible solutions in their dealings with Poland , so that no new Iron Curtain may descend there to separate people from each other .
I believe that this will be of immense significance as regards our relations with the Ukraine .
I believe that we - Council , Commission and Parliament - have a common task , in that we need to work much harder at persuading people , not only in the candidate countries but also in the European Union , that the membership of the central European countries and also Malta and Cyprus is a massive opportunity for the European Union - and particularly for the countries of central Europe - to establish stability on our continent .
It is , though , also an economic opportunity , as trade between the European Union and the central European states has in the meantime almost equalled in scale our trade with the United States of America .
This unleashes a dynamic that is to the benefit of all of us .
If , when considering enlargement , we cast our eyes eastwards in particular , it is very important that we , especially in days like these - so we thank you again , Mr President , for your initiative on the Middle East - also look southwards , to the Mediterranean region .
Eastward enlargement enjoys equal priority with our relations with the Mediterranean countries and with the Arab and Islamic world .
If , as a European Union , we act with determination , courage and an eye to the future , then , I believe , we will also be able to accomplish a great work for peace and contribute to stability in our environment , both to the East and South of the European Union .
I believe this to be the common task of the Council , the Commission and Parliament .
If we , together , bring that to pass , you , in the Commission and in the Council , will of course have our unqualified support .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner Verheugen was entirely right to say that we are in the final phase of an irreversible process .
Enlargement can be delayed no longer , and to seek to delay it is to contemplate making a grave error and taking an unhistorical step .
Nobody in this House , I believe , wants to hold enlargement up .
In this irreversible process , though , demands are made of both sides .
We have discussed the candidates , and the tasks that the candidate countries must carry out .
Many true things have been said about this , but we must take a critical look at ourselves and ask ourselves where we stand in this final phase .
Even on the eve of its enlargement , does not the European Union itself still show deficits , and are there not tasks that it has not completed ?
On that point , I want to address two aspects of the debate over the past eighteen months , and a period of time that lies ahead of us .
Following Nice , we were told by everyone in the then Presidency of the Council and by the Commission , that Nice made the EU capable of enlargement ; indeed , there were even Members of this House who said so equally emphatically .
In Parliament , the overwhelming majority of Members took the view that this was not the case .
Parliament took the initiative in introducing what was then termed the post-Nice process , which has , thank God , culminated in the convocation of a Convention , which is henceforth charged with eliminating the deficits , particularly of an institutional nature , that we still have as enlargement progresses .
Nice saw the adoption of an agreement that did not go far enough , especially in the areas simplifying decision-making mechanisms , reform of the Council , and reform of the Commission 's structures and democratisation .
Much more is it the case that what was adopted at Nice was a mechanism for reaching majority decisions , one that complicated matters more than it simplified them .
If we proceed with enlargement on the basis of such structures , it will be incapable of being delayed - on which point , Mr Verheugen , you are right - and will , furthermore , be necessary and historically right .
It would , though , lead to a dangerous paralysis in the European Union and , furthermore , such a paralysis that there would an even greater threat of people turning away from the European Union .
There is therefore a link between the Convention 's task and enlargement .
It is the Convention , in fact , that must make the European Union capable of enlargement .
You referred to the need for Parliament to give its support in this .
Parliament is indeed an important partner , and that in two respects .
We are an important partner because we , in this House , will see to it that the democratic reforms needed at the heart of the European Union are actually carried out before the new Member States join , in other words before the European elections .
We will equally see to it that we will , being part of the budgetary authority , join in dealing with the financial requirements , and do so to a creditable extent .
As Commissioner Verheugen rightly said , the upper limits are clear , but there continue to be within them serious problems in need of a solution .
These problems are , incidentally , not only of the sort that arise from enlargement and the financial arrangements associated with it ; they result also from the decisions by which , within the framework of the foreign and security policy , additional financial functions are transferred to the European Union , functions that must also be funded from the Budget and will result in staff being redeployed .
This means that Parliament , over the next two years , has to make it abundantly clear that we are the Council 's and the Commission 's partner in enlargement policy .
Being a partner , we give support , but we will also critically monitor what the Commission and the Council will do about democracy , reform and the funding of the enlargement process .
Mr President , the Commissioner has very helpfully outlined the major challenges that enlargement will bring - challenges such as the problems of Kaliningrad , of the Bene ? Decrees , of Cyprus ; and he has talked a lot about the cost of enlargement .
I am , however , very pleased that the President-in-Office drew attention to the cost of non-enlargement , which is by far the greater .
It may well be true , as the President-in-Office said , that for us these countries will have waited a " mere " 15 years to join the Union .
To them , however , those 15 years will seem more than half as long again as the decade that Spain waited to come into our Union .
I believe it is incumbent upon us to do all we can to speed up the process of enlargement .
The first step in that process is in the hands of the Presidency this week as the Council meets in Barcelona .
President , you have emphasised that we have a responsibility for reuniting our divided continent .
We must welcome those who wish to join us as soon as they are ready .
But it is not primarily a budgetary question : there are tremendous economic benefits to be gained , and that is where Barcelona comes in ; for we need to have the courage to undertake ourselves the difficult economic reforms which we rightly expect of the applicant states .
This means , in Barcelona , agreeing important economic reforms , finding the way towards reform of the common agricultural policy , and moving towards reforms of our institutions .
The Heads of State and Government must not fudge the opportunity of real economic reform in Barcelona .
We must open up the markets for gas and electricity , both wholesale and domestic , by 2005 at the latest .
We must recommit ourselves to the package of legislative measures in the financial services action plan , unblocking discussions in the Council .
We must also see progress on public procurement and a European patent .
If we are to fulfil our objective of staying within the financial perspectives , enlargement must also mean reform of the common agricultural policy .
The over-production and waste which characterise the CAP and the worrying consequences for public health of intensive farming methods must be dealt with as we move towards a modern rural development policy , breaking the link with production and creating an environmentally sustainable policy providing aid to our farmers .
The prospect of enlargement also requires us to make a success of the Convention .
Our institutions and our decision-making procedures are like a Trabant , when what we need is a Mercedes .
We need to design a constitutional settlement for the Union of the 21st century which goes beyond Nice , which is based on common rights and values , which addresses the legitimate concerns of our citizens , combining accountability , democracy and efficiency .
Here , above all , what is called for is a responsible approach from our Member States .
It is not helpful for financial discipline if the Italian Finance Minister questions the finances of enlargement .
It is damaging , when a Community of 25 or 27 will need a strong Executive in the Commission , if the Head of Government of one of our large Member States accuses the Commission of a bias against his country , of wanting to smash the culture of one of his industrial producers , and of singling out his country .
If we are to insist on a responsible approach from the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , then we need a more responsible approach ourselves .
I hope that as we move towards the Danish Presidency later this year and the historic decisions on enlargement , we will see a responsible , united and purposeful Western Europe welcoming these new democracies into the democratic fold .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office , I must say that I can see an astonishing transformation .
Whereas we have , over and over again , invented new and grand names for the enlargement of the European Union - ' Europe 's achievement of the century ' and ' peace project for the continent ' spring to mind - recent weeks have seen the addition of a new name for it : the ' enlargement savings bank ' .
This ' achievement of the century ' is saving the fifteen EU finance ministers a cool EUR 18 billion over against the financial decisions reached in Berlin !
This is not to say that the financial decisions reached in Berlin were set rather too high through being wrongly estimated .
On the contrary , criticisms were voiced at the time that it would probably not be enough for enlargement .
It was said , though , out of fear of the net contributors , that we still had the reserves , and that we could call on them if it came to that .
The opposite , though , is the case ; the Commission has for weeks been repeating the slogan that enlargement must not cost anything .
This strikes me as playing at a topsy-turvy world , as a peace project costs a fair bit .
There cannot be a two-class Europe , as that would produce social tensions , migration and under-development .
We Greens therefore call for the financial forecasts to be re-examined .
It is not true that rural areas and the Structural Fund are getting more .
It is precisely at these points that conspicuous cuts are being made over against what was estimated in Berlin .
It would , basically , be necessary to use for enlargement the EUR 15 billion that are to be given straight back to the finance ministers of the fifteen EU States in 2002 and 2003 .
I also believe that transitional periods are possible until 2007 at the latest .
The attempt to delay phasing-in even further , until 2007 , is a pusillanimous proposal and evidence of the Commission 's incapacity , as it would mean that the agricultural policy would not be reformed , and that they want to adjourn the mid-term review that makes the European Union do its homework .
We are not going along with that .
We need an agricultural policy under which aid is linked in with ecological and social criteria and projects are funded only if they are compatible with the reform .
The candidate countries , though , must participate in this reform on an equal footing .
The Commission continues to reject one important proposal by Parliament , namely that the agricultural reform should be introduced now in the candidate countries in order to strengthen rural areas , and that this should be done with the citizens who live there .
The Commission , I believe , must stop acting in a feeble manner , and must have the courage to reform , and the courage to tell us that enlargement will cost money if it is to be a success .
Mr President , as a Dane , I naturally hope that this can be done so that the Copenhagen criteria come full circle and we can append the final signatures in Copenhagen by the autumn .
As a democrat and internationalist , I rather doubt , however , whether we shall make as much progress as that .
I think there are still many obstacles . Some of these have been mentioned , but I think there are others that are also worth mentioning .
We heard about developments from the fall of the Berlin Wall until the present time .
Eastern and Southern European countries , emerging from planned economies and militarisation , were mentioned .
All right , but what is to become of these countries if there are no planned economies or militarisation .
The other day , we had a debate in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Security and Defence Policy about transatlantic links , and all the participants thought that European countries should prepare to get the defence budgets up to between 3 and 5 % of GDP , simply in order to comply with general expectations of the EU 's military capacity .
What does that mean for the candidate countries and their economies ?
I fear that , when it dawns upon them what conditions we are offering them , the people of Eastern and Central Europe will vote ' no ' in the final referendums , and that would in my view be a catastrophe .
I am dissatisfied , then , with the economic package prepared in connection with enlargement .
I am dissatisfied with the statement that it must not cost anything .
I am dissatisfied with the fact that the candidate countries must go through a transitional phase of ten years before they feel they are participating fully in the economic area , when it is also ourselves who are laying down transitional conditions and not allowing the principle of freedom of movement for the labour force to apply to the candidate countries on the same footing as it applies to other countries .
When considerations of this kind become apparent to those people who , in due course , must vote on whether or not the candidate countries are to become members of the EU , then I fear we shall have problems .
I would therefore call for an extra effort to be made in the last phase to alter all this about its not having to cost anything .
I agree completely with Mrs Schroedter from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance when she said that we are probably talking about the biggest peace project of our lifetime .
Must it really rest upon its not having to cost anything ?
Are those of us in this cooperative venture really so small-minded that we believe that the greatest peace project of our lifetime must not cost anything ?
I should very much like to be involved in campaigning for the rich Member States to be required to pay for the project , and that also applies to my own country .
Denmark must naturally be willing to pay .
Saying that it must not cost anything is tantamount to not wishing wholeheartedly to get this mammoth project under way .
Mr President , the EU Convention comes at a very important moment in the life of the European Union .
The Laeken Declaration made clear both the extent of the achievements of the European Union over the past 45 years and the scale of the challenges which it now faces .
The debate we are holding here today relates to the enlargement of the European Union .
The enthusiasm and determination of the candidate countries seeking to join the EU provide the clearest proof that the European Union is an enormous success story .
I very much welcome the participation of representatives from the parliaments of the applicant countries in the Convention and look forward to the fresh insight they will bring to its workings .
Institutional reform goes hand-in-hand with the enlargement of the European Union .
The regulations and directives enacted through the three decision-making procedures in Europe must be streamlined and simplified .
The Göteborg European Council decided that those applicant countries which are ready to join the European Union may complete accession negotiations by the end of this year .
The goal of admitting new members into the European Union by 2004 is still a very ambitious one , but it is not a pipe dream .
The enlargement of the Union is the number one policy priority of all key European Union legislators .
Our resolve and courage at these enlargement negotiations must match those which the candidate countries themselves are showing in enacting wide-ranging new laws as they prepare to join the European Union as full members .
The Spanish Presidency is now dealing with the most difficult enlargement negotiations , notably agriculture , the structural funds and budgetary matters .
I am confident that both sides can reach agreement on these chapters of the talks and reach a conclusion that is - and must be - fair and balanced .
The applicant countries have made substantial progress in meeting the Copenhagen criteria , with regard both to the transposition of legislation and to the implementation of new European regulations and directives covering a wide range of economic and social sectors .
The significant advances made by the applicant countries in terms of enacting new EU legislation have certainly ensured that the enlargement negotiations can proceed at a stronger pace .
Undoubtedly , substantial progress has been made in increasing the independence , transparency and efficiency of public administrations in the applicant countries , as well as in improving the operation of their legal systems .
Efficient public administrations are necessary not only to enact new EU laws completely , but also to ensure that the Community 's financial resources are used effectively .
This year will undoubtedly be a decisive one for the enlargement process and for the future of Europe .
This institution will work very closely with the Spanish and Danish presidencies of the Union to ensure that enlargement negotiations are a success .
We will have to show the same determination as in the past in order to find constructive answers . I believe that this House has the goodwill and determination to do just that .
Mr President , I should like to warn against our treating the new candidate countries as second-class applicants .
In the Convention , the national parliaments met and appointed their two representatives in the Bureau , without the representatives from the candidate countries being called at all .
On 25 February , I submitted a proposal to the effect that the candidate countries should themselves be able to elect two representatives to the Bureau .
The proposal was neither circulated nor debated .
The Bureau has held its first meetings without the new countries being represented .
The latter must naturally have completely equal rights and also be entitled to have material interpreted in their own languages .
This weekend , the prime ministers are meeting in Barcelona .
The large countries are attacking the equal rights enshrined in the rotating presidencies .
There is the risk of a situation in which the EU is run on an intergovernmental basis by representatives of large countries who , in that way , act together supranationally in relation to the smaller countries .
That is how I interpret Mr Solana 's discussion paper for the Summit .
It is a variant which the EU 's critics should not be alone in criticising .
The proposals are also a sign to the candidate countries that they can certainly join us but not on an equal footing .
The Commission 's proposal on agriculture also operates with two classes of Member State .
It would be cheaper and more sensible to phase out price support in the EU before enlargement and to provide the candidate countries and our own farmers with compensation .
Signalling different treatment is wrong and deeply damaging .
It is also the Nice Summit 's decision to give the Czech Republic and Hungary two fewer places in the European Parliament than are allocated to EU countries with fewer inhabitants .
I wish once again to call upon the Commission to publish the so-called screening reports concerning how far the candidate countries have got with introducing our legislation .
That is information which belongs to the people , both in our own and the candidate countries .
In this case , it is everyone who is being discriminated against .
Debates concerning legislation should be fully open , as they are in all the parliaments , and the people of the candidate countries must also be able to monitor the phasing out of their own laws .
Mr Solana 's new discussion paper should have been submitted directly to ourselves , as I requested . Instead , I now hear about it through leaks .
Let us put an end to this secretiveness and take the Commission to the Court of Justice if it does not hand over the screening reports .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I would like to make reference to the general speech by our group 's Chairman and seize on a few , perhaps just small , details .
Although we have to keep an impartial view of all applicant countries , this must not mean that the various decisions they made prior to accession negotiations or their special circumstances arising from their natural resources or history should be completely ignored .
I am mainly alluding to the situation regarding Estonia , which is close to Finland .
It is unreasonable that the Union is demanding that the country 's bituminous shale-based production of electric energy , which is unable to compete in a freely competitive market , should swiftly become the object of free competition , while , at the same time , France , and to some extent Germany also , are still , after fifty years , obstructing the liberalisation of their own energy markets .
Fortunately for it , Estonia is still not even part of the European electrical network .
The other special feature of Estonia concerns its milk quotas , which the Union wishes to fix at a basic level equal to that of the start of the last decade , when Estonia - rightly or wrongly - decreased its production . Thus , present volumes of production - very important for Estonia 's countryside , which is still dependent on agriculture - will not fit within the framework of the quota .
It is these sorts of decisions that will , however , determine the attitude of the farming population and the people of East Estonia to EU membership in the referendum .
The question of Kaliningrad always comes up as a key issue in any talk about enlargement , the northern dimension and our relationship with Russia .
I am a very strong supporter of Russian cooperation , but I am very pleased to hear Commissioner Verheugen remind us that Kaliningrad is a part of Russia , and that there can be no special negotiations on it with regard to enlargement .
Russia is also mainly responsible for proposals on cooperation and participation in financing .
Neither is Kaliningrad - and this is something I want to stress - a crucial element in the problems and opportunities of the northern dimension , which lie elsewhere .
They are in Murmansk , in the St Petersburg region : close to the Finnish border .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , in this debate on enlargement I should like to emphasise an aspect which is not part of the negotiations as such , but which will be very significant for the success of the new accessions .
I wish to talk about the statements which are made from time to time - and too often for my liking - by the leaders of candidate countries , political declarations which emphasise the bilateral conflicts between neighbouring countries in Central Europe , countries which today aspire to join the European Union .
For example , I am thinking of a subject which you yourself addressed , Commissioner : the recent virulent comments made by the Hungarian Prime Minister on the Bene Decrees , which were followed by the sharp riposte of the Slovak Prime Minister , his Czech counterpart and the President of the Czech Parliament .
The result of this controversy was the postponement of the Vi ? egrad summit , during which four countries - Poland , Hungary , and the Czech and Slovak Republics - had intended to coordinate their positions for the final phase of the negotiations , which would have been extremely useful .
I am not going to express an opinion here on the Bene ? issue itself .
In any case , you have already done so , Commissioner , and very well too .
For my part , however , I deeply regret the climate of mutual mistrust of which this controversy is symptomatic .
Similarly , the persistence of the excessively nationalist leanings of certain leaders and the general public in the candidate countries is something which we can only contemplate with fear .
Of course we can understand their terrific thirst for freedom and independence after so many years of oppression .
Having become well acquainted with these countries myself just after the fall of communism and the break-up of the Soviet Union , I think that I am quite well placed to know and understand how the people there are feeling and why they are reacting in this way .
But , for pity 's sake , accession to the European Union does not require them to forget the past , but to be able to transcend it .
I have often regretted the fact that the accession negotiations are based solely on the Copenhagen criteria , that is , on criteria which are objective , admittedly , but which are essentially materialist .
Psychological political criteria - states of mind , attitudes , private reservations - which are obviously difficult to measure , hardly play any part at all , as you have often reminded us , Commissioner .
However - and I say this in a spirit of friendship and out of the high regard that I have for the candidate countries - their accession to the Union , which we are hoping , preparing and waiting for , has to take place in a climate of confidence , with the very strong desire to live together , and not in a climate of distrust and even suspicion .
Mr President , I too wish to thank the Council and the Commission for their work , and I hope that , despite the political hurdles which will no doubt appear , the negotiations in Copenhagen will nonetheless be successfully concluded .
We then come , however , to the next phase , namely the people 's support of the project by means of referendums and , in that connection , I should like to address one aspect which covers half of the population , namely women .
There is no doubt - and the Commissioners have also assured us of this - that the Community acquis must be implemented .
However , there is a difference between theory and practice , and the reality is of course that the situation of women in the candidate countries has not been improved following the fall of the Berlin Wall .
I must therefore ask whether , in the Commission 's and the Council 's work , there is anything at all that ensures that there are opportunities for strengthening the position of women in the countries concerned .
If there is not , we may have a problem with the referendums ; we may have a problem with female representation at the elections to Parliament ; and we may have a problem with female representation in the public administration .
I would therefore ask the Commission and the Council to answer the question of whether special initiatives are being taken with regard to women in the countries concerned .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , it is my personal belief , and one I share with my party and my group , that there can be no going back on enlargement towards the East .
There is a historical basis for that view , but we should not forget that a commitment on our part is called for too . We have just heard a reference to Kaliningrad .
At present it is part of Russia , but it was the birthplace of no less a figure than Kant , one of the thinkers who laid the foundations for modern Europe . We should also remember that the Ukraine is as European as Poland .
There is a region known as Galicia in Spain , but there is another Galicia in Central Europe with Krakow as its capital . That region boasts a long history and is at present partitioned between Poland and the Ukraine .
It should also be borne in mind that if Turkey joins , Europe will spill over into Asia .
All the problems and political uncertainties related to this process must be taken into account . We are contemplating a Union with a population of 500 million and 28 Member States at the last count , if the Balkan countries do not join .
Such a Union will need European institutions that are both more tolerant of diversity and stronger . The issue of the type of constitution we should seek also arises .
Regarding economic uncertainties , it has been claimed that after 2006 the European budget could be maintained with 1.27 % of European GDP .
That is impossible in my view , if we wish to maintain the Structural Funds and European policies , notably the employment policy .
We only have to recall the German experience .
Differences between East and West still exist , despite the tremendous effort made .
It is also important to respond to concerns regarding the environment , transport , and even the impact on this House .
It is not clear whether the Treaty of Nice will have been superseded by the time the new Members join , but it provides for 732 Members of the European Parliament .
What kind of enlargement will it be ? Will ten countries be joining or not ?
I think these questions deserve careful consideration .
Finally , I believe the issue of eastwards enlargement should lead us to reflect on the kind of Europe we are aiming for .
A more diverse Europe should in the future be a world power working for peace and solidarity .
By its very nature , it cannot be a militaristic power like the United States .
All these thoughts should be aired in the House . We must avoid focusing on minor difficulties arising , because we have many major problems to deal with .
Mr President , although the EU has already gone through several processes of enlargement in its fifty-year history , there has never been such inequality as in the present round .
The acceptance of new members is not actually taking place on the consistent basis of equality and solidarity .
I find the debate on the Czech Republic intolerable .
Anyone who wants to examine the so-called Bene ? decrees and raises issues of property cannot leave out of consideration the character in international law of the two-plus-four process involved in the union of the two German states .
Anyone who wants Russia on their side , wherever they may be , had better not make any false moves over Kaliningrad .
As seen from Brussels , the accession process is more than a one-way street ; that is something that Mr Schulz addressed .
Accession is meant to cost as little as possible even though the candidates are bound to the unconditional acceptance of obligations and payments in advance .
The opening-up of markets is already turning out to mean good business for business groups , banks and insurers .
Demonstrably better support was given when other countries joined - Spain being one of them .
The candidates from Central and Eastern Europe have , on average , reached not even half the gross domestic product of the European Union , and the three Baltic States have only managed one-third .
The level of production in some of these States is lower today than it was in 1990 , which indicates that the preparatory payments have not been much use .
What is required is the reshaping of the structural and cohesion policies to ensure that , in both present and future Member States , the less developed regions in general , and the border regions in particular , will receive appropriate support .
We therefore need concepts that really will convince citizens of the candidate states that entering the EU is the right step for them to take , and one that will be to their benefit .
Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to bring to your attention a matter which is far from unimportant and is closely connected with the enlargement of the Union . It is the matter of the protection of human health , which has always been a primary objective in all the development policies of the countries of the European Union .
The Treaty of Amsterdam , in fact , lays down that a high level of health protection is guaranteed in the drawing-up and implementation of all Community policies and activities .
To this end , we are making every effort to ensure that the citizens ' health is protected by means of a common , efficient , high-quality health system , as proposed by the Community Action Plan for Public Health 2001-2006 .
Given that to achieve such objectives we need to develop specific policies aimed at ensuring the ongoing improvement of professionalism and scientific research in the health structures of the European Union Member States , and given that the current status of the health structures - and health policies - in the candidate countries for enlargement is clearly backward compared with the situation in the European Union , I believe we should urgently take steps , by means of studies or simulations within the Member States , to identify the possible consequences of the enlargement of the Union on public health .
Furthermore , we should verify that the Community acquis on health has been effectively adopted in the Countries of Central and Eastern Europe , and we must take into consideration control measures to prevent the entry of the candidate countries from leading to a fall in standards of health care in the countries of the Union , in view also of the recognised shortage of medical and nursing staff .
Mr President , this debate contains one overall message , namely that membership of the European Union constitutes something along the lines of maximum political good fortune for the Member States and for the EU as a whole .
I wish that assumption were correct , but I am unfortunately convinced that the message of the EU project will reveal itself to be a huge and fearful illusion . Wishful thinking is an obstacle to anything approaching sober realism .
A number of problems have been mentioned , but these are not the crucial ones .
There are the politically inflammatory problems with the Bene ?
Decrees , there is the Cyprus question and there is the economy with the unsolved problems of agriculture and the Structural Funds and so forth . Then there are the set of problems concerning the budget and the fear that the candidate countries will be treated as second class Member States .
However , the crucial and fundamental problems are not of course of a political and economic nature .
The crucial problems arise from the fact that the process in relation to the candidate countries from Eastern Europe entails a huge transformation .
It is about producing the legal framework for a transformation process of historic dimensions .
Moreover , these legal problems , which may be difficult enough , of course conceal the democratic problems .
The basis for the latest Copenhagen criterion is that a public administration should be brought about which effectively and correctly administers , applies and implements Community legislation .
There is no information in the existing reports concerning this huge problem .
And even if an effective legal administration , able to implement the transformation , is obtained , it will be democratically compromising , for how are the people to be involved in this process ?
The moment of truth is approaching .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , your speeches have naturally struck home with me as well , especially the idea that we are now on the road to enlarging European rule of law to include more countries . As a result , European peace can ensue in States that know their responsibilities .
A ' European-style ' peace .
I also have a great deal of faith in the policy of the Commissioner during the negotiations . I support his underlying principles .
I also welcome the fact that he keeps the pressure on until the last minute , until October , and that it is not a foregone conclusion that ten countries will be joining .
Their accession remains conditional .
I should like to ask a specific question concerning the costs that enlargement entails .
A few other MEPs have already mentioned this topic , and we have also discussed it with the Commissioner within the framework of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Security and Defence Policy .
Regarding the costs of enlargement , I believe the Commissioner completely when he states in this respect that these will , in fact , not exceed our set budget .
We have cut costs to ensure that enlargement becomes possible within the budget .
Despite this , we hear all kinds of conflicting stories in the various Member States , depending on whether it is in their interest to turn this into an issue .
A moment ago , I heard Italy being mentioned . I also have to include my own country , my own government , which states that the additional costs could be enormous .
The Secretary of State for European Affairs made a cryptic statement that this could well cost the Netherlands anything between 0 to 1 billion .
This proves that a ) he has a conscience and b ) he is also a campaign leader .
Commissioner , I think it would be extremely useful if another authoritative analysis were issued of these calculations which are being drafted in the Member States and which give a completely different picture from that of the Commission .
Surely this can be done independently , and I also think it is important for our people to be able to distinguish between the truth and accuracy on the one hand and unfounded nightmares on the other .
Added to this , of course , is the fact that we have created our own problems by not reforming our own agricultural policy in time .
We have simply not done our homework , but have saddled those other countries with these tasks instead - which they are implementing - and we complain in the meantime .
Mr President , I have to say that I am also delighted with the statements made by the Commissioner with regard to the Bene ? Decrees .
We are all very busy working on them , and I have also noticed that in the Netherlands , associations , for example , are reporting claims in connection with Poland , among others .
I would very much appreciate it if the Commission and the Council were to clarify which claims , with a reference to Copenhagen , would be viable and which would not be .
In my view , clarity in this connection is crucial in order to keep our population in the positive frame of mind with regard to enlargement .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , I am very grateful to the two introductory speakers for their references to the great vision and also to the problems that remain to be solved .
There are still a number of stumbling blocks that we have to remove , and not all the forces in the Member States , or in the candidate countries - to whom reference has already been made - have been very helpful in this .
The discussion of the Bene ? decrees is certainly one of the stumbling blocks .
Historians certainly judge these decrees in different ways , but I am obliged to the Commissioner for pointing out that the only issue of relevance to accession is that of whether they still to this day have discriminatory effects , that is , whether the legal systems contain provisions that go against the acquis communautaire and are still of relevance to negotiations today .
Provisions of this nature must be removed along with their effects ; I am very glad that this is something on which the Czech and Slovak governments now agree .
We will not be helped to build a new Europe either by revising the Bene ? decrees or by cementing them into the EU 's treaties .
Rather than getting bogged down in nationalistic squabbles , we should not lose sight of the vision of a great Europe .
The 2004-2005 enlargement round will be the cause of much satisfaction in many of the candidate countries , but there will be disappointment in those that remain outside .
It is worth considering whether we ought to give these countries not only greater financial help with the implementation of their reforms , but also a realistic - and I emphasise realistic - provisional date for their accession , subject to their making progress in the relevant areas .
There is great fear , particularly on the part of Romania and Bulgaria , of being put on the shelf .
Consideration will have to be given at the same time to adding new countries to the list of candidates , and I am at present thinking only of Croatia .
With Turkey , on the other hand , we have to consider how to grant what it has asked for , describing this as a compensation for its help with the Cyprus issue , help that has , though , not yet made itself clearly visible .
Here , too , it must be clear that a date for the beginning of negotiations with Turkey cannot be named in isolation from fulfilment of the Copenhagen political criteria .
In light of the fact that the borders of a future Europe will become ever more visible , we must also , I believe , even now slowly start thinking about how even closer political and organisational ties can be forged with those states that I believe will remain outside the European Union - Russia , for example , or many of the Mediterranean states .
For Europe does not consist of the European Union alone ; there are other states with which we want to build up new and strong cooperation , with potential for the future , in order to maintain a strong European Union .
Mr President , when , on 9 November 1989 , we stood in front of our television sets and saw people , intoxicated by the spirit of democracy , hurling themselves over the Berlin Wall , we all felt the pulse of history .
The very same night saw the beginning of the enlargement process , or the reunification of Europe , as the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party prefers to call it .
We now stand on the threshold of creating a unified Europe , an EU for the whole continent .
It is , of course , nothing less than an historic sensation .
Now , however , we must move on a stage from merely engaging in rhetoric , whereupon it becomes a question of hard facts : money , agriculture and ancient border conflicts .
Who said that it would be simple ?
Who believed that it would not cost anything ?
Who believed that we should not have to make sacrifices ?
Certainly , enlargement has a price , but it is worth it .
Obviously , there are still a lot of problems to be solved , but we must not drown in details .
2002 is an incredibly important year for enlargement , but it is also a year with elections in six Member States and three candidate countries .
The European issues will become important , but there is a very great risk of domestic political considerations overshadowing enlargement and the European issues .
That is why vigorous European leadership and action by the Commission is required to force the pace during these crucial months .
2002 must not be a lost year .
Enlargement must not be delayed .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner Verheugen 's statements on the Bene ? decrees , which I expressly welcome , mark a noteworthy change in the Commission 's attitude .
Many initiatives , Commissioner , saw these issues as bilateral in nature and not to be put in the context of negotiations on European enlargement ; I expressly welcome the way you have now abandoned this manifestly untenable position and I praise you for it .

You obviously did this influenced by the public debate sparked by Mr Zeman , who , this House should note , has presumed to advise the Israelis to do with the Palestinians what the Czechs did with the Hungarians and Sudeten Germans after the last World War - which I consider to be the most monstrous thing he has said .

Such an attitude of mind has , though , no place in the European Union , and so , Mr Verheugen , I expressly welcome the way you have put discussion of these decrees into the context of the European legal order , recognising the political and moral issues involved , which go against the EU 's legal order , and which are indeed obsolete , being incapable of having any future legal effect within the EU , and that what matters now is to make it our concern , in a spirit of good neighbourliness , that they do not constitute obstacles on the road to enlargement .
Questions therefore arise and demand to be answered .
If the decrees have indeed lapsed , as the Czech government maintains , why were they not unambiguously annulled ?
If , though , they have not lapsed , and can still be employed in practice , indications of which are unfortunately numerous , how , then , can they be reconciled with the European legal order ?
And the pre-eminent fundamental question is that of what line the Czech government takes , not only on excesses but with the expulsion of entire ethnic groups as such , that is , on what we have unfortunately learned to call ethnic cleansing .
That the Foreign Affairs Committee intends henceforth to set in motion investigations by experts is therefore to be welcomed to an extraordinary degree , as these issues affect not only the EU 's conception of itself as a community based on law , but also the foundations on which the EU enterprise rests .
These issues must be clarified before we can actually complete enlargement successfully .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the enlargement of the European Union is an endeavour - an endeavour for 500 million people on this continent , people in the EU 's fifteen Member States , but also in the countries that want to join them in it .
In contrast to what you have said , Mr Verheugen , it is not an effort that we have to make now and which we can no longer get out of , but an endeavour that we want to engage in because we want to create a future Europe that will be a community of solidarity in that future generations can work in peace with one another and with economic success on sound social foundations and under optimum conditions from the point of view of the environment .
Such an endeavour must be worth something to us - not only in terms of what we ourselves , or politicians , put into it , not only in terms of drumming up people 's support , but also in terms of figures in black and white , by which the project must be backed up ; it means that we also , of course , have to give thought to how we can set out , including in financial terms , the individual steps that must be taken . That is not just a fear on the part of the public , but an important issue .
As a householder myself , I , naturally , pay a great deal of attention to that .
We have just heard that we will be able to cope with all that within the framework of the Perspective that was adopted in Berlin in 1999 .
All of what the Commission has presented will indeed last us until 2006 .
There are though , a few things in all these columns of figures that we need to discuss .
Mr Verheugen referred to one of them himself .
It is expecting too much of the new countries who will be added that they should be net contributors from the very outset .
You cannot demand that countries whose gross domestic product is certified as being only 50 % of that of the existing Member States , that they should start out as net contributors , for the precise reason that payments have to be effected directly , whilst repayments would be made only after a period of time had elapsed .
In this financial perspective , we have described pre-accession aid packages that , in the first instance at any rate , worked on the assumption that new countries would be added with immediate effect from 2002 .
However , they have not been , but , spread over the years , the EUR 3 billion remain the same .
If ten countries actually are added in 2004 , the EUR 3 billion left over would be for two countries , Bulgaria and Romania .
We will have to discuss what is actually meant by this and how it has to be implemented .
Finally , we must think about how things are to go on after 2006 , for you cannot simply say that this will be enough until 2006 , and that we will just carry on after that date .
You mentioned that the Structural Fund and the Agricultural Policy are in the ratio of 75 : 25 .
In our current Budget , the ration is 45 : 35 , in favour , let it be noted , of the Agricultural Policy .
We cannot make such massive changes to it that it will be as you have just said by that date .
What this means is that we must discuss in precise terms how we go on from here .
We will monitor that during the Budget very constructively , but with a highly critical eye .
Mr President-in-Office , this morning you introduced this topic for us .
With all respect for you and your office , I have a request to make .
In the whole of your speech , you did not once mention Parliament as being a fellow-player in connection with these enlargement negotiations .
We are legislators on the Budget every bit as much as the Council .
It would be good if the way you conduct business were to take us into account .
Mr President , we have made a considerable number of requests of the candidate countries - we have set a whole series of criteria - but from time to time it is good to reflect on our duties , and I should like to mention three of these .
First of all we need to ensure that the public understands what is at stake .
Here it seems to me that there is a lack of information in our countries .
Secondly , we need to rethink cohesion policy , taking into account the points mentioned by the Commission in its second report .
But we should have one priority : to bring the costs of enlargement under control .
Finally , we need to reflect on the issue of federalism and democracy in an enlarged European Union .
It is true that this is what the Convention is now doing on a daily basis . Nevertheless , it remains the key problem : we need more democracy in Europe .
Mr President , I have listened very carefully to what the President-in-Office and the Commission had to say to us .
I have two questions to ask .
I still fail to understand what you intend to do about Bulgaria and Romania .
Perhaps you are taking a step forward , but I fail to understand how and I totally fail to understand what our longer-term objectives are for the rest of the Balkans , where the decisions which we have taken so far are creating a black hole at the heart of Europe .
My second question , Mr President-in-Office , is this : I am an optimist and I believe that the first accession agreements will soon be signed .
Have we considered the fact that the candidate countries , which by then will be members , will need to learn to work within the European Parliament and , as in the past , their parliaments will need to send representatives to Parliament in Strasbourg and Brussels until such time as European elections are held ?
Have we made the necessary financial and technical arrangements ?
I think we should because this is something which has to be done and it is an extremely positive message which we can send the candidate countries right now .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Foreign Affairs Committee has commissioned a legal opinion on the issue of the Bene ? Decrees .
This greatly gladdens my heart .
I see them as not only a bilateral problem ; they continue to be applicable in law , and the question therefore arises of whether they are compatible with Article 6 of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Previous progress reports have , unfortunately , had not a word to say about this .
Commissioner Verheugen has given it as his opinion that the Bene ? Decrees are not merely a legal problem but a political and moral one .
The ethnic cleansings and expulsions in the most recent wars in the Balkans have without doubt revealed a European dimension .
What is at the heart of the Bene ?
Decrees is no different . The international jurist Felix Ermacora came to the conclusion , in a legal opinion on the Bene ?
Decrees , as recently as 1992 that they were incompatible with current international law , thus indicating that they cannot be reconciled with EU law either .
It is with real excitement that I await the outcome of this opinion and the reaction of the Commission and the Council to it .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , a process of such historical significance as enlargement can only be approached on the basis of broad consensus .
I should like to emphasise that it is essential to arrive at financial consensus .
In recent years , the European Union has operated by means of a multiannual agreement as expressed in the so-called financial perspective . This consensual system has resulted in two key achievements .
The first is interinstitutional peace , crucial to the preparation of an annual budget .
The second is multiannual financial programming , a very useful instrument for budgetary policy .
The memory of the difficulties experienced in reaching agreement on the most recent financial perspective in Berlin in 1999 must still be fresh for all Members of the House .
This perspective will remain in force until 2006 .
Members must also be aware of the major difficulties anticipated in connection with drawing up a new financial perspective valid until 2013 . By that time , the House will have welcomed new honourable Members and the new Member States will be present in the Council .
Consequently the nature of these two budgetary authorities will be very different .
The impact of a reformed agricultural policy is one of the variables the new financial consensus will need to take into account . Others will be actual convergence in the areas classed as Objective 1 at the time , and the statistical effect will have an impact on that .
Then there is the absorption capacity as far as new Member States are concerned . It will even be necessary to come to a new decision on own resources and the maximum ceiling , currently 1.24 % .
This will have to be ratified by the Member States .
It might therefore be wise to delay negotiation of a new financial perspective until it is possible to ensure complete consensus between the parties .
If the present financial framework can cope with enlargement , it should perhaps be retained until an overall assessment of the new financial situation is available .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is no doubt about it , agriculture is at present certainly one of the most difficult chapters to negotiate in the enlargement process .
I would therefore like to preface my remarks by saying that there may not be , and there will not be , a link between reform of the Common Agricultural Policy and these countries joining , nor a composite measure to that effect , even though there are those who would like to see such things .
The one must be dealt with separately from the other , although that does not mean that there is not a whole range of requirements and rules to be complied with by both sides .
First of all , there is the need to guarantee the full transposition of the acquis communautaire , especially with regard to the veterinary and plant-health sectors , quality standards for food safety and adherence to the regulations on the protection of animals .
There is no dispute that there will , in some sectors , be transitional rules with time limits , but they will be few and far between .
Furthermore , the Sapard programme , conceived as pre-accession aid , must at last be fully implemented , as what has been done hitherto has been unsatisfactory .
We also support the Commission proposals for direct payments to the new Member States to start by being made gradually and in a form related to area rather than to production following their accession and for rural development programmes independent of production to be markedly topped up with resources , in order to avoid social dumping , among other things , in countries such as Poland .
Agriculture and rural development still play a central role in these countries and will continue to do so for a long time to come .
Not only there , either , might I add !
Support , across the whole of the EU , must be given on the basis of multifunctional agriculture in all its many facets , thus further strengthening the second pillar , not only with regard to the WTO negotiations .
I would like again to make it clear that the idea of solidarity , by which our Community is governed and characterised , must be neither eroded nor done away with .
This does not mean , though , that the Common Agricultural Policy was not in need of reform , both in our own states and in the candidate countries , whether enlargement took place or not .
Any of the farmers ' representatives who believes that no reform of the CAP is needed is , by his attitude , doing nothing more than accelerating the downfall of rural agriculture , the maintenance of which he constantly and stridently demands .
Let me turn to the Presidency of the Council and say that it is perhaps dawning on some of us that , in the 1999 negotiations on Agenda 2000 , it might sometimes have made more sense to think along slightly less national and rather more European lines .
Is it not so , Mr President-in-Office , that there can and will be no more inherited farms ?
As a Parliament , we want Europe to be enlarged and hence reunited , and I am certain that Commissioners Fischler and Verheugen will see to it that this does not fall at the hurdle of the agriculture chapter .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , right at the beginning of my contribution to the debate , I would like to remind you that Parliament will not only have to approve the enlargement treaties with each country in turn , but also , in exactly the same way , the relevant transfers of funds in accordance with Article 25 of the interinstitutional agreement , with an absolute majority of members and three-quarters of the votes cast , and so it is a good thing that both the Commission and the Council have involved Parliament in the negotiations from an early stage .
So what are we doing now ?
For a start , toiling through the mid-term review , as decided on in Berlin under the German Presidency of the Council .
Secondly , setting in motion a further development of Community policies for the post-2006 period , ever bearing in mind that eastward enlargement and the world trade round are running in parallel . Let me say loud and clear that over-ambition will endanger the timetable for enlargement .
I would also like to make it clear that I consider the current Commission proposals , for example in the area of agricultural policy , to represent a responsible approach to budgeting .
We certainly also have to discuss , in the area of structural policies , how we can develop plans for adapting the Structural Funds .
I will go on record as agreeing with Mr Walter .
We will also have to discuss this if we have special provisions for the Cohesion Fund .
Would these apply up to 2006 or would they be laid down for a further period from 2006 onwards ?
The devil is trying to hide in the detail here .
Let us not deceive ourselves ; we will also have to ask whether the deficient implementation of pre-accession aid to date is the litmus test for the candidates ' ability to transpose regulations and their suitability for accession , or whether we have ourselves complicated matters to such an extent that nobody can cope any more .
So I hope that the Convention comes up with the conclusive results that we will need on the institutions ' capacity for action , and on the concentration of competences . Let me add that I personally have doubts as to whether what we are currently discussing in relation to capacity for action and the rules governing languages will really be the final solution .
Above all , there is one thing we must pay attention to : We need solutions that are capable of gaining a majority , that will not only be adopted in parliamentary bodies , but will meet with public approval in both the old and the new Member States of the EU .
With that in mind , let us go to work together !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it has been said that this is an inevitable , unstoppable process , but it is a process that must be kept under control .
We must recognise the efforts of these countries but , at the same time , we must also ask ourselves some questions about the more sensitive aspects of this process .
As has already been said , Bulgaria and Romania are countries that have been left behind and form part of an area - the Balkans - that in itself is a critical area historically , let us remember , an area that sparked off disasters during the last century .
What do you intend to do , Mr Commissioner and Mr President-in-Office of the Council , to speed up the process of integration and approximation of the Balkans to the Union ?
The second point I should like to make concerns relations with the Mediterranean countries .
There is a kind of double vision in this House : on the one hand , two hours ago we all applauded the initiative that our President proposed , seeking to adopt a different , more participatory approach to the Palestine peace process ; on the other hand , after Barcelona , our Mediterranean policies are practically dead .
How can one think of holding an effective dialogue if one is unable to understand that it is also possible to further peace through practical forms of aid ?
Then there is the matter of public opinion .
I was pleased to hear that we will be getting a coherent package as regards agricultural policies and Structural Fund policies .
Public opinion is distrustful of the enlargement process , especially inside the countries of the Union .
Of course , some people are more sensitive and others less , but all in all there is distrust in all the Member States .
I believe that , from this perspective , answers need to be forthcoming .
A final point : languages .
Here I support everything Mr Böge has just said .
I believe we must retain the principle of multilingualism .
With continued enlargement , on the one hand we are taking up an historical challenge that we do not , of course , want to miss , but on the other we must also do what we can so that the identity of our cultures and our peoples is not lost .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin my prepared statement by thanking Commissioner Verheugen for discussing the subject of the Bene ? Decrees and thereby , as Parliament has already done in many resolutions , clearly pointing out that this issue very definitely possesses a European dimension .
Commissioner , you were right to observe that problems of a legal , but also political and moral , nature have arisen and are certainly of relevance to the process of integration .
I will now also expressly welcome and support the encouragement you have given in this House to the Czech Government and the Czech public to do everything possible to put a stop to such discriminatory effects in the legal field as may still result from these Bene ? Decrees , and thus remove potential obstacles on the path to enlargement .
I greatly regret the remarks by some Members to the effect that enlargement is inevitable .
As if we were now to have to do everything in our power to move this process further forward , because it would otherwise be unstoppable !
This process is not only unstoppable , it is also explicitly desirable , and to be desired , moreover , with the utmost ardour !
In particular , enlargement incorporating the countries in Central and Eastern Europe , and those to the North , overcomes the historic burdens laid upon us by Yalta , at last overcoming the division of Europe , and benefiting us all , especially countries such as Austria and Germany , who will profit directly from the growing markets at their front door !
Mr President , the 45-year history of the European Parliament confirms the Communist Party of Greece 's assertion that it was created in order to serve the interests of big business , not of the people , as many would have us believe .
The workers of the European Union have seen their rights eroded or even abolished , especially over the last ten years .
This applies to industrial relations , insurance rights , democratic liberties and wages .
Unemployment , poverty and suppression are spreading .
Small and medium-sized enterprises in town and country are being wiped out .
Measures are being taken which bolster the increasingly autocratic powers of major economic interests .
A Union is being constructed which , instead of opposing the barbarity of the United States , goes along or competes with it on a dangerous and absurd path , which may lead to the destruction of our very planet .
The people of the candidate countries therefore have nothing positive to expect as regards their vital interests .
Pre-accession relations have given them a bitter foretaste of what happens when companies are restructured , nationalised industries are snapped up by foreign capital , their important social rights are abolished and support is given to their local exploiters , often the Mafia , who are proving to be privileged partners of the European Union .
That is why the Communist Party of Greece , in a spirit of solidarity with the people of the candidate countries , urges them to oppose this process .
As far as Palestine is concerned , I should like to call on the European Union , here and now , to cut all funding to the regime of criminals in power in Israel and any supply lines to that regime , in order to put an end to the crime being perpetrated against the Palestinian people .
Mr President , I would like to thank all the honourable Members who took the floor .
I listened carefully to what they had to say .
Unfortunately , time does not allow me to reply to each of them individually , as I would have liked .
I believe this has been a very useful exchange of views and ideas for all concerned . It demonstrates the cooperation that exists between the various European institutions , notable the Council , Parliament and the Commission .
I would however like to make some observations and I hope they will be relevant .
As I see it , there is clear and overwhelming support for this great historical enterprise of enlargement .
We have all but achieved a common front on this issue . In addition , there is universal awareness of the need to abide by the timetable we set ourselves to ensure that many of today 's candidate countries can participate in the next elections to the European Parliament in 2004 and be represented in this House .
The historical dimension of enlargement was mentioned , and rightly so .
Enlargement is a political venture but also one with a historical dimension . It aims to reunite Europe for good , following the divisions that arose during the cold war and the balance of terror , when Europe was split into rival blocs .
Nonetheless , it is true that this enlargement will probably not allow us to claim that we are topping off the building of Europe in a geographical sense .
At present we are all thinking in terms of a maximum of 10 countries , and of concluding negotiations by the end of 2002 . I shall come back to the question of the number of countries in a moment .
We are working hard , but many difficulties and obstacles remain to be overcome .
Several honourable Members referred earlier to the situation of Bulgaria , Romania , Turkey , the Balkans and Ukraine .
I should like to point out that when strong criticism of the present process of building Europe is voiced , there is a tendency to overlook the fact that the building of Europe and the whole political enterprise of creating the Union are an obvious success story . The Union began with six Member States .
There are now 15 .
Very soon we could be 25 , then 27 , 28 and perhaps many more in the future .
Nobody wants to be associated with failure or to join a poorly-run club . On the other hand , people generally queue up to join a well-run venture with proven success .
Take the Balkans as an example .
I shall refer to both the Eastern and the Western Balkans including Bulgaria and Romania .
I said earlier , and Commissioner Verheugen endorsed my comments , that it is essential to send out very clear , strong and positive messages to Bulgaria and Romania . The aim is to open all the chapters with these countries in the coming few months , and to speed up negotiations for their future accession as much as possible .
The European dimension has special significance for these countries , as indeed it did for Spain in the past .
Where freedom , the consolidation of democracy , social justice , modernisation and economic progress were concerned , Europe always was a lodestar for Spain .
The same is true for these countries . They have exactly the same right to integrate into the European Union as we had at the time .
In due course the same will also be true of the Western Balkans .
What are we offering these countries ?
We are spreading a prospect out before them and offering them the opportunity of integration .
We are enabling them to pursue the consolidation of democracy and internal reforms , because there is no feasible alternative to integration into Europe .
This will be the best way of ensuring that conflicts do not arise . It should prevent a repeat of the war situation these countries experienced in the recent past .
It is for this reason that the European Union is setting up Association and Stability Agreements with several of these countries within the framework of the Stability Pact .
The time-scales vary from country to country , but it is our declared aim to ensure that all of them will in due course be in a position to apply for membership of the European Union .
This therefore is the venture we are currently engaged in . You will appreciate the importance of getting things right at this stage .
We must be serious , rigorous , disciplined and realistic .
I listened carefully to the honourable Members who spoke of reconsidering the financial perspective and of how enlargement would not be achieved for free . It certainly will not .
On the contrary , it will be provided for within the framework of the financial perspective we agreed . That is something quite different .
Other speakers referred to the need to begin considering the reform of the common policies . They are quite right , of course .
I would like to make the following quite clear , however . At this juncture , anyone who maintains that the debates on the financial perspective and on the reform of common policies should be interwoven with the accession negotiations has to realise that doing so would make it impossible to keep to the timetable for enlargement .
Anyone in favour of enlargement and meeting the deadlines set must be aware that either we continue in the present vein or we shall fail .
I believe there is full agreement between the Council and the Commission . I trust the same is true of Parliament .
A broad consensus of this nature is essential if we are to meet the citizens ' expectations .
I should like to make one last observation which I think is also relevant .
The European Union has demonstrated a clear political will concerning enlargement .
That political will does not , however , imply that a political decision has been taken to close negotiations with ten candidates before the end of the year .
Political will is essential but it is not sufficient .
The pace of negotiations must be maintained , and the candidate countries need to demonstrate their administrative and judicial capability . In essence , they must demonstrate their political capability regarding the transposition of the acquis into their legislation .
Further , they must satisfy us that they are capable of complying with it . Things will go badly both for them and for the present Members if that is not the case .
We are all committed to ensuring success .
I trust that the same kind of clear political will shown by the European Union will also be shown by the candidate countries , and that they will therefore take the action required . Then , when the time is right , it will indeed be possible for us to take the political decision to close negotiations with ten countries in the first instance and with more in the future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to thank Parliament most warmly for the wide-ranging support it has given the Presidency of the Council and the Commission in the enlargement process , and I consider it highly significant that this common purpose and cooperation are continuing .
A couple of very short observations : Firstly , it seems to me that I again need to point out very clearly that we may not impose new conditions for enlargement , no matter how desirable it may be to push forward certain reforms within the policies and also within the structure of the European Union .
Much as I understand the use people make of enlargement as an argument in favour of pressing on with these , I must equally warn against any form of composite measure , as that could be taken in the candidate countries only as a new and additional obstacle and would serve to confirm the candidates ' existing suspicion that , whenever they approach the objective , we move it even further away .
That is not on !
Nor do I at all understand what is the problem with the Convention , for example .
Why is it that the present candidate countries should not , as new members , already play a full part with equal rights ?
Those who think they would be incapable of doing so are deluding themselves .
Let me deliver a forceful warning against the conception that we even now have to put our silverware and valuable porcelain in a place of safety , before the grubby kids arrive from the East .
Anyone who approaches enlargement in this way does not grasp the whole historic dimension of this problem .
My second observation relates to finances .
I am quite happy to be admonished by representatives of the budgetary authority , that the Commission should adhere to what the budgetary authority has prescribed .
If you want us to spend more money , then by all means come to an agreement with the Council that more money should be made available .
Until that happens , the Council will adhere strictly to the framework that we have received from the Council and from Parliament .
I can tell you that that is quite sufficient .
It would be quite absurd to make substantially more money available because of our being at the limit of what we can justify as allowable expenditure in the candidate countries .
It is quite simply untrue that they are getting a worse deal than the present members .
Measured by reference to their gross national product , those who will be our new members get substantially more aid from the European Budget than do the present cohesion Member States .
It is , then , accurate to depict us as applying double standards only in as much as the candidate countries enjoy preferential treatment to some degree .
They are not , though , neglected in any way .
In response to Mr Oostlander 's last remark , let me say that there are dozens of studies of this sort , some of which also come from the Netherlands , to the effect that the costs of enlargement would in fact be far higher than we have calculated .
All these studies , including the Dutch ones , have one thing in common ; they are based on political assumptions that are not going to become reality .
They assume results from negotiations that do not exist , nor will they exist in the future .
If , of course , we were to negotiate a requirement for the whole environmental acquis to be completed in the new Member States by 2005 , that would cost EUR 130 billion , and that EUR 130 billion would have to be raised .
We do not , though , negotiate like that .
We negotiate in such a way that we remain within the bounds of what is financially possible , and we do not enter into financial commitments for the post-2006 period .
I surely do not have to explain to Parliament that it is not even possible to negotiate in such a way as to produce financial commitments that Parliament and the budgetary authority have not covered .
You would never adopt an enlargement treaty of that sort if it involved financial risks .
Enlargement , though , puts us at no financial risk .
I have my own hunches as to why , certain discussions have been launched in certain Member States and using certain documents .
My position as a member of the European Commission does not , unfortunately , permit me to express my thoughts on the subject .
I might perhaps be permitted to observe that the European Union 's budget permits neither tax increases nor indebtedness , so that we really cannot budget more than the Member States make available to us as contributions , and perhaps every Minister of Finance in the European Union ought to be aware that that is the case .
The discussion on the Bene ? Decrees has encouraged me to continue with the Commission 's cautious way of dealing with this issue .
I would ask for all those who wish to participate in this discussion to do so with the utmost sensitivity and care .
Not all the strident voices of recent times have helped us to get closer to the objective .
I agree with all those who say that , beyond the subjects of the negotiations themselves , there are issues and problems that should be resolved before we come to any decisions , as we do not want to have to drag burdens from the past behind us on our way into our common European future .
The debate is closed .
The next item is the debate on the statement by the Council and the Commission on Transatlantic relations , including steel import tariffs .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I should like to thank this House for giving me the opportunity to speak , on behalf of the Council , on the current state of transatlantic relations .
I believe this reveals Parliament 's sensitivity with regard to the European Union 's foreign policy and , moreover , it is a timely initiative in view of the events of recent months and the forthcoming Summit meeting between the European Union and the United States , the first since 11 September .
The European Union and the United States are partners with a shared history that cannot be denied .
I use this term not only to describe the longevity of this relationship but also as a graphic illustration of its importance and unique nature .
The relationship between the European Union and the United States is based on strong and long-standing ties between our respective peoples and governments , and rests on fundamental values such as the respect for human rights , personal freedom , the rule of law , a democratic form of government and the system of free trade .
Experience has shown on many occasions that , when the European Union and the United States act together in harmony , we can make a decisive contribution to generating a positive dynamic for world change , fostering the establishment of democratic regimes , seeking greater trade and investment opportunities , reducing poverty in less favoured societies , or overseeing environmental protection on a global scale .
Going beyond our political and economic ties , the events of 11 September are a constant reminder of the value that both Europeans and Americans attach to the principles of freedom , democracy and respect for people 's rights that shape our relations .
By way of an introduction , I should like to remind you of the terms in which the Spanish Presidency expressed its priorities for its current six-month term with regard to transatlantic relations - and I shall quote directly here : ' 11 September has strengthened even further , if that is possible , the indissoluble nature of Europe 's intended integration with the transatlantic relationship .
Now is the time to remind the younger generations of Europeans that this prosperous and peaceful Europe that we know exists partly because of the generosity and solidarity of many Americans when , not so long ago , Europe was no more than a battlefield and , after that , a continent in ruins .
Now it is our turn to show such solidarity .
During its Presidency of the Union , Spain will push this vigorously ' .
Less than twenty-four hours after the odious attacks on New York and Washington on 11 September , the European Union expressed its total solidarity with the United States Government and the American people .
On 20 September , the European Union and the United States committed themselves to work together within a broad coalition to combat the scourge of terrorism .
We thus made a joint commitment to lead a hitherto unheard of cooperative effort on a global scale , aimed at eliminating the terrorist threat and its leaders , networks and organisations .
This determination reflects the strength of our transatlantic relationship , our shared values and our determination to stand shoulder to shoulder against the challenges posed by fanaticism and intolerance .
Together with the United States , we are committed to the security and well-being of our citizens , and we shall spare no effort to protect our societies from the terrorist threat .
We shall keep a special watch to ensure that the freedom of the individual and the rule of law are always scrupulously upheld .
The Presidency accords the highest priority to furthering this cooperation between the European Union and the United States in the fight against terrorism , particularly with a view to European Union-United States Ministerial meeting that will take place in Madrid on 10 April and the EU-US Summit to be held in Washington on 2 May .
We can be proud of the efforts that we and our American counterparts have made in this regard over the last few months , but satisfaction with what has been achieved must not distract us from the long road that still lies ahead .
Since the Council of Ministers for Justice and Home Affairs which met in Santiago de Compostela on 14 February , there has been a consensus for the Presidency to ask the Council for a negotiation mandate to conclude an extradition agreement and a mutual legal assistance agreement on criminal matters , based on Articles 24 and 38 of the Treaty on European Union .
The Presidency wants to present the Council with a draft mandate so that it can announce its decision on 25 April .
We are aware that this mandate must be clear and flexible and must represent added value compared with the current situation , and it must of course comply with the limits laid down by the constitutions of the Member States and the procedural guarantees inherent in European values .
International affairs are another fundamental element in the exchange of information and points of view that form part of transatlantic dialogue .
This dialogue on CFSP matters seeks greater coordination of our positions on matters of great importance - including security and defence policy - and viable solutions to international conflicts .
For example , amongst other issues , we have been and still are analysing the conflicts in Afghanistan and the Middle East every day , at various levels .
Over the last fifty years , the European Union and the United States have helped create and develop the rules and institutions responsible for promoting peace and prosperity within many different international forums , including the United Nations , NATO , the International Monetary Fund , the World Bank and the World Trade Organisation .
For two generations the Europe-America link has ensured peace in our continent , and now , when Europe is closer than ever to achieving its dream of reunification , we bear the responsibility of maintaining and expanding our understanding with the United States , renewing our commitment to stand shoulder to shoulder against the demands and challenges of the present day .
Mr President , the European Union and the United States also share one of the most complex , rich and varied economic and trading relationships in the world .
Trade between us is worth almost EUR 1 200 million every day , representing roughly 37 % of world trade in commodities and 45 % of trade in services .
Direct investment by the European Union in the United States stands at approximately EUR 675 000 million .
Three million jobs there depend directly on this investment , and one out of every twelve American workers is paid by a European company .
I must emphatically point out that the vast majority of these trade and investment links are carried out openly and without any obstacles , and when this does not happen we prefer consultation and dialogue as the most suitable means of resolving our differences , in a constant and sometimes far from simple effort to find practical , swift and balanced solutions .
The decision adopted at the WTO meeting of Ministers , held in Doha last November , to initiate negotiations for a new multilateral trade round is a clear example of the beneficial effects of European-American cooperation , which can overcome our divergent aims and interests for the sake of a greater common goal .
At the same time , however , we must not be surprised if the complexity of our economic and trade relations causes disagreements and disputes , which , despite their relatively minor impact when compared with the total volume of trade , can sometimes take on considerable importance .
Such disputes at times play a leading role and strongly influence the debates led by leading politicians and also the media .
In contrast , few people remember our ability to reach compromises and solutions to past controversies .
The banana conflict is one example I can mention , which remained with us for a long time until it was finally resolved quite recently .
One of our objectives , therefore , is to provide a new , positive focus that can enhance and develop bilateral trade .
This positive side of things is all too often overshadowed by the prominence accorded to disputes .
The Presidency underlines the need to use the as yet untapped potential of commercial relations to transcend any process of crisis and confrontation and transform it into a process of cooperation .
I am convinced that , in this way , we shall be able to address other ongoing disputes , such as those of the Foreign Sales Corporations or genetically modified organisms , or the more recent dispute on the trade in steel .
On this point , I must specifically mention the appearance of this new disagreement with the United States , as a consequence of the decision announced on 5 March to impose safeguard measures against imports of certain steel products .
The imposition of tariffs of up to 30 % , depending on the case , reflects a worrying trend in the United States towards unilateral protectionist options that ruin the efforts that the European Union and other producing countries made in Paris under the auspices of the OECD .
It is a very unfortunate precedent at these times , which are so important for the fate of the new multilateral trade round .
All the Member States and the Council support the measures adopted by the Commission , and in particular the policy being implemented by Commissioner Lamy .
I assure you that the Presidency takes this matter very seriously and , with regard to future developments , it will remain in close contact with the Commission and the Member States , determined to adopt appropriate measures whenever necessary to safeguard the interests of the Union .
Mr President , it is understandable that Europeans and Americans sometimes have different views on major international issues , but that must not hold back our commitment to try to act together , and I shall give you an example that I think demonstrates this clearly : the Monterrey Conference .
We managed to reach a consensus between the European Union and the United States , which all countries worldwide have also agreed to .
I believe this is a good precedent and an incentive in the run-up to Johannesburg .
This is not the case in the environmental field , however , where the European Union has just taken an important step forwards in ratifying the Kyoto Protocol at the last Council meeting of Ministers for the Environment only a few days ago , whereas the United States , with the adoption of the recent programme announced by President Bush , seems to be moving further away from this goal .
Even in this case , however , when our positions seem so far apart , the Presidency believes in building bridges and , in the next few weeks , we shall be holding a high-level meeting within the working party set up at the Gothenburg transatlantic summit .
Mr President , I will finish here .
The opportunities that each of us has to influence the others ' actions positively and for the benefit of all are by no means negligible , and the European Union , which is ever more European and ever more united , must fully accept its responsibility as the friend and ally of the United States .
The Presidency will therefore do its utmost to ensure that our relations with the United States are fully developed and , together with the Member States and the Commission , it will spare no effort to make the summit planned for 2 May in Washington satisfy both sides ' expectations .
In this context , the contributions to be made today in this sitting of the European Parliament will be of fundamental importance , and I thank you for them in advance .
Mr President , I would like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council and the Commissioner for their comments this morning .
I believe that we have reached one of those critical stages in the development of the transatlantic relationship in its global context .
Firstly , looking at the overall relationship , it is quite clear - as our two speakers have said - that since 11 September 2001 we have seen a significant change in the way in which the Americans view their place in the world .
We see an America under attack - one which we recognised on 12 September in this House , but which perhaps we now fail to recognise six months on .
Secondly , we are in danger of seeing an unravelling of the security side of our relationship , where a political consensus underlying NATO cannot now be taken for granted for out-of-area responsibilities .
We see the military gap widening and perhaps difficulties also in expanding NATO operations .
Thirdly , the strong impetus that came with the 1995 New Transatlantic Agenda now appears to be under threat because of a lack of political vision and , perhaps , frustration at the lack of results among many of the parties involved in the dialogues .
On the specific case of steel , I can only welcome the comments made by the Commissioner in deploring the US decision .
The Commission should take action to seek compensation , and look for legal means of taking retaliatory action .
I would also add that it would be very unhelpful , as Mr Aldonas at the Department of Commerce in the United States has suggested , for the US to link this steel dispute to the wider issue of problems in the global economy .
That surely is not the way to go .
Fourthly , I come to what we might be able to do in the present context .
It is indeed tempting to think of taking retaliatory action through tariffs .
However , as The Times stated on 7 March , in Bush 's folly , tariff walls would amount to an own goal .
It would simply be a futile effort by the Americans to preserve unviable jobs in steel .
Surely , therefore , we should be looking for a broader transatlantic partnership in which to define Europe 's role and America 's role and build on our common interests together .
As regards NATO , that means ensuring that we can move NATO on to more global responsibilities .
Furthermore , your meeting on 2 May at the EU / US Summit to update the New Transatlantic Agenda to meet new challenges must ensure that the political communities are properly involved .
In conclusion , it is up to you to provide leadership .
We must be tough and take the necessary action to protect our interests in this steel dispute , but also think of the broader context and form a vision of how the transatlantic partnership should look in the 21st century .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , with regard to the framework for our transatlantic relations , I believe we have to start with the current framework , which is the Madrid Declaration of December 1995 , issued under the Spanish Presidency .
I do not recall that the President-in-Office of the Council mentioned this declaration , which defines our framework ; I do not know whether that is because a Socialist government adopted it , but in any case , as it was the Presidency of the Union , I recommend that he should take it into account this May , and Mr Elles will not deny this since we worked together at the time for the Spanish Government to push this very important declaration through the Council .
I really must say to the President-in-Office of the Council that I believe this declaration should be brought up to date , for various reasons .
First , because of the situation since 11 September : we have not merely shown our solidarity with the United States , but we have also adopted measures .
In this fight , however , as in all others - I must be frank about this - we are allies , but we have to work together on an equal footing , and our American allies - as some ministers in the Union have said - must understand that we are equals and subservience has no place here , which means that we must not systematically bow to unilateral decisions .
This applies to many things .
We have to act jointly in the Middle East , Afghanistan and the Balkans ; it is to be hoped that the United States will reconsider their position on Kyoto and especially with regard to certain worrying announcements by the Bush Administration .
With regard to the specific question of the steel issue , which the Commissioner , Mr Lamy , has developed further , we believe that we must adopt a firm stance and we also support taking reprisal measures .
We do not understand why , for example , the United States trade representative , Mr Zoellick , is today developing the worldwide international conspiracy theory to say that the United States is being attacked through steel imports .
The history of the European Union began with the Coal and Steel Community , which was a restructuring process .
I understand that Mr Bush wants to win elections , but what the Americans have to do is restructure their steel industry , which will demand sacrifice , and we should not have to pay for the restructuring of American industry .
We have to make this quite plain and , in addition , there are proposals such as applying a 2 % surcharge so as to be able to restructure the industry .
What does not make sense is that we should have to pay this , when in this Parliament we systematically have to deal with the banana war , hormones and GMOs , and we always have to check the list to see what reprisal measures we can take within the bounds of our own countries .
Our American friends and allies have to understand that we cannot go on working like this , and we therefore call on the Commission to take the strongest line possible to make them see reason .
Mr President , the announcement last week was bad enough .
The comments from some US officials , including Mr Aldonas , that somehow protectionism is warranted to correct wider macroeconomic factors is potentially even worse .
It displays a dangerous and economically illiterate philosophy that needs to be strongly rebuffed .
The question is : how do we rebuff it ?
Firstly , we need to ensure that we consolidate our friendships with those allies with whom we wish to act together against American unilateralism .
And if there is one tactical concern my group has about brandishing safeguard measures against those steel exports that might be diverted from the US to Europe , it is that it might actually alienate countries such as Russia , India and Brazil , with whom we have to act together in the WTO and the OECD to take on this American move .
Therefore , we would ask the Commission and , of course , the Council , as a matter of urgency to try and negotiate bilateral voluntary export restraint agreements with these countries , so as to avoid the diversion from steel going to America to Europe happening in the first place .
The obvious danger if we do not achieve this is that we end up having spats with precisely the people we should be teaming up with against this American behaviour .
The second point is this : let us not be squeamish ; this decision was taken for domestic political reasons .
It will only be reversed or limited if domestic political pressures dictate that should be the case .
In order to do that , we need to brandish big sticks which are felt on the domestic US political scene .
And conveniently enough , if inelegantly , we do have such a big stick , in the form of the measures we can take within the context of the foreign sales cooperation dispute .
Of course , we do not wish to mix these things formally ; but let us not be naive .
The FSC dispute provides us with the best means by which to inflict the domestic pressure which is absolutely necessary in order to get some change in the American attitude and to reassert the international rule of law , rather than the rule of the law of George Bush 's economic jungle .
Mr President , needless to say , the fact that we are debating transatlantic relations today has everything to do with 11 September .
But let there be no mistake : 11 September has accelerated a process that was started long before , namely the forging of a new alliance between the EU and the United States .
Many structural causes play a role in this : the EU 's stronger , enhanced role as an economic superpower , the end of the Cold War and , related to this , a shift in the role for the United States in Europe .
The EU is no longer America 's kid brother who is proud to walk in its shadow . But neither has the EU become , I hope , the adolescent who wishes to follow in the footsteps of its great example .
The EU must carve its own role in a self-assured manner . The EU must not shy away from conflict , and should not be frightened to show that it disagrees with the United States if that is the case .
Above all , the EU should not try to emulate the United States . Allow me to illustrate this with two examples .
The first is the sharp increase in defence budgets by an amount which far outstrips the budgets of France and Great Britain put together .
Does this mean that the European Union should increase its defence budgets accordingly ?
Not in my view , because it is completely futile to try to bridge the difference in the belief that we will be a more credible partner if we do .
It is up to the European Union to consider a credible mix of military means , but , above all , to consider matters which the European Union is good at : conflict prevention , crisis management and nation building . Macedonia and Afghanistan are good examples of this .
May I venture to quote American President Roosevelt who said : ' Let us speak softly , let them carry a big stick ?
But the bearing of arms is also subject to restrictions , and these restrictions are exceeded in the US plans , which have now been leaked , concerning the use of nuclear weapons .
It is unacceptable for the United States not to cut back the role of nuclear weapons , which is what we want , but instead they cast them in a new role in a new strategy , lower the threshold for their use and allow the line between nuclear and non-nuclear weapons to become blurred .
This is a development against which the European Union should not be afraid to protest .
The blurring of the line between nuclear and non-nuclear weapons is a dangerous development , and we all know that the threat of nuclear weapons would only hamper the search for solutions in Iraq or Iran , for example .
It makes no sense whatsoever to use this threat , and we must not be frightened to say so .
What is more , the French and British governments should be urged to clarify once and for all their stance on nuclear weapons .
As far as my group is concerned , the answer is quite simple : nuclear weapons have no role to play in future European security policy .
I should like to quote the Middle East as a final example .
Needless to say , it is preferable to keep a diplomatic offensive together with the Americans . We should do this , but we should not wait for the United States .
The European Union can play its own role not only diplomatically , but mainly economically .
This will give us a unique opportunity to step up the pressure on both sides , and we are also committed to ensuring that our own human rights policy remains credible .
Mr President , the European Union is an economic superpower which is trying to carve a role for itself in the world .
We will succeed in this if we speak with one voice , if we do not shy away from open criticism of other superpowers and , above all , if we do not try to emulate the United States .
The European Union is not a military superpower which can impose its wishes all over the world all by itself , and neither should we want this .
Neither is the EU a naïve Maecenas , who pays up once the United States has done the dirty work .
The United States should obviously be able to keep the peace in its own backyard , also militarily .
Apart from this , we should mainly focus on what we are good at : to talk and talk again , to strike compromises and to pay up eventually .
The EU needs the United States if things get out of hand , but the United States needs the EU to ensure that things do not get too out of hand .
Mr President , I agree with much of the President-in-Office 's statement , in particular about the need for a strategically positive relationship with the USA .
However , I am also particularly grateful to Mr Lagendijk for identifying the key events so clearly .
I do not think that it makes any sense to dub the problems in current relations with the USA as ' cowardice in the face of amity ' .
I believe that it is urgently necessary , indeed I would even say that it is of the utmost urgency , to discuss transatlantic relations in a very open way .
And that is the point , Mr President-in-Office , where there is a difference that has not been mentioned and that you did not touch upon .
It seems that at present we do not have the courage to admit to ourselves that the role of the European Union in international relations is undoubtedly at risk because of this .
We do not have the courage to admit that there are differences between us and the USA .
We do not have the courage to admit that you can hardly say there is a common foreign and security policy at present .
There are also significant developments beyond steel which will have serious consequences .
I am certainly pleased that the business community in Europe has at least aired its differences of opinion and not just expressed unreserved support .
There is the issue of withdrawal from the ABM Treaty and the issue of unilateral declarations involving clear legal violations .
The problem in such cases is that those who have their headphones on hear , whilst those who stand around chatting do not get the message at all .
So the United States has made a unilateral decision concerning the non-proliferation treaty .
They are blocking controls on biological weapons .
The United States is dismantling the control organisation for the chemical weapons treaty .
There has been an announcement about withdrawal from the space weapons treaty .
There have been violations of international humanitarian law , the withdrawal from Kyoto , and the non-ratification of the international protocol on the International Criminal Court .
I do not want to say that this all adds up to a negative picture , but it is nevertheless clear that there are very big differences between the US and Europe here , and I can only agreed with what Mr Lagendijk has said about nuclear weapons .
I am certain that that the plans of the US and probably Russia as well contain even more macabre scenarios , but the point of their becoming public knowledge is evidently to humiliate Russia , which has recently been so zealous in its support for the USA .
I wish to call on the European Union to counter this trend towards genuine multilateralism and the strengthening of the UN , and it should take advantage of its position as a civilian power , a power that practises preventive conflict resolution , and it should actually develop a common foreign policy .
The most important condition for this is that , regardless of everything we have in common , we should ensure that these differences are not allowed to be hidden in a kind of European policy blind spot .
Today marks a critical time in the transatlantic relations which , six months after the direct terrorist attacks on the US , are straining under intense pressure .
This is mainly caused by the further development of the international anti-terrorist coalition .
As with the Islamic terrorist network of Al Qaida , President Bush is issuing serious military warnings to potential terrorist States .
For support of this bold approach , the American Head of State is making an urgent appeal to all coalition members .
It is precisely this appeal which is stirring up very mixed emotions in European quarters .
The standard European reproach of American unilateralism , which dates back to before 11 September , is once again being uttered .
However , this familiar European reproach addressed to Washington is rooted in a fundamental weakness on our side .
Indeed , recent analyses have clearly shown that the military and technological chasm between the transatlantic allies is widening at an alarming pace .
The European NATO Member States carry increasingly less military weight .
There is no doubt that this imbalance within NATO promotes American unilateralism in the area of security .
The scenes of battle in Afghanistan bear witness to this .
Mr President , for Europe to be a force to be reckoned with on the international scene , without jeopardising its own security , it needs to make a credible defence contribution to NATO and to outline a coherent , viable Euro-Atlantic security concept as a matter of urgency , on pain of being ostracised internationally and of being isolated .
However , with regard to the steel conflict that has broken out between the US and the EU , there is no reasonable excuse for this example of uninhibited American protectionism and unilateralism in terms of trade .
Passing on the weakness of its own steel industry to that of other countries by levying a 30 % import tariff for three years only steps up the tension in transatlantic relations .
In addition , this one-sided American government measure jeopardises the new trade round within the WTO .
Above all , the intervention has an adverse effect on the American economy : the protection of 9 000 jobs in the American steel industry translates into a possible loss of no fewer than 75 000 jobs in other economic sectors due to higher steel prices .
Where do we go from here ?
A trade war between the US and the EU would undoubtedly come at the worst conceivable time politically speaking .
Attempts to settle the dispute within WTO are therefore much to be preferred , for example , through a serious European contribution towards relaxing and reinforcing transatlantic relations .
The debate is adjourned .
It will resume at 3 p.m. with a statement by Commissioner Solbes .
Mr President , on a point of order , you may be aware that Parliament 's entire e-mail system has practically crashed .
This is a direct result of the unforgivable spamming of our system by a certain Dr Rath of Germany , who appears to have considerable interests in the matter of vitamin therapy on which we are voting this morning .
Several times in this House I have protested about this totally unacceptable invasion of our system , which has no place here and is causing serious problems for Members .
I would like to reassure Members that we are doing our very best to take action in this regard .
I would also repeat that all Members are entitled to request a filter for their system if they are being annoyed by these e-mails , which will then be removed .
However , the ubiquitous Dr Rath - wherever he is , and I suspect he is in this House - has carefully changed the message regularly as it comes through , making it very difficult for our services to block these e-mails .
We would have blocked them if we could have done so .
However , each individual Member can request a filter on his or her machine to prevent these completely counter-productive e-mails from coming in .
Mr President , I should like to make a correction to what Mrs Banotti has just said because we will be dealing with spamming and unsolicited commercial e-mails at a later plenary .
What we are being targeted with is not spam .
Spam is untargeted . We are quite clearly being targeted in this particular case .
With relation to this whole spamming issue , everybody in Parliament is extremely frustrated with the campaign that is taking place .
But I have spoken with organisations in the UK and Ireland this morning who are clearly as frustrated as we are .
I may be paranoid , but I wonder whether industry is behind this attempt to get a reaction from Members of Parliament .
Clearly , though , the organisations I am working with have tried desperately hard to stop this campaign of spamming our e-mail systems .
We will leave it in the hands of the Quaestors to see what further action should be taken .
Mr President , the Commission 's position on these amendments is as follows . The Commission can accept all the compromise amendments to the common position put forward during the second reading , namely Amendments Nos 1 , 2 and 3 .
On the other hand , the Commission cannot accept the other amendments that diverge from the common position , which was largely supported .
It is my pleasure to inform the House that there is a delegation from the Standing Committee on Agriculture and Forestry of the Canadian Senate in the Official Visitors ' Gallery .
They are led by Senator Leonard Gustaffson .
They have been having agricultural discussions in Brussels and in Strasbourg .
We welcome them here .
We value our very close links with our Canadian partners .
We now continue with the vote .
Report ( A5-0046 / 2002 ) by Cecilia Malmström , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the European Commission 's legislative and work programme ( amendment of Rule 57 of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure ) ( 2001 / 2110 ( REG ) )
Before the vote :
. ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have now agreed to six amendments to the Rules of Procedure by the necessary majority ; we now have to vote on a proposal for a decision , the first paragraph of which states that these amendments to the Rules of Procedure are to be adopted .
This amounts to a kind of final vote , which as I see it is unnecessary in accordance with Rule 180 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
I would accordingly ask you to refrain from voting on paragraph 1 .
This will also enable us to avoid another problem : paragraph 1 would require 314 votes for it to be adopted , whereas paragraph 2 would only need a simple majority .
Mr Corbett , I understand you know something about the Rules .
Mr President , I think Mr Wuermeling is correct .
The custom and practice is that we do vote on the draft decision but I agree with both Mr Wuermeling and Mr Corbett that they have a point .
I would ask the Rules Committee itself to examine this matter .
Just one correction - because this is now a draft decision it does not require a qualified majority .
It is now a simple majority we are going to vote with .
I refer to the vote on the amendment by Mr Elles .
It was not carried because it needed a qualified majority .
Mr President , as far as this report is concerned , the Commission can accept in full Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 14 , 17 , 18 , 20 and 22 .
We feel that these amendments actually improve the quality and clarity of the text .
We can accept in part Amendments Nos 4 , 15 , 16 and 19 and we reject Amendments Nos 3 , 5 , 13 and 21 as well as 23 and 25 .
Mr President , this is a procedural motion .
Yesterday , when we debated this issue , I asked the President whether we might hold the debate in another way and perhaps obtain a more lively debate by my talking for four minutes and subsequently rounding off the debate with a further minute of my speaking time .
The President was very obliging and said that we were perfectly entitled to do that , and the whole matter passed off splendidly .
My question to you , Mr President , is as to whether you will instruct the Sittings Directorate that this is in actual fact a procedure that can be used here in Parliament and that it is supported by the College of Presidents with a view to bringing about a more lively debate .
When I asked the Sittings Directorate whether this could be done , they in fact said that the debate could not be conducted in this way .
I would therefore ask you to instruct the Sittings Directorate that this is a method of proceeding that we use here in Parliament .
It gives rise to livelier debates , and there is nothing in the Rules of Procedure to prevent this approach from being used .
Mr President , I rise on a point of order as the chairman of the committee which is bringing this report to Parliament , and particularly on behalf of the rapporteur .
Members of this Parliament will be aware of the very high degree of public interest in this issue and of the lobbying to which we have all been subjected .
I am not against that lobbying - a lively parliament should welcome lobbying from all sides .
But the situation regarding this particular directive is unusual and serious .
Firstly , the rapporteur , Mrs Müller , who has done her job very gallantly , has been subjected to unacceptable harassment and threats .
Lies have been disseminated as to her motivation .
Secondly , the people in question , led by Dr Rath from Germany , have practised deception on Parliament .
They gained entry as a news team to the committee meeting when her report was adopted , and used the material to make a video that caricatures the views of the Committee on the Environment and its rapporteur .
Mr President , I ask you to consider what can be done about this .
I would like to ask the Presidency to find a means of dealing with such excessive , fraudulent and oppressive approaches .
( Loud applause )
It is true that in this instance they have done more harm than good , as Mrs McKenna has said ; and it has to be said that there is a perfectly good case against this directive ; but we need to put in place a procedure , as a parliament , to guard ourselves in the future .
In some national parliaments in this instance the person concerned would certainly be called before the parliament , reprimanded and asked to apologise , and we might consider putting that in place .
( Applause )
But given the fact that there are now electronic means to overwhelm us with lobbying , we need to do something .
I ask the President of Parliament to consider this very urgently .
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Amendments Nos 1 and 10 , which were adopted by a majority of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , relate to a ban on the use of catering waste for feeding and to its disposal and use .
The rapporteur has now tabled Amendment No 25 , which is a compromise amendment .
However , with one exception , these amendments are mutually compatible .
The problem is that they refer to different dates .
The amendments adopted by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy refer to 30 June 2002 .
Mrs Paulsen 's Amendment No 25 says " before the entry into force of this regulation " , and that is what we are voting on now .
I would like to table an oral amendment to the effect that in the two amendments adopted by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy the date should be changed to " before the entry into force of this regulation " .
Yesterday , the Commission said that it would not take on board either Amendments Nos 1 and 10 or Amendment No 25 .
So there will be a clash between us anyway , and that is why it is important for us to vote on all three amendments in this way .
However , even if this oral amendment is defeated by the required majority - and I am saying this now so that I do not have to speak again later on - we can still vote on these amendments , because this date does not tie the Commission 's hands .
It has the right of initiative and can decide anyway .
It is simply a recommendation , and if that does not go through , then I am in favour of us still adopting all three amendments .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it rather complicates matters that these amendments , Amendments Nos 1 and 10 , on the one hand , and Amendment No 25 , on the other , are more or less identical .
The oral amendment to Amendments Nos 1 and 10 is not an editorial change . Instead , it would disturb principles fundamental to the whole report and make it incredibly difficult to achieve a conciliation .
I cannot approve this oral amendment .
I would ask my fellow MEPs to vote in favour of Amendment No 25 , which would open up possibilities for solving both Germany and Great Britain 's special problems with household waste and second-hand household oil .
In other words , I do not approve the oral amendment .
You know the Rules .
If there are 12 Members standing their places against an oral amendment then it cannot be put .
That is the case .
( The President declared the common position approved as amended )
Report ( A5-0077 / 2002 ) by Claude Turmes and Bernhard Rapkay , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directives 96 / 92 / EC and 98 / 30 / EC concerning common rules for the internal market in electricity and natural gas ( COM ( 2001 ) 125 - C5-0184 / 2001 - 2001 / 0077 ( COD ) )
Before the vote on Amendment No. 72 :
Mr President , we have just voted against Amendment 71 .
If one looks at the text of Amendment 72 , it tries to introduce a sentence relating it to Article 17 , paragraph 2 ( a ) .
As this Article has gone now , I propose that we attach this Article 72 to Article 16 , paragraph 2 .
Mr President , I would like to put forward an oral amendment to rectify an unfortunate typing error made initially .
This will insert the word " not " , so that the last phrase reads as follows : " independent from other activities not relating to the transmission system " .
I am sure the rapporteur understands this , but I do apologise to the House for the original typing error .
Mr President , we have of course made some decisions about the electricity part that mean we now have to be careful not to contradict the gas part too much .
That is why I would like to speak at three different stages : first now about the block vote , then later on about Amendment No 162 and then once again on amendments Nos 149 and 184 .
These are not comments on the substance , but rather comments about the adjustments .
I would like at this point to comment on the first block : we have just rejected the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party 's Amendment No 173 in a roll-call vote .
The problem that we have here is that in committee we did not make a decision on this subject as regards electricity , but we did in the case of gas .
The Liberal Group has now tried , in parallel , to do the same thing for electricity as we have already done for gas .
We rejected that .
However , we now have Amendment No 147 , which belongs to this block , and which covers exactly the same substantive point that we rejected in the case of electricity .
We are bringing forward something for gas that we do not want to bring forward in the case of electricity - the progress of market opening , as proposed by the committee .
However , we still want to defer the opening of the gas market somewhat as compared with electricity .
We are now creating an inconsistency around precisely this point .
That means that by analogy we should be opposing Amendment No 147 , but I simply do not know how we do that procedurally speaking , because in the voting list that is included in the block .
That is why you , Mr President , have to decide now whether we should take Amendment No 147 out and vote on it separately ; in that case , by analogy with the vote just taken , it would also have to be rejected .
I hope that was confusing enough for you !
Mr President , this a bit simpler than just now .
It is just about correcting something .
The intention of Amendment No 162 , a joint PSE and PPE-DE amendment , is to bring what we agreed for electricity in line with what we are now agreeing on for gas .
It is word for word what we agreed earlier on for electricity .
But because of the way the voting list works , that means that we first have to vote against the committee 's amendment and then vote for Amendment No 162 .
However , a mistake has crept in along the way .
This is exactly what we agreed for electricity on Article 8 ( 5 ) .
Amendment No 162 now also reads " Article 8 ( 5 ) " .
However , for gas it is not Article 8 ( 5 ) but Article 7a ( 1 ) , and so of course that needs to be inserted there from the Minutes ; this is just a technical adjustment .
Mr President , this is about another adjustment , but this is rather more complicated than the one we had just now .
You do not really need to listen at all , just do as I suggest , that will make things perfectly simple !
( Laughter )
But enough joking .
We have just voted on the relevant part in relation to electricity .
This is found in the committee 's amendment .
The amendment tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party attempts to remove the discrepancies between Article 14 , which relates to the gas sector , and Article 22 . I must say that this is certainly necessary if we are to be rigorous here .
However , if we now only voted on the PPE-DE 's amendment , the key point concerning the electricity sector would be lost .
Conversely , if we were to vote as shown here in the voting list , according to which if Amendment No 149 is accepted Amendment No 184 becomes redundant , then we would once again have the problem of a lack of consistency with the other article .
That is the reason for the following proposal , and I have agreed this with the mover , who can confirm this . We should first of all vote on Amendment No 149 from the committee , and the PPE-DE Group will then withdraw its amendment except for the part that eliminates this inconsistency .
This would then be added to Amendment No 149 .
We would then have eliminated the inconsistency between electricity and gas and the internal inconsistency in the case of gas .
( Applause )
Just to confuse my colleagues , it is not exactly correct , because if we vote for the EPP Group 's amendment , then we will have a different wording on Article 22 which is the Article on the electricity and gas regulator .
I will leave it to the wisdom of the Assembly , but personally , I will vote against this in order to be consistent with Article 22 .
If we do not solve it today , we will solve it at second reading .
Mr President , two minor drafting errors have crept in here .
The first error is in Amendment No 48 .
It should say " the competent authorities " , in the plural ; there was not any disagreement between the Council and Parliament about this , it was just an error in the wording of the amendment .
Similarly , we made a small error in Amendment No 52 , in which two words have been omitted from the written version .
However , in the case of Amendment No 52 in particular , this goes a long way towards meeting the wishes of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
I would therefore ask you to approve the two oral amendments and to vote accordingly .
Mr President , there is a problem in the Dutch version , and I understand that this also occurs in various other language versions .
It concerns the word ' identity ' , which is wrong , and should be ' identification ' .
We do not want religious or political symbols to appear in passports and on identity cards .
That is the issue .
Mr President , we should like to table a compromise amendment .
We want to know whether the GUE / NGL Group would accept the addition of the words ' including those inspired by fundamentalism ? at the end of their Amendment No 29 , so that the amendment would read thus : ' Urges the Commission and Council , when applying penalties based on the human rights clauses in association and other agreements , to take account of violations of women 's rights , including those inspired by fundamentalism . ?
This is a compromise amendment that would remain as an addition .
Furthermore , Mr President , may I say that , if linguistic issues arise , I should like the Spanish version to be taken as authentic .
Mr President , since work is running late , I shall forgo all the oral explanations of vote I was going to deliver today .
That is very kind of you .
You have been listening to your mother again .
Mr President , the Council common position on the liberalisation of postal services guarantees that there will be a controlled opening of the market in these services in Europe .
We need to adhere to the planned target dates and weight limits , as they will make it possible to liberalise the postal sector , with all the advantages to be gained from fair competition , in a gradual and organised way .
As always , if areas of public services are to be liberalised , the opening process needs to be carefully controlled and implemented with regard to security of supply and social issues .
The compromise worked out in committee concerning the production of regular reports on the application of the directive as a source of information for future development is therefore to be welcomed .
Nevertheless , the economic , social and territorial consequences of the liberalisation process need to be taken into account when making policy .
It is , however , questionable whether it really is right for the directive to make recommendations to the competent social partners , as has been suggested , for example , in one amendment .
Mr President , my colleagues and I think that of all the sectors forced to endure the agonies of liberalisation , the postal sector is both the most important and the most ill-treated .
First the Commission and then the Council of Ministers showed that they are either unaware of or systematically underestimate the fact that alongside and in addition to the service which they provide to the public , the postal services play a significant social role in all of the Member States and in all of the regions of the Union .
On the pretext of liberalising the service , we are depriving the public - and first and foremost its most disadvantaged members - of social support which is nevertheless essential .
Parliament had , moreover , rejected the initial proposals put to it .
Those which have been put to the vote today contain improvements , but they do not remove the threat to society ; quite the opposite , it is becoming increasingly clear that no provision has been made for funding the universal service or for compensating for the inequalities caused by nature .
To make matters worse , the massive job losses which will be the direct result of the measures being recommended will compound the violence which is already doing serious damage to European society .
Under these circumstances my colleagues and I supported all of the constructive amendments , wherever they came from , and will remain more vigilant than ever .
- ( FR ) The history of European directives on opening the market in postal services to competition is a good illustration of the Commission 's methods : from force to stealth , it makes skilful use of the weapons bestowed on it by the Treaty , in particular the monopoly on the right of initiative , to impose its theories and gradually see off its opponents , including in this case the European Parliament , which here had tended to advocate moderation .

It is all the more regrettable , as is so often the case , that the Commission 's position is , in essence , perfectly unilateral and open to dispute .
It has not furnished the proof that opening up postal distribution to full competition would be profitable overall in a country like France .
And yet this is the objective towards which it is leading us de facto .
And by what right ?
Just as it would appear justifiable that the Commission should wish to concern itself with cross-border mail distribution , so it seems to us that internal distribution should be the responsibility of each State .
Such distinctions do not exist , however , in the eyes of the Commission .
Commissioner Bolkestein has just explained to this House that we need to " move forward towards the completion of the internal market for postal services " .
Does not this internal market exist today ?
Is it not possible to send a letter from France to Denmark or the United Kingdom easily and inexpensively ?
All of this is laughable .
The internal market already exists and Commissioner Bolkestein is only betraying the fact that , for the Commission , the real objective is quite different : it is unification , of which we have no need whatsoever .
This issue raises another general question : the interface between the Commission 's competence in matters of competition ( where it now enjoys inordinate powers ) and the Member States ' competence to organise national public services .
We think that , where there is any uncertainty , it is the State that should have the last word , provided of course that it has the clear support of the public .
We must not allow the Commission to develop and impose a megalomaniac vision of its competences in the field of competition .
That is why the Convention which is going to meet to discuss the future of Europe should add this important issue to its agenda .
We voted in favour of the GUE 's amendment because it rejects the whole of the Council 's common position on opening the market in postal services to competition .
We did not do this solely to show our disapproval of the attitude shown by the Council in refusing to take into account the European Parliament 's flimsy amendments .
Even if it had been amended or toned down as proposed by Parliament , the scheme would have been unacceptable .
We reject the text as a whole because we are completely opposed to any privatisation of postal services and to any notion of these services being for profit .
In rejecting the Council 's text , we reject the overall policy pursued by national governments and the European institutions , a policy to demolish public services , a retrograde policy , harmful both to users of the postal service and to workers in this sector .
We refused to take part in the vote on the amendments because neither the text on the table nor the initiative as a whole are capable of being amended or improved .
It is clear that the progress that has been made these last few years on defining and guaranteeing a universal service in the postal sector , as in other areas , such as energy , constitutes a significant advance which we found it very hard to conceive of or even hope for at the beginning of the nineties .
I would therefore pass a favourable judgment on this progress : we now have not inconsiderable guarantees on the accessibility and quality of the universal service , in terms of a minimum set of products being supplied as part of the universal service and in terms of the universal service being adaptable to new technology .
Nevertheless , there remain some doubts , questions and concerns about striking the right balance between the public service and the market , about maintaining the postal network in our towns and villages and about the tariffs applied .
That is why I signed the amendments seeking to have the Commission submit regular reports to the European Parliament on the development of the internal market .
That is also why I signed the amendment with the Greens setting the weight limit , as at first reading , at 150 grams ( with pricing conditions ) .
I regret the fact that this amendment , which ' guaranteed the guarantees ' given by others , was rejected .
We will now need to be extra vigilant when the texts are implemented .
First and foremost , I should like to thank both the rapporteur in the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , Mr Markus Ferber , and all of the Members of that committee for their proposal .
The compromise amendment tabled by the rapporteur , Mr Ferber , is unsatisfactory , indeed even unacceptable .
This amendment is unsatisfactory because it calls for a unilateral evaluation , which would be made by the Commission alone , and not , as I would have wished , a more controversial one carried out by all of the stakeholders .
It is unacceptable because it rejects Parliament 's initial proposal to limit the next stage of liberalisation to 150g and four times the basic tariff , and yet does not give any guarantee that a high level of social cohesion will be maintained .
It is also unacceptable because this amendment refuses to tackle the problem of the conditions under which access will be available to the networks of the new operators .

Finally , it is unacceptable because this amendment refuses to raise the issue of how the universal service will be funded ; in fact if there is a legitimate request it is surely that of funding : we actually have a right to know how the universal service will be funded , which is to say how the universal service will be able to be guaranteed as such .
Nevertheless , I will vote in favour of the common position for lack of anything better , because if we were to try to amend the text again we would run the risk of seeing the common position fail ; we would therefore be running the risk of not having any directive on postal services and consequently of this sector being fully liberalised within two years .
It was therefore more out of a concern to play safe than a real enthusiasm for the text - which in my opinion is far too cynically liberal - that I voted in favour of the common position .
On 14 December 2000 , when we voted at first reading , we were among a handful of Members who rejected the ' gradual and controlled liberalisation of the postal market ' .
We had tried to convince those who , although they supported the public service , explained to us that the essentials had been safeguarded .
This was without reckoning with the Commission and the governments ' firm desire to liberalise and then to privatise all of our public services .
There is no acceptable compromise on either the timetable or the scope of the liberalisation .
That is why we voted to reject the common position and we will continue to defend the postal service as a public service .
This is the only position which guarantees continued high quality for users and free access for everyone , in particular for those living in rural and working-class areas .
It is the only position which safeguards jobs : by adopting this directive alone , Members are opening the way for 450 000 jobs to be cut in this sector in Europe , including 50 000 in France .
It is now time to mobilise the public , workers and their organisations against the liberal dogma of treating our needs and fundamental rights as commodities and to impose a public postal service which is coordinated at European level and placed in the hands of the people .
The compromise which emerged at the Council meeting of 15 October last on opening up the Member States ' postal services to competition , which was supported amongst others by the socialist government of France , seems to us to be built on a series of ambiguities which may hide considerable dangers .
France 's unique position and the precautionary principle - to safeguard the equality of our fellow citizens - are the reasons why I did not support this shaky compromise , which is tantamount to handing a blank cheque to the Commission to complete the demolition of the French postal service by around 2006 .
The economy should not be the only guiding force behind European policy .
France has chosen to have a quality postal service , which extends across its territory and is accessible to everyone for a standard price .
This is our vision of a public service .
It is our wish to safeguard our system , whatever the cost .
I should like it to be minuted that since all public services fall within the competence of each Member State , each of them will remain free to determine the final shape of their postal service .
. ( NL ) Public utilities , such as postal services , public transport , the supply of energy and drinking water , have , for more than a century , been government monopolies for very good reasons .
These are vital utilities , and competition would interfere with their being continuously available to all at an affordable price .
One would expect that advocates of political and economic unification would strive towards the integration of public postal companies of all the Member States and towards single European stamps .
Instead , the co-existence of different postal companies in the neo-liberal phase is being used to allow these companies to compete with each other and , in addition , to open the door to American or Australian companies , or to new companies which offer poorer services at lower prices under poorer working conditions .
Twenty years from now , after take-overs and bankruptcies , there will be three global concerns in charge , and mandatory protection of staff , the environment and consumers will prove impossible .
At first reading , the majority of the EP rejected a further weight decrease of postage under 150 grams for distribution in a competitive market , as well as more far-reaching forms of liberalisation in due course .
At the risk of the European Commission applying other rules which offer yet less protection to a universal provision of services , after years of protest , the social democrats are now finally resigned to these unsatisfactory plans .
In my opinion , this resignation is unnecessary and harmful , and I will vote for rejection .
At first sight the Malmström report on the presentation of the Commission 's work programme to the European Parliament offers a pleasing aspect : it actually manages - without saying it in so many words - to erode the college 's monopoly on the right of initiative and expose its unilateral and anti-democratic nature to the broad light of day .
On the other hand , however , it omits the essential point : nothing is said about the Council 's right to approve this same work programme .
The Malmström report shows firstly that , as the European Parliament becomes more powerful , the Commission 's monopoly on the right of initiative weighs increasingly heavy on it .
It therefore seeks to impose its own priorities .
This desire had , moreover , caused some tension last December when the Commission presented its programme for 2002 .
Today , the agreement between the Commission and the European Parliament , which has just been adopted , sets out a timetable for the year n-1 for us to work together to draft the work programme for the year n . This is a good initiative .
But it raises a further question : where is the equivalent timetable for a dialogue with the Council ?


Such a timetable would be even more justified , and for three reasons : 1 ) the Council is the European institution with the deepest democratic roots because it is based on national parliaments ; 2 ) theoretically , unlike the European Parliament , it already has real power to push forward and guide the work of the Commission , pursuant to Article 4 of the TEU ; 3 ) finally , the Council has an overview of the work which needs to be done at European level across the three pillars of the Treaty , including the initiatives taken by Member States in the intergovernmental pillar .
In the absence of clarification on this point , the Malmström report appears more than anything to be a man ? uvre by the two old connivers , the Commission and the European Parliament , to throw out the primordial rights of the Council .
Mr President , I apologise for taking up your time .
You are aware , as I am , of a campaign waged by the Daily Record newspaper in Scotland , in the course of which some extremely unfair things were said about our colleague Mrs Thorning-Schmidt , whose valuable report we adopted today - things which I deplore .
It is the case , however , that this valuable report , which protects working people against noise in the workplace could have had unintended side effects on the music industry .
I am very glad that Amendments Nos 23 and 25 were corrected , thereby saving the world of pipe bands amongst others .
I think I am the only piper in this House , so I am particularly pleased about that !
But I do want to say to Mrs Thorning-Schmidt that her Scottish colleagues regret the way she was unfairly pilloried in our press .
We look forward to hearing the pipes at the next Burns ' Supper .
.
( EL ) The initiatives to introduce Community legislation on minimum health and safety standards for risks to which workers are exposed from noise are a step in the right direction given the truly abysmal situation in certain Member States such as Greece , where even the most rudimentary safety mechanisms have still not been introduced .
Having said which , we need :
low limit values before action is taken ( 83 db ) ;
responsibility for action to lie with the employer , not the workers , which is why ear protectors should not be taken into account ;
a reference period of one working day , not one week , to avoid extending the exposure of workers to noise and the damage caused by it .
These positions are contained in the relevant amendments tabled by the European Parliament , which is why I supported them , but are not included in the Council 's common position .
Finally , we need control mechanisms to ensure that these measures are put into practice .
. It has always been the position of my group to work towards a safer working environment for all workers and in the past we have been very supportive of realistic initiatives that achieve this end .
We , in common with many other members had many concerns with the contents of this report , in particular the wide ranging requirements on the employer and the dubious emission levels .
For these reasons we were unable to support many of the amendments put forward and indeed we were disappointed that many amendments were given the support .
In particular , we were very happy that the amendment to exclude the music industry was adopted .
This is most welcome as I and many Members had the impression that this was not the appropriate place to deal with a very specialised sector of industry .
We must also welcome the willingness of the Council to take on board many of the amendments proposed by Parliament in its first reading and we hope that the goodwill shown by the Parliament will be reciprocated in the future .
On a personal level , I did not participate in the vote as I had such grave reservations with regard to the content of the report and many of the amendments and as a former musician I did not think it was right for me to vote .
In general our group is pleased with the outcome and hope that this new realism will continue in this .
. I wholeheartedly support this report by my Socialist colleague to tighten the Council 's common position on exposing workers to noise .
No workers should be exposed to such high levels of noise that they are unable to have a conversation : you only get one pair of ears and to protect them is vital .
Moreover , it is better that measures to combat noise pollution and harm are preventative rather than curative and that the onus is placed on collective rather than individual responsibility in this domain .
So that this directive is as effective as possible , we should work with existing tools and avoid duplication .
Therefore , the European Agency for Health and Safety at Work should be used to its maximum capacity .
This will facilitate and promote the exchange of best practice in terms of acceptable noise levels .
Moreover , it is logical that this directive must be far-reaching to include those employers and employees who are self-employed , since these make up a significant share of today 's workforce .
Mr President , I voted for the Müller report , and I say so with great conviction .
I support Mrs Müller 's cause and hope that the appeals made to the House by Mrs Jackson , as well as her statements , and also the assurances given by Mrs Banotti , the Quaestor , about settling the matter of this unacceptable and unbelievable interference - not only for the sake of our parliamentary work but also , I believe , for democracy as a whole , for the development of parliamentary debate - will achieve their aim as soon as possible , so that interference of this kind - which even included death threats - cannot happen again , in other words so that those responsible can be suitably reported and such things can never be repeated .
I am confident that Mrs Banotti will handle this .
Mr President , I regret the vote that took place today .
It is a major blow to the public 's right to choose alternative forms of medicine , the right to try and avoid relying on pharmaceutical industries and their products .
Last night Commissioner Byrne rejected the idea that the pharmaceutical industry had anything to do with this , but I wonder why they are so interested in getting this through if that is not the case ?
He clearly tried to give the impression that those opposing this were just spokespeople for the industries that produce food supplements .
That is not the case .
We are clearly in favour of people 's right to choose .
That right has been taken away from them today .
Some Members of this House took a ridiculous approach in saying I should be recommending that people eat more oranges and vegetables .
Take the example of pregnant women .
They would have to eat a lot of broccoli to get the amount of folic acid they actually need , so such an argument is ridiculous .
What has happened here today has played right into the hands of the pharmaceutical industry , which will now have more customers because more people are going to fall ill .
It is also an assault on individual Member States ' policies .
If the Member States do not have a lenient policy in their countries they should change it and not force the rest of us to drag our standards down to theirs .
Mr President , I supported the amendments to the Müller report , though every fibre of my being wanted to deliver a body blow to Dr Rath - spelled r-a-t ? - and his minions , who have placed this Parliament under siege not just for the past few months , but for a year .
I would also join with Ms McKenna in saying that vitamins - which I personally , as a nurse , do not regard as a food supplement - are on free sale in our country and that I have never yet heard of anybody overdosing on vitamin C or any other vitamin .
For that reason - regretfully , because I would have done anything to defeat Dr Rath 's purpose - I voted for the amendments which , unfortunately , were not passed .
I agree with Ms McKenna that so far the free sale of these products - which , I repeat , I do not regard as food supplements - has not caused any problem , and I see no reason to interfere with that sale .
Mr President , may I just say that the whole discussion on this directive shows that there is an urgent need to make laws and rules clearer .
There is a huge misunderstanding about how this is to be interpreted , when Article 4 makes reference to annexes and other things .
I urge us all to support better regulation .
Mr President , the European Parliament has decided against the right of European citizens to be able unrestrictedly to enjoy natural medicines , which are completely free from side effects .
People have tried to make us Members of Parliament forget a simple truth , which is that nobody in human memory has ever died from taking vitamins , whereas the same can certainly not be said of the products of the multinational drug companies ' sophisticated laboratories , as shown by the Lipobay case .
There are tens of thousands of cancer patients who are treating themselves effectively with vitamin therapy associated with natural substances such as the amino-acids lysine and proline .
In upholding the demands of a powerful lobby of the multinational drug companies , this directive therefore goes against a substantive right and the widespread interest of European consumers .
It is not for nothing that a board member of the second largest multinational drug company , Mr Bolkestein , sits in the European Commission .
Nobody mentions that he is certainly not unfamiliar with this directive , which , in one fell swoop , kills off the healthy small and medium-sized dietary supplement enterprises and the freedom of four hundred million Europeans to choose their treatment .
Many people in Europe take vitamins and mineral supplements .
It is therefore appropriate , as part of European consumer policy , to avoid any abuse of these substances and to ensure that the products offered to consumers are of high quality .
This recommendation meets these aspirations , in particular by proposing an adequate European legal framework which does not hinder the free movement of these products , while guaranteeing increased health protection for the consumer and accurate and appropriate information on the products available .
One of the factors which is crucial to the safety of these products is the maximum quantity of minerals which they contain .
That is why setting maximum limits for the quantities of vitamins and minerals authorised in food supplements is important for ensuring that they are taken in moderation .
This is because scientific opinions show that absorbing excessive quantities of certain vitamins and minerals may have undesirable or harmful effects .
In addition , the list of these substances should not be set in stone because other products with nutritional or physiological effects could be incorporated into the provisions .
On the basis of the experience it gains in this field , I should like the Commission to present to the European Parliament and the Council additional proposals , accompanied by appropriate legal measures , on other nutriments and substances which can have comparable effects to food supplements .
I voted in favour of Mrs Müller 's report and I should like to highlight the quality of the work done by our rapporteur .
I am delighted that this House is finally speaking out on such an important issue .
Today it is a question of ensuring that the products concerned do not present a health risk by guaranteeing that the labels provide European consumers with clear , accurate and appropriate information about the products .
It is desirable to set a minimum level of vitamins and minerals which these products have to contain so as to guarantee that the food supplements contain them in sufficient quantity to justify the stated objective of the product .
Once we have agreed the principles in accordance with which the maximum and minimum quantities are to be set , the adoption of specific limits for each nutrient , on the basis of the opinion issued by the Scientific Committee for Food , is a purely technical matter .
Let us not forget that absorbing excessive quantities of some vitamins and minerals can have undesirable or harmful effects .
That is why it is necessary to guarantee the safety of these products , amongst other things by having labels with precise instructions on the use of the product and in particular the quantity that may be consumed .
The European public will thus be able to have peace of mind when choosing vitamins and mineral supplements from the huge range of products currently available on the market , without having to worry constantly about damaging their health .
. ( NL ) Last year , all EP Members were inundated with e-mails on food supplements and vitamin preparations .
Both a scientific theory and an economic interest underlie these .
The theory of Linus Pauling , who became renowned for his protest against nuclear arms , is interesting .
However , the economic interest of Mathias Rath , who dispatches products from the Netherlands to customers in Germany , where his products are banned , cannot justify an adaptation of the law .
These food supplements should be subject to the same rules as other contentious products which are consumed by the public in the expectation that these will benefit their health .
Government intervention is only justified to protect people from harm .
On-going debates , lack of scientific certainty and permanent differences of opinion on the effectiveness of substances cannot be resolved by legislation which from the outset lumps together anything which deviates from established medical science under the umbrella of fraudulent practices .
I note that many people use these products and that they consider any ban imposed by a bureaucratic government to be unnecessary and patronising .
Under these circumstances , the EU should confine itself to controlling harmful substances .
Since it would be preferable if the EU were to redirect any other measures to the national legislator , who can react more effectively and more quickly to changes in public opinion , I vote for rejection .
I have voted against the report .
In my view , there is no legal basis insofar as the EU is not entitled to legislate within the area of public health .
It is national legislation that should deal with issues of food supplements , not the European Union .
Nor has the EU taken any initiatives to regulate legislation within areas in which very serious abuse takes place , for example those of alcohol and drugs .
The fact that an attempt is now being made to do so within the field of health foods - something that would have consequences for people 's self-medication by means of vitamin supplements - raises a number of fundamental issues .
In whose interests is this to be done ?
Why should it be done specifically within this area ?
How would it affect the individual citizen ?
Which manufacturers would suffer , and which benefit ?
These questions demand answers , and no satisfactory answers have been given .
Mr President , I would like to state that I voted for the Paulsen report and above all for Amendment No 10 .
I basically believe that we need to pay close attention to hygiene regulations and enforce them very strictly , and that standards need to be raised accordingly .
Nevertheless it does not make sense for us to destroy reusable waste - and that is what catering waste is - and by destroying it to create further costs for the public , when we could in fact make use of it in a sensible way .
I am pleased that the European Parliament has agreed with this approach , even if it has been by a narrow margin .
I hope that as things proceed we will also get the necessary agreement of the Commission that reusable waste should not be indiscriminately destroyed , which also involves extra costs , but that it should be possible to use it and recycle it .
Mr President , I am very grateful to you for giving me the opportunity to table an oral amendment and to explain what is behind it .
Unfortunately , it did not scrape past the required 314-vote mark .
That is a pity as far as the amendment is concerned , but it does not alter the fact that in compromise Amendment No 25 Parliament has called on the Commission to bring forward a legislative proposal .
That means that the codecision procedure will be invoked and that we can deal with this by means of a regulation of our own .
I wish to call on those Member States that have not so far called for a ban to make sure that these substances , which are dangerous if they are not properly treated , are properly disposed of .
I expect that during the transitional period until a regulation governing all this is submitted , the Commission will use its control functions to make sure that we do not have a repeat of the disasters that we have already experienced - foot-and-mouth disease and swine fever - which can be caused by untreated catering waste .
I have always attached great importance to health and consumer protection .
I should like to make two essential remarks on the points which I advocated in the parliamentary committee .
The European Union 's decisions must be consistent .
In the interests of efficiency , it is therefore appropriate not to have a proliferation of regulations on the same subjects .
In laying down provisions for the prevention , control and eradication of transmissible spongiform encephalopathies , Regulation ( EC ) No 999 / 2001 already subjects animal by-products from slaughterhouses handling ruminants and cutting plants handling meat from ruminants to rigorous and controlled health rules .
Consequently , to ensure consistency and the correct application of the rules , there is no reason to include these facilities in the scope of a second regulation with the same objectives .
The European Union 's decisions must also be possible to implement .
In fact we already know that , because of treatment and disposal capacity ( incineration or landfill ) , measures which have to be implemented at too short notice cannot be applied at Community level if they cover effluent - whether category 1 or category 2 - from wastewater treatment plants at slaughterhouses , which are often shared facilities .
These shortcomings mainly came to light when the ban on animal meal in animal feed was imposed , forcing the Member States to store large quantities of animal meal while waiting for it to be incinerated .
Adding several million tonnes of products to be disposed of or treated before processing would impose further constraints on storage because it is not possible to treat or incinerate them as required .
And we know that storage can involve health and environmental risks .
It is therefore necessary to put in place an adequate timetable allowing this to be managed at Community level in a way which is well thought-out , safe and respectful of the environment .
. I would like to commend the rapporteur Ms Paulsen for her work on this important report .
The BSE crisis of recent years must never again threaten European consumers , farmers and the beef industry .
I believe that great credit is due to the Commission for systematically putting forward a series of legislative proposals which aim to address each and every one of the issues surrounding the original crisis .
The Commission and the Member States have taken the necessary steps , with the full co-operation of the farming community and the beef industry , to guarantee safe farming and food production practices and a safe product for the European consumer as well as for our vital export markets .
Many actions and measures taken have brought with them great sacrifice and we must remain conscious of that .
This particular proposal aims to establish a single legal framework to clarify conditions for treating animal by-products .
Most importantly , the only by-products which should end up in animal feed , and consequently the food chain , are those by-products which would be fit for direct human consumption .
In other words , if you can 't put a spoon of the stuff in your cup of cocoa at night then you shouldn 't be feeding it to the pigs either .
As a Member of Parliament representing a largely rural constituency , and coming from Ireland , the Member State most heavily dependent on agriculture , I fully endorse the stringent thrust of this proposal .
I strongly believe that there must be a complete ban on the feeding of swill to pigs .
We have seen the damage that can be wreaked from a more lax approach .
I am also convinced of the need to ban recovered vegetable oils from all feed uses .
There is great merit in the rapporteur 's suggestion that household catering waste be exempt from the provisions of these regulations with regard to transport , identification etc and that they be covered by national rules and the Framework Directive on Waste .
As regards the issue of waste water from slaughter houses , I believe that this must be reviewed as it covers a huge quantity of material for disposal .
Defining ' sludge ? in the Annex might help clarify the situation .
In conclusion , I would like to assure the Commissioner that he has the full support of Parliament in this important area of food safety .
In this regard I would urge him to exert some pressure on the Council to come to a final decision as to the location of the all-important Food Safety Authority .
Protection of European consumers , and of the integrity of the food chain , remain at the heart of the concerns of Members of this House .
In establishing the single market , which is its stated aim , the report on cross-border exchanges in electricity seeks , first and foremost , to open the market in electricity to competition and de facto , even if it does not admit it openly , to privatisation .
This means awarding the prize of supplying electricity to more than 300 million Europeans to large private groups .
Not content with this , but perfectly consistent with this approach , the rapporteur recommends passing on the costs of opening up the national networks to the private sector to consumers throughout the European Union .
We are resolutely opposed to privatisation of the generation and supply of electricity , as we are to the privatisation of all public services , which the Member States and the European institutions are so keen to achieve , because this policy can only be to the detriment of the interests of both the workers in the sectors concerned and the vast majority of consumers .
We condemn this policy of demolishing public services , whose sole aim is to satisfy capitalists ' appetite for profit , whether it is acknowledged as such , as in the Mombaur report , or whether it is veiled - ineffectually - by environmentalist considerations , as in the Turmes-Rapkay report .
We therefore voted against these two reports .
Energy is not a marketable commodity like any other !
How many times have I already said and repeated that ?
Account must be taken of the need to guarantee security of supply and the volume of investment this entails .
The provision of essential public services and its impact in terms of regional planning must also be taken into account .
In spite of all this , following the request made by the European Council at its Lisbon Summit for rapid progress towards the completion of the single market in gas and electricity , the Commission has presented a communication , a draft regulation and a draft directive designed to speed up the liberalisation of the gas and electricity market with a view to the establishment of an entirely open market in 2005 .
At the Stockholm Summit , the Member States approved this acceleration , with the exception of France , which is strongly opposed to the adoption of that date .
The Commission wishes to speed up the opening of the electricity market so as to give non-residential customers a free choice of supplier by 1 January 2003 and to extend the same opportunity to all electricity consumers not later than the beginning of January 2005 .
In the case of gas , free choice of supplier is to be available to non-residential customers by 1 January 2004 and to all consumers by the start of January 2005 .
This is utterly irresponsible and unacceptable .
It is the distortion of an ultra-liberal Europe that I am resisting .
Given the balance of power in the European Parliament and in Europe , it will be an arduous struggle .
To this end , I have signed a compromise amendment to Article 19 , tabled by Mr Herzog and Mr Savary , which alters the deadlines and conditions for open competition and insists on scope for cross-subsidisation to guarantee equality of charges for residential clients .
This is why I voted against the report in the final vote .
France should uphold this position at the Barcelona Council .
I would first like to state that there was not a majority in the committee in favour of the part of the report on a Directive concerning common rules for the internal market in electricity , the part for which Mr Turmes was responsible .
If there had been just a Turmes report instead of the Rapkay-Turmes report we now have before us , it would not have seen the light of day in plenary .
We are of course in agreement with the three major objectives of the process of liberalising the electricity and gas industry , and our message to the Barcelona Summit about this was clear and undisputed .
It is as follows :
1 ) we want to ensure that consumers are free to choose their suppliers ;
2 ) we want to guarantee that all suppliers have fair and transparent access to all networks ;
3 ) we want to see a binding system in all Member States in order to underpin the objective described in point 2 .
However , Mr Turmes felt that in his part of the report , which covered the electricity industry , he should set out his entire ideology and the Greens ' wish list in this area , which have nothing to do with the actual subject matter .
His report therefore misses the point .
Like my colleagues , I voted against these parts of the resolution .
Because we are now involved in the codecision procedure between Parliament and the Council , Mr Turmes has , with his Red-Green wish list , not done a great service to the subject at hand here , by which I mean a reasonable and balanced liberalisation of the EU electricity market .
( Explanation of vote cut short pursuant to Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
. ( NL ) The promotion of international trade in gas and electricity leads to more problems in the field of the environment , consumer protection and price stability .
This is a comment in connection with the Mombaur report .
As transpired yesterday - much to the chagrin of the spokesperson of the PPE-DE Group - the rapporteurs Turmes and Rapkay have made proposals to moderate the effects of the Mombaur report .
Their intention is noble , but difficult to implement , because it aims to combine two incompatible objectives .
They accept more emphasis on market forces , which centre on growth and profits , while trying to protect the environment and consumers .
I welcome their attempt to give customers a percentage breakdown in their bills and in information leaflets explaining the origin of electricity and the effects on the production of greenhouse gases and nuclear waste , and to apply this to imported energy .
I also support financial measures to promote investments in total energy and windmills .
I am less keen on the importance being accorded to attempts also to liberalise biogas and to ensure that environmental obligations do not restrict competition between companies , although this may be a concession to the majority in the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy .
Although I reject the circumstances under which this proposal has been made , unlike my group , I gladly support it in the absence of anything better .
.
I welcome the move to shake up Europe 's energy markets : this will make markets more open and accessible to all .
If the final directive contains many of the useful amendments proposed by the Industry Committee , European energy consumers will operate in a considerably more favourable climate than they do at present .
Bills will contain more basic information and consumers will be better informed of exactly what they are paying for .
Even more significant for European consumers will be the proposed non-discriminatory access to networks for different competitors .
Basic economics tells us that more competition for networks should result in an eventual decrease in prices : good news for some consumers who , in the present system , end up paying over the odds .
This is equally goods news for small energy companies who are sometimes deterred from further expansion owing to high market entry costs .
Gas and electricity are basic necessities , not luxury goods , and this directive will be a triumph for most European consumers and some producers of energy .
. ( NL ) In the past , electricity was generated and distributed on a small-scale , and organised for each municipality or province under the remit of the administration elected for that region .
Now , we are on our way to the generation and distribution by international concerns on which democracy has no effect whatsoever .
The drawbacks have meanwhile become glaringly obvious in America , especially in the power cuts in California and in the bankruptcy case of Enron .
But in Europe too , the adverse effects are already being felt .
The Dutch energy companies , until recently in the hands of municipalities and provinces , have made considerable investments in the environmentally-friendly generation of electricity .
This clean production is now being considered too expensive , and dirty electricity is being imported via the cross-border connection network , which originates from pit coal , brown coal and nuclear energy .
This connection network was installed some time ago to allow Member States to help each other in the event of disaster and in cases of peaks in the use of electricity , but its capacity is now being used completely for the purpose of international trade .
This is why I disagree with the purport of the Mombaur report on cross-border electricity trade , even if through the proposals by Turmes and Rapkay more attention is paid to keeping track of greenhouse gases and nuclear waste , to promoting windmills and total energy , and to consumer protection .
These objectives will ultimately not be compatible , which is why I am voting against the proposal .
. ( NL ) Airports are built in densely populated regions and attract extra economic growth , as a result of which an increasing number of people end up living in their vicinity .
Consequently , aircraft noise has become a plague to an increasing proportion of the population .
The more a region is forced to rely on air traffic for its transport needs , the greater the burden becomes in terms of damage to health .
The only ways to combat this nuisance are to restrict air traffic to long-distance flights , to create greater distances between airports and residential areas , to accord lower priority to economic growth or world trade and to ban noisy aircraft .
Clearly , America and the Third World have different views on noise pollution .
The Third World is too poor to consider matters of this kind , and in affluent America , company profits are more important than any other considerations .
Anyone truly wishing to restrict noise pollution in Europe should not be content with the agreement that was recently concluded on a global scale within the ICAO , but should set higher standards themselves , if necessary .
The proposal to withdraw the aforementioned Hushkits Regulation from 1 April onwards mainly aims to avoid a trade war with America .
I share the view of the draftsman of the opinion , Mr Blokland , that this proposal does not go far enough and that it continues to permit exceptions for too long a term . I will be voting against the proposal .
. I fully support this report on the Commission communication , which aims to improve information exchange between the EU and its citizens .
Anti-EU campaigns in countries such as Ireland have clearly demonstrated the need for a positive communication strategy .
Moreover , the practical policy prescriptions outlined in this report show that the EU is serious about becoming closer to European citizens and countering the common perception that it is run by an elite bureaucracy .
Focusing on issues which affect people 's daily lives , such as food safety , the euro and justice and home affairs , will ensure that citizens fully engage in the debate about Europe .
Moreover , the focus on decentralisation in this communication exchange is pertinent : regions vary dramatically across the EU and local authorities are attuned to regional needs and issues of local importance .
They are clearly the best placed to disseminate information about the EU .
Similarly , it is vital that regional TV should be involved .
Finally , the call for more Internet use in the information campaign will ensure that this campaign is not only cost-effective but environmentally sound , too .
Since the European Parliament is the European institution closest to European citizens , it would make sense for it to become the institution around which this information campaign revolves .
On behalf of my group , I should like to inform you as to why we have voted against the report .
First of all , because of the poor quality of the report .
It is a very confused report and it is very difficult to make sense of it .
A second reason is that religion , fundamentalism and the violation of human rights are lumped together , which is unacceptable to us .
A third reason is that the European Union is given a number of inappropriate assignments , including the setting up of a free university for women .
In fact , we do not want a separate university for women ; we want co-educational universities .
These are the reasons why we have voted against the report .
Mr President , I voted against the report before us because it does not live up to the expectations created by the title .
The main focus is on religious fundamentalism , with other forms of fundamentalism only being given a brief mention .
Even if religious fundamentalism is the most significant form and stands out from other forms , it is nevertheless essential to recognise all forms of fundamentalism if a meaningful debate is to take place .
The threats posed by fundamentalism are growing in a way that the events of 11 September suggest involve an enormous contempt for humanity .
However , to do justice to the situation we cannot limit ourselves to religious aspects alone .
Just as people obsessed with a fundamental order are to be found in all walks of life , this way of thinking is also prevalent throughout society .
The logical consequence of recognising this can therefore only be that we should examine this whole area and not concentrate on just one form of this phenomenon , even if it is the form with the most adherents .
Mr President , during the vote one of my Dutch colleagues remarked that part of the report did not make sense in Dutch .
I had difficulty in finding any of it that made sense in English !
This report has taken political correctness to a whole new level .
It is counter-productive to approach such an important issue as religious fundamentalism with a tirade of political fundamentalism of the kind that this report is largely made up of .
I am particularly critical of paragraph 29 , even as amended , which considers the separation of church and state to be the most acceptable form of government .
I do not have to remind you , Mr President , that in my country , if not in yours , the head of state is also the head of the established church .
That is a system that works very well indeed .
I hope Parliament is not calling on the Queen to abdicate , so that maybe we can elect President Kinnock in her place !
The Izquierdo Rojo report on women and fundamentalism , which has just been adopted by a slim majority in spite of our having voted against it , is a prime example of a good initial idea that has been completely perverted in the course of the discussion process .
It was originally a matter of reaffirming our desire to ensure that women 's rights are rigorously respected throughout the territory of all the Member States at a time when huge influxes of unassimilated immigrants are prone to import practices that are degrading to women or are tantamount to cruel torture , such as female circumcision .
Unfortunately , the European Parliament ultimately shied away from naming the plague that besets us , namely floods of unassimilated immigrants , often from countries with an Islamic culture .
Faced with this predicament , Parliament has taken refuge in sanitised statements or , even worse , has issued sweeping condemnations which seem to apply to all Europeans without distinction and which imbue everyone with an unwarranted sense of guilt .
The same is true of the concept of fundamentalism itself .
Under that heading , the report blithely lumps together the rigorous practice of Christianity , a religion that places the individual at the heart of society , and the rigorous practice of another religion , Islam , which subordinates the individual to the community .
But these are not the same phenomenon at all .
To crown it all , the European Parliament recommends that the forthcoming directives on the right of asylum , based on the Treaty of Amsterdam , provide for reception of women from all parts of the world who suffer from ' fundamentalist persecution ' .
Had it been consistent , the report would have called at the same time for the abolition of the budgetary stability and growth pact !
The report has the merit of condemning one of the most odious aspects of the oppression of women in the world by taking a stance against the integration of church and state and the regimes that practise it .
We voted in favour of the condemnatory paragraphs and of the measures to assist women who are forced to flee from countries where women are the victims of systematic barbarism .
On the report as a whole , however , we abstained .
Although the report rightly condemns Islamic fundamentalism , it is considerably more discreet about the other forms of fundamentalism , notably the role of Catholicism , of which women are victims both outside and inside the European Union , in countries such as Ireland and Portugal or in some of the German Länder .
Prohibiting women from voluntarily terminating their pregnancy , in other words denying them the right to use their bodies as they please , is one example of a sexist and oppressive attitude towards women .
And the good resolutions adopted by the European Union against misogynous practices and the excesses of Islamic regimes would be more credible if the Union first put its own house in order by prohibiting discriminatory practices against women in its own Member States .
The European institutions have taken it upon themselves , with the complicity of the European governments , to impose such a retrograde step as nightshift work for women .
Why do they refuse to impose throughout Europe the fundamental right of women to self-determination , including the right of voluntary termination ?
I must warmly congratulate Mrs Izquierdo Rojo on her excellent own-initiative report , compiled as a result of the hearing on women and fundamentalism held on 23 January 2001 .
Everyone agrees that fundamentalism can appear in many guises .
It can be religious , political or ideological .
We do not stress often enough that women are the chief victims of fundamentalism and that this state of affairs frequently arouses utter indifference .
While the European Union has to condemn this phenomenon in third countries , it must not presume to lecture the rest of the world , because it is confronted with fundamentalism within its own territory .
This is confirmed by the massive floods of e-mails that have inundated Members of the European Parliament and in which we are being urged to reject this report on the grounds that it is ' a threat to the dignity of women and to the right to life of every human being until his or her natural death ' .
On the contrary , I support the demand contained in this report for promotion of equal rights for women , particularly the right of women to exercise control over their own bodies and to decide when they wish to start a family , to determine their own lifestyle and the nature of their personal relationships .
It appears equally imperative that the Member States should adopt legislation outlawing any practices that endanger the health or the physical and mental integrity of women , such as female circumcision .
Who could fail to recall the human misery into which the Taliban plunged the eleven million women of Afghanistan in 1996 ?
Imprisoned behind their chadors , deprived of education and care , subjected to public floggings , they endured an existence beyond the bounds of human dignity in order to survive .
It is our duty to exert pressure on the new government in order to ensure that the political wind of change sweeping through Afghanistan is translated into a genuine improvement in the position of women .
The struggle for the recognition of women 's rights should be an integral part of the foreign policy of the European Union .
I am thinking here of the way in which we implement the MEDA programme and the Lomé Convention .
The human rights clause is too often allowed to remain a dead letter for fear that its implementation would jeopardise the success of particular economic or trade agreements .
Mrs Izquierdo Rojo has given us many avenues to explore in the fight against fundamentalism .
The main line of approach I wish to highlight is that of the secular state , in other words the clear separation of religion and public affairs .
This is a fundamental principle .
In addition , the modernisation of political life must mean granting women their rightful place in the machinery of public administration .
Nothing can justify the violation of an individual 's fundamental rights and freedoms and which issue from that individual 's inalienable dignity .
I am therefore against fundamentalism as the expression of a way of thinking that denies a person - man or woman - their freedom and the right to choose their own destiny , and It is my view that the European Union must , with every means at its disposal , uphold and promote respect for human rights wherever they are violated .
I cannot , however , accept the implicit censure of religious values and actual religion that the Izquierdo report makes , under cover of its censure of fundamentalism - and not only in relation to Christianity .
It is one thing to freely espouse religious principles that accord with respect for human rights ; it is quite another to impose rules of behaviour that entail the negation of individual dignity and the infringement of such rights .
It is one thing to support the separation of Church and State , a position I fully share because it is the basis of the democratic system , but quite another to deny the Church and religious communities their right to freedom of expression in the name of secularity - in other words their right to interpret , according to their way of thinking , the facts of public and political life that govern citizens ' lives .
By adopting this report today , the European Parliament has done the cause of the freedoms we wish to promote no favours , because behind the censure of fundamentalism there is in fact a new form of fundamentalism that they are trying to impose on us : secular fundamentalism , which is just as deserving of censure as any other , in that they all deny the freedom of the individual to choose his or her own model in life .
This is the reason why I voted against the report .
. I abstained on the amendments and voted against the final report because I am deeply concerned about the lack of balance within this report .
Implicit in this report are western cultural values which make a presumption against the rights of women in Islam .
I would question the wisdom of this parliament in producing this report and in doing so pass judgement on other cultures and their values .
I believe this report was based on an external view and with very narrow and limited experience of Islamic lifestyle .
I am deeply committed to equal opportunities for women everywhere , however , I believe it is crucial that women in different parts of the world can establish their own concept of freedom which takes into account the variety of different cultures and values they hold .
The Members from the National Front will vote against Mrs Izquierdo Rojo 's report .
There are undoubtedly good elements , such as the principle that fundamentalism must not be fought with other types of fundamentalism of an opposite kind ( recital M ) .
But the report also contains bad things and some very bad things .
First of all , it is astonishing to note that this report , which was originally devoted to Islam and women , has now been renamed .
The reason for this was undoubtedly to avoid shocking anyone and to comply with the sacrosanct dictates of political correctness .
Moreover , to create a stronger sense of guilt among us , recital A recalls that ' the concept of fundamentalism originated in the 1920s in the USA , where it primarily referred to Christianity ' .
The eleven million Afghan women who were banned from all public places , deprived of education , barred from professional activity , deprived of care and exposed to beatings and floggings in the years when the fundamentalist Taliban ruled their country have a different story to tell about the origins of fundamentalism .
In this report , the European Parliament presumes to lecture us on moral theology .
On what authority ?
With what qualifications ?
How can it put religion and fundamentalism , the exercise of spiritual and temporal power , on the same footing ?
The report systematically equates religion with fundamentalism in utter disregard of reality .
The report , in fact , is a hotchpotch of hackneyed ideas , all of which have the same purpose , namely the inversion of decent values and the promotion of decadence .
What can I say , for example , about paragraph 33 , which calls on the heads of Christian churches to legitimise lesbianism ?
This report is also yet another stepping stone in the pro-immigration policy pursued by Brussels .
In fact , by some sleight of hand , paragraphs 18 , 19 , 21 and 24 use the fight against fundamentalism as a pretext to demand greater flexibility for governments to grant asylum to women from countries where fundamentalism is rife as well as using the framework of a preventive policy to secure the rapid social integration of the immigrants , refugees and minorities who are resident in the territory of the European Union .
For these reasons , and many others besides , we must reject this report and resist any attempts by Parliament to replace it , under cover of the struggle against religious fundamentalism , with another report , which may be even more arbitrary than this one and which is the fruit of the fickle convictions and hostility to the natural order that characterise the present majority of this House .
- ( DE ) It is vital for us to deal with this topic thoroughly , because many women suffer from fundamentalist discrimination .
However , the report before us does not do justice to these problems and creates the impression that fundamentalism is the hallmark only of certain religions .
The political , social and ideological fundamentalism directed at women with such devastating consequences for their quality of life has been ignored .
Narrowing the scope of the report in this way is contrary to the Christian ethical order of values .
This one-sidedly anti-religious approach means that an opportunity to deal appropriately with this important subject , " Women and fundamentalism " , has been missed .
The report is unbalanced , contradictory and undifferentiated , and accordingly totally undermines the battle against discrimination against women .
Freedom of religion and protection against discrimination are key aspects of fundamental rights that cannot be played off against each other , and that is why I voted against this report .
When the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities was given permission to draw up an own-initiative report on women and fundamentalism , we had reason to hope that this report would serve not only to reiterate our condemnation of the fact that millions of women in the world are deprived of elementary human and civil rights , which we know only too well .
We also nurtured the hope that this report might provide a valuable contribution that would push things in the right direction wherever a push was needed .
Regrettably , our rapporteur and those who followed her lead have squandered a great opportunity ; this is illustrated , incidentally , by the fact that the report was adopted by only 15 votes to 7 in the Committee on Women 's Rights , while the opinion of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs was adopted by 18 votes with 11 abstentions .
The two women rapporteurs are members of the Socialist Group in this Parliament .
The uncooperative approach of the rapporteur for the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , and indeed her obstinate determination not to listen to reason and to throw everything into the one pot , if I may say so , means that I cannot vote in favour of this report ; for one thing , it indiscriminately accuses all religions for practising a pernicious form of fundamentalism , and another , more important reason is that it seeks to manipulate this resolution to define details of the asylum and immigration policies of the European Union .
This is unacceptable and I am afraid that , through her obstinacy and the tone of her report , the rapporteur has done a great disservice to the women who are victims of fundamentalism and , hence , to this House too .
. ( NL ) All people are equal , but there are always people who have an interest in denying this .
This leads to slavery , racism , colonial wars , child labour , subsistence wages for workers , underpayment for raw materials and the withholding of equal rights for women .
In order to maintain their position , some privileged parties draw on quotes from the Bible or the Koran which are supposed to justify their misconduct .
Only in the past few centuries have women in different European countries acquired the same rights as men , such as the right to vote , the right to work , rights to equal remuneration , access to managerial roles , the right to dissolve a failed marriage and equal rights of inheritance .
There is still a rearguard of men who are opposed to this .
New to us is the increase - through immigration - of the number of men originating from cultures who oppose gender equality .
Some of them keep their daughters at home , marry them off and penalise them for looking for contact with boys independently .
I fully endorse the proposal by the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities not to use family law from the countries of origin as a basis , not to support the States that discriminate against women and also to bring women who are persecuted on grounds of gender under the asylum law .
The report on ' women and fundamentalism ' addresses many important issues .
It is indisputably the case that women in large parts of the world are at present denied their rights and suffer oppression in the name of what we call religious , political or ideological fundamentalism .
As Christian Democrats , we vigorously condemn these human rights infringements and condemn the treatment to which women have been , and are , exposed in , for example , Afghanistan under the Taliban regime .
However , the report contains such basic shortcomings that we cannot , in the end , support it .
For example , there is no definition of what is meant by fundamentalism .
Even though it can more or less be inferred that what we are talking about here are violent and repressive regimes or forms of , in particular , religious belief , the report does not successfully distinguish between what , in that case , is to be viewed as fundamentalism and what are to be regarded as ordinary religion and religious institutions .
On a number of occasions , the report states that religion is something private and that religious institutions should not interfere in ' the public and political life of the state ' .
We believe in a vigorous civil society , of which the churches too should be a part , and do not wish to remove any right to participate in ongoing public debate .
I abstained on this report .
I believe that it is important to guarantee women 's rights .
Fundamentalism exists in all areas of society and not only in Islam , an idea constantly repeated in the report .
The report is one-sided and condemns only a few states that do not recognise women 's rights .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.58 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

The next item is the continuation of the debate on the Council and Commission statements on Transatlantic relations including steel import tariffs .
Almost six months to the day after the events of 11 September , one can only be extremely surprised that , in the progress report on transatlantic relations which has been drawn up by the Presidency of the European Union , such a relatively small part has been devoted to the lessons to be drawn from those events .
One might have thought that the tragedy of 11 September would prompt the countries of Europe to engage in some soul-searching on the reasons why the international Islamic terrorist network chose Europe as a location for the bases from which they struck at the United States .
So what particular facilities do our countries offer , and how can these be rooted out ?
What consequences should be drawn from the exploitation of asylum procedures by terrorist networks , etc . ?
Our police forces have certainly worked hard in close cooperation with the U.S. authorities .
Their enquiries have revealed the extent to which terrorists have set up bases in our countries .
When it comes to analysing the significance of 11 September , on the other hand , a considerable gulf is developing between the two sides of the Atlantic , with one side regarding it as an isolated operation and the other as a manifestation of the new global terrorist scene , dominated by hyperterrorism .
The communication from the Council indicates this .
The effective measures to deal with the nature and scale of the common threat is not its main concern and a very minimalist response seems to be envisaged .
There is only a vague mandate to draw up , sometime or other , an agreement on mutual judicial assistance .
This , Mr President , is a strange and dangerous divergence which may well seriously encumber transatlantic relations and our own security .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is extremely disappointing that when we talk about the transatlantic relations between the European Union and the United States , we should also have to mention a steel war .
This is extremely disappointing because we assumed that President Bush would be one of the main champions of the market economy , and not that he would belong with the campaigners for protectionist measures .
It would , of course , be understandable if he were to take such measures for electoral reasons , but based on his undertaking to act in favour of free trade , this is , naturally , an incomprehensible attitude which we must unreservedly condemn .
It is all the more disappointing since we have just started the fourth ministerial meeting in the framework of the Doha world trade talks , now being overshadowed by a measure of that kind .
And that is not the last we have heard of it , for if I understand it correctly , the United States wants to adopt the same line for agricultural products too .
Mr President , this is completely the wrong route to take .
In the case of steel alone , I should like to point out that my country , the Netherlands , has made considerable efforts , together with your country , to restructure the steel industry .
This has , both directly and indirectly , led to thousands of job losses in both our countries .
This means , therefore , that we would have to pay the price for the lack of restructuring in the United States .
In my opinion , the European Union has tabled sound proposals to consider whether a kind of fund could be set up to help restructure the steel industry in the United States .
These proposals have , of course , been dismissed , which means , therefore , that we cannot make any more headway , and that the high costs of steel in America - certainly not simply due to the expensive dollar , but also , of course , due to the social security schemes and pensions in the steel industry - have , in fact , been passed on to us .
In my view , Barcelona should be used to launch a diplomatic offensive , alongside the normal measures which you , Commissioner Lamy , have to take , obviously , by threatening the United States with countermeasures .
However , what matters is that we should also use Barcelona to launch a diplomatic offensive in order to make it clear to the United States that protectionist measures of this kind only lead to major disruption in free trade and with it , to a huge upset in the creation of jobs .
It is exactly the opposite signal from the one we need : we all want to create more jobs globally .
Yet , what is happening now is the reverse .
I would therefore call on the Commission and the Council - and I am pleased that the Council is here today - at least to ensure that initiatives are taken in Barcelona .
The transatlantic relations between Europe and the US are once again under intense pressure .
Europe and the United States are adopting increasingly threatening language with each other on a variety of topics .
Only last week , President Bush unleashed a fresh trade war by restricting steel imports by means of import tariffs .
The European Union was right to lodge a complaint with the World Trade Organisation about these Draconian measures .
Although our trade disputes with the US only concern one to two per cent of our trade and investment flows , they can cause a great deal of damage to our mutual relations .
Trade disputes are always catching the headlines and undermine the political relationship , which is already very fragile at this time .
Each new trade dispute is one too many .
Consequently , more efforts must be made to nip potential conflicts in the bud as a matter of urgency .
Transatlantic relations desperately need new positive impulses in the interest of us all .
Mr President , the Greens have spent more than a decade endeavouring to expose the myths at the heart of the free-trade theory .
Now we know for sure , as we have always suspected , that the rhetoric of the US and its major corporations was a sham .
Far from being at the centre of a development agenda to help poorer nations out of poverty , the US tariff barriers reveal how that country uses trade rules to gain access to other people 's markets , while protecting its own industrial interests at home .
The US view is clearly that free trade is a one-way street for a superpower : good for US exporters , but not so good for US domestic industry .
Contrast that with the unequivocal lectures given by the US to developing countries at the WTO meeting in Doha , to the effect that , by liberalising their markets , they will automatically reap the benefits of globalisation .
Poverty eradication and sustainable development are somehow automatically meant to follow , yet poorer countries have known for a long time that this is often far from the case .
Perhaps the one good thing that could come out of President Bush 's unilateral introduction of tariffs on steel imports would be a much-needed serious debate about the flaws and weaknesses inherent in the free-trade model , because there is growing opposition to the global inequality inherent in its diktat that every country must put international competitiveness above all other domestic concerns .
The reaction against this ranges from Indian farmers calling for an increase in tariffs to protect themselves from cheap food imports , through to steel workers , including fully restructured UK steel workers , who find that they will now still be unable to compete with Romanian steel exports .
However , there are some retaliatory actions that the EU should consider , which will send the right signal to the US .
I would like the Council and Commission 's views on them .
For example , since the US has refused to implement the Kyoto Protocol because of the perceived impact this would have on US business , the EU should levy an energy tax on all US-manufactured goods .
Or we might consider the issue of a complete ban on all imports of US-produced GM foods , since US pressure exerted under free-trade rules has prevented EU ministers from reflecting popular opinion by banning such foods from markets here .
The time is long overdue for the EU to call Mr Bush 's bluff .
Mr President , it is perfectly understandable that we should wish to examine the state of transatlantic relations in the light of the current situation .
Let us begin with the decision to tax steel imports at rates of up to 30 % and to impose quotas .
As the main exporter to the United States , the Union is the primary target of these measures .
And yet European steel imports have fallen by 33 % since 1998 , and so they are not the cause of the problems in the U.S. steel industry .
Coming on top of the differences over hormone-treated beef and GMOs , these measures are likely to have serious economic and social repercussions for the European steel industry .
The Commission would therefore be well advised to bring a complaint before the WTO , as Mr Lamy announced , as well as to apply retaliatory measures without delay against US exports .
What is more , this latest decision by the Bush Administration testifies to a strengthened desire on the part of the US Government to adopt a unilateral approach in numerous domains : on the commercial and economic as well as the cultural and military fronts , and this last front is the focus of deep concern .
The New York Times has just published a report indicating the existence of a secret Pentagon plan targeting Iraq , Iran , Libya , Syria and North Korea and even Russia and China .
The plan apparently envisages the possibility of using nuclear arms for offensive purposes , for example in the framework of an Arab-Israeli conflict .
To quote John Isaac , a leading figure in the voluntary sector in the United States , Doctor Strangelove is alive and well and working in the Pentagon .
This lurch by the American superpower , on the pretext of fighting terrorism , towards a permanent war footing poses an intolerable threat to the entire planet .
The United States is redefining its role in the world around one single obsession , namely its own security .
But in this world , right cannot be exclusively and invariably on the side of the Americans .
It was impossible not to be concerned at the words of John Bolton , Under Secretary at the Department of State , who fired this broadside during the Conference on Disarmament , and I quote : ' Our policy is , quite simply , pro-American ' and ' The United States ? will meet this threat with every method at our disposal ' .
This policy , which entails a 15 % increase in the military budget , equivalent in monetary terms to the entire state development aid provided by all OECD member countries , along with the planned anti-missile defence system , is liable to provoke a new arms race .
The fight against terrorism , on the other hand , involves identifying its roots and seeking real solutions .
And again , the United States is obstructing progress towards a fairer world by refusing to ratify several international conventions , such as those on the rights of the child , disarmament , biological weapons , the International Criminal Court , climate change , the Kyoto process and a host of others , not to mention the failure of the United States to adopt a sufficiently impartial position on the Middle East conflict .
We can no longer be silent on the death penalty , a crime perpetrated by the state , where it is administered by a superpower that seeks to impose its order and its values on the world .
We want nothing to do with that particular value .
Numerous people , including US citizens , reject that vision of the world and aspire to globalisation based on solidarity .
This was one of the messages that emerged from the World Social Forum in Porto Alegre . Europe must take heed of the ardent hopes of those who are exhorting us to play our part in the pursuit of that goal .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in recent years , transatlantic trade relations have often come under strain .
We have been able to resolve many trade conflicts in a professional way that satisfied both sides , but only because we have accepted binding rules for free and fair world trade within the framework of the WTO , and also because the WTO is the only international organisation that has a dispute resolution system that also provides for sanctions .
However , with the punitive tariffs the United States is now imposing on steel imports , they are abandoning the common ground that we have so far occupied under the WTO .
It is extremely hard for us Europeans to understand these measures , as they primarily hit our steel products .
Almost half of Europe 's steel exports to the USA are affected by these punitive tariffs .
What is more , we Europeans can expect to suffer twice over from the American measures , because of diverted trade flows .
That is something we are not prepared to accept .
We will not support the Americans ' game of playing off their workers ' interests against those of our own workers .
Over the past few years , the European steel industry has had great success in carrying out restructuring , but this has involved enormous job losses , making this a very painful process .
It must be clear for the United States that it is not in their interest to undermine confidence in the WTO 's system of multilateral rules and its impartial conflict resolution system at the beginning of the Doha Round .
In the case of bilateral contacts with the USA , the European Union needs to firmly demonstrate to our American partner that this serious and unwarranted interference in free world trade will not be simply accepted , and that we will make use of the mechanisms currently at our disposal .
Why is the Commission not considering using the mechanisms available to it in accordance with the decision of the WTO panel on US export promotion and taking countermeasures ?
I believe it is now necessary for us to make that clear to the Unites States .
Mr President , behaviour which is apparently irrational usually has an explanation .
President Bush 's decision to impose steel tariffs is irrational .
The tariffs are a flagrant breach of world trade rules .
There has been no sudden calamitous increase in imports .
US steel has been uncompetitive and in deep trouble over a long period ; it has not become so suddenly .
Tariffs will not solve the US steel problem , but they will badly harm America 's allies .
They will destroy American jobs in other sectors and they will damage world trade relations .
Knowing all this , why would President Bush take this irrational decision ?
We know why .
He wants to buy votes in steel-producing areas come November and is so desperate to do so that he will gladly sacrifice his international credibility - and we in the EU and others elsewhere in the world are meant to pay the price !
Talk about collateral damage !
Of course , this cannot be tolerated .
We do not subsidise steel , we do not dump steel .
We went through terrible times to make our steel competitive .
Our market is open .
There is no possible justification for this deliberate attack on the livelihood of European steel workers .
Remember , this is the President who thinks he can provide world leadership .
Global leader in military power he may be , but he is a global dunce in citizenship and respect for others .
Commission : take him on .
You have all of us behind you and you have the tools to ensure that you can act both legally and effectively .
Go for it !
Mr President , I am dismayed at the United States ' belligerency towards the free market in steel , particularly since free trade has been the hallmark of the USA since the 18th century .
I am appalled at the concomitant weakening of the all-important transatlantic alliance that this creates : an alliance that is the world 's greatest force for peace today and one that gives unrivalled opportunities for prosperity to the world 's 1 billion poorest people .
But since the European Union and the USA share essential values , I cannot believe that the US seriously intends to follow this destructive course of action .
I therefore see this as a purely political manoeuvre - President Bush placating domestic and special-interest lobbies .
We must be tough and then we will succeed .
The cause is good .
The arguments are correct .
I firmly support the Commission and the Council of Ministers and I believe that with EU backing and pressure , the World Trade Organization will act correctly and throw out the US position , and that President Bush will welcome this .
Mr President , the events of 11 September ought to have strengthened transatlantic relations by virtue of the emotions they unleashed and the solidarity displayed .
On the contrary , it appears today that relations have been weakened .
The North Atlantic Alliance , which took the decision to invoke Article 5 of its charter for the first time , is in crisis because the Americans did not see the need to enlist the aid of its organisational structure in the war in Afghanistan .
NATO is mulling over this manifestation of unilateralism , and no one within the organisation wishes to see it as proof of the Americans ' indifference towards their European allies .
I too support this view and share the ensuing frustration , but I do not subscribe to the overall conclusions drawn from it .
I have always been a proponent of the idea that the prevention and management of crises by the international community should be regionalised .
Our experience at the start of the Balkan crisis showed us that sending in troops from all corners of the earth , from Vancouver to Vladivostok and from Moscow to Buenos Aires , for all its huge symbolic value , was not an efficient way to proceed .
Effective intervention in the maintenance and restoration of peace in specific parts of the world depends on familiarity with the culture and history of the country in crisis .
This is what prompted the international community to support the establishment of a pan-African peacekeeping force , for example .
It is also what prompted the Americans to base their operations in Kabul directly on the provision of support to the Afghan forces who were opposed to the barbaric dictatorship of the Taliban .
As I said in Brussels in 1993 , the primary mission of NATO is to intervene in European territory and on the fringes of Europe , particularly in the Mediterranean and the Middle East , in order to guarantee and develop peace and stability throughout these areas .
Within the Alliance , I believe it is legitimate that the Americans , who are aware of our prosperity , require us to assume an increasing share of the burden of maintaining a European defence system that has hitherto fallen almost entirely on them .
I believe that Europe must prepare itself to take over a leadership role which the Americans are willing to transfer to us gradually .
To this end , the governments of the Union must possess the necessary will and must provide the necessary resources .
Do you believe , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , that Europe is finally ready to assume this role ?
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to pick up on what was said this morning .
I believe that transatlantic relations are regularly subjected to crucial tests .
What we are experiencing now is nothing new ; it is not a new conflict .
Steel is an old chestnut .
As many Members have already indicated , we need to proceed with sufficient toughness .
But we should also be guided by reason , wisdom and far-sightedness .
The President-in-Office of the Council has pointed out that our relations are historical ones and that we have many values in common , but that we need to shift from a crisis situation to a process of dialogue .
I would certainly support him in that .
However , this also means that the Council needs to consider new initiatives .
It was the Spanish Presidency that established the new transatlantic agenda .
I believe that the Spanish Presidency should also undertake an analysis and a review and present new proposals at the next summit .
I would like to ask what work you have done on this so far and what the nature of the Spanish Presidency 's proposals will be .
We need an update , as James Elles said this morning .
We need an EU strategy that goes beyond what we have at present .
The Commission proposal is good , but it does not go far enough , and it does not cover all factors .
In particular , it does not include a sufficiently clear EU strategy .
Commissioner Lamy said today that he is investigating several areas , including intellectual property and the auditing of accounts .
In my own report , which I shall be presenting on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy together with James Elles for the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , I shall be presenting some proposals on this .
In particular , you will be interested to see that economic relations are very close and that in many sectors it is already fair to talk about a transatlantic market .
That does not of course mean that trade conflicts can just be glossed over , quite the opposite .
A small delegation of us will be in Toledo on Monday , and the topic of relations between the USA and the WTO will be on the agenda .
I would be grateful if you could briefly say something more about our approach at that meeting .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , can anyone tell me what has been happening in the United States since Mr Bush took up office ?
With a straight face , he has proclaimed unilateral measures , measures which a ) are counter-productive to transatlantic relations , b ) do not conform to WTO agreements and c ) will lead to a wave of protectionism in the world .
A 30 % import tariff on steel , mainly aimed at the European Union , is a great injustice .
Has our European steel sector in recent years not been restructured very successfully ?
We do not have overcapacity now .
Due to the import restriction in the United States , the price of steel will increase over there , upon which the urgent restructuring of the American steel sector can be funded .
However , the outcome for Europe is an increase in imports through dumping on our market , which translates into falling steel prices , with all its implications , particularly for employment .
A company such as Corus in the Netherlands and in England will be hit extremely hard , for this latter scenario will lead to a huge number of job losses .
I would like to ask the European Union , and especially Commissioner Lamy and the Presidency , what does it intend to do about this ?
Mr President , I was Minister for Steel in the United Kingdom between 1987 and 1989 and was responsible for an industry which was over-manned , uncompetitive , riddled with old-fashioned practices and heading for disaster .
When it was privatised , it experienced a traumatic time with the loss of plants and jobs , and morale was at rock bottom .
However , it had to be endured to secure any future at all .
We do not want that to happen again because an outside agency such as the United States has seemingly broken WTO rules , especially since the US itself should restructure old plants , rationalise employment and pension practices so that its own industry is improved , but not at the expense of European industry .
I find it disturbing , to say the least , that Romania is one of the countries exempted by the United States of America .
Romania is home to Sidex , closely connected to Ispat , the firm controlled by Lakshmi Mittal , which gave Tony Blair and the Labour Party GBP 125 000 for their general election campaign and then lobbied President Bush harder than anyone else to impose 30 % tariffs that would protect his United States and Romanian steel interests at a potentially deadly cost to British plants and jobs .
Just whose side is Tony 's crony on ?
It does not appear to be British and European workers , since Mittal will make an estimated USD 1 billion from this deal .
That GBP 125 000 gift was a real steal - a cheap and cynical investment that will literally pay dividends .
Therefore , the Labour Government is not our answer - the Commission is .
We must support the Commissioner in his determined attempts to protest and , if necessary , retaliate - but carefully .
We need the OECD talks to continue and to produce success .
How about some targeted action against products from Pennsylvania , Ohio and West Virginia ?
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , the transatlantic relationship is very important : it was a priority of the last Spanish Presidency and is again under the current one , and we must therefore do whatever we can to preserve it .
What is happening is that , like any relationship , there are two sides to it , and we are now seeing that the Bush Administration is strongly tempted to act on its own ; that is , to practise the Frank Sinatra doctrine : ' I 'll do it my way ' , both in politics - I only have two minutes and I cannot expand on this - and in trade .
Trade never used to be an area that tested this relationship : we considered trade disputes to be an exception , while trade benefits were the rule .
Now , however , they have gone too far , on both steel and another product that is less talked about : clementines .
The cases are different : clementines affect just one country ( the region , by the way , where Commissioner Solbes comes from ) and steel affects us all .
Both cases go against the WTO rules without any justification at all and , what is more , they imply self-punishment by the United States .
We have to withstand both the indirect damage - I believe traffic diversion measures can be taken - and the direct damage .
There are several possibilities : one is to take action within the WTO , but that will take time and , in the long run , we shall all be dead ; there is also the possibility of laissez-faire , of doing nothing , because the derived industries that import steel inputs will become less competitive and therefore we will be able to take over from them ; but what I believe we must to is act immediately .
The provisional measures that can be adopted are within easy reach , covered by the panel judgment on the Foreign Sales Task Corporation , and therefore we must act immediately .
Mr President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , in a well-known passage in Julius Caesar there is a sentence that reads : ' The fault , dear Brutus , is not in our stars , but in ourselves that we are underlings . '
I think this quotation is particularly appropriate to this moment , because the seriousness of the problem does not lie so much in the protectionist measures that affect the United States as in the reaction that the European Union must have to these aggressive trade moves , relations in which the steel and clementine issues - referred to by my good friend Mr Westendorp - are not just isolated incidents but have their causes and their consequences .
Mention has been made in this House of the ban on imports of hormone-treated meat ; the banana war ; the export aid declared illegal by a WTO panel ; the discussions that took place when the competition policy and certain mergers were implemented by Commissioner Monti ; and the aid for certain American products .
What worries me most in this love-hate relationship , however , is not so much what has happened but what the future holds , which is that the Republican administration is on the point of succumbing to the temptation of protectionism , as shown right now in two cases : steel , which has been explained enough - and on this I fully endorse what my colleague Mr Atkins has said - and clementines , which have also been mentioned by Mr Westendorp .
In the latter case , as this House knows , the United States unilaterally closed its borders on 30 November .
The Spanish government and my Parliamentary Group brought these events to the Commission 's attention on 12 December and the Commission then took immediate action .
Thank you for this promptness .
In addition , on 14 February the Spanish government requested that , in view of the breakdown of the talks that had been entered into , action should be started within the WTO .
What I am asking right now is that the same efficacy that people are trying to demonstrate on the matter of steel should also be demonstrated in the case of clementines . This is an even more flagrant case because , while in the first case it is a matter of imposing tariffs , which in my view are abusive and completely illegal , in the second it is about an even more drastic measure : the closing of borders .
This matter really does need to be taken to the WTO , but they will only reach a solution to this conflict , in the case of clementines , once several harvests have passed , and I therefore call for immediate compensation and reparations .
What we must do is make the United States sit round a negotiating table and work out a solution to the steel and clementines issues , by setting in motion the forceful measures to which my good friend and compatriot Mr Westendorp has referred .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , in the wake of 11 September the United States seemed to want to engage in a policy of broad partnership on an international scale .
It paid off its arrears to the UN and held consultations with the Europeans and many others .
However , since the State of the Union address , a hard unilateralist line has come to the fore .
This change of course appears to create the risk of serious aberrations , judging by the Pentagon report on the revision of US policy on the use of nuclear weapons , which could include the possibility of a first strike against Russia , China and many other countries .
This creates a difficult and disturbing atmosphere for transatlantic relations , which is compounded by the recent decisions on steel .
At the present time , it is important that Europe should reaffirm its role as a major partner whose friendship and solidarity depend on reciprocity .
This is essential if we want a balanced relationship between Europe and the United States , but it is even more essential for the stability of the world .
Europe must emphasise the impossibility of dealing with the instability , the dangers , the imbalance of today 's world by merely wielding a big stick ; it must emphasise that we also need to gain the upper hand in the struggle for peace , that we need to devote the same energy today to the fight against inequalities in the field of development and to defusing hotbeds of tension like the Middle East as has been applied to the struggle against terrorism .
As far as steel is concerned , Europe must take a firm line .
It is right and proper to issue a reminder , as Commissioner Lamy did this morning , of the need to submit to multilateral disciplines .
It is also crucial that we do not hesitate to ensure that other governments comply with rulings that the WTO makes in favour of Europe .
It will be obvious that I refer here to the Foreign Sales Corporation .
And so I should like to ask the Commission if it has the intention of applying the retaliatory trade sanctions that the WTO has authorised us to impose , given the decisions that the United States has just taken on steel imports and the violations of trade agreements that the United States has already committed through its use of export subsidies .
Relations between the European Union and the United States are inextricably linked .
We have strong bonds rooted in our respective pasts and we share many common values .
The strengthening of our long-standing transatlantic relationship is to our mutual benefit .
However , this has to be a relationship based on equality and mutual respect .
In America 's hour of need , after the 11 September attacks , Europe responded with unstinting support and solidarity , and rightly so .
Regrettably , though , the same sort of solidarity and cooperation has not been reciprocated in US foreign policy .
Prior to 11 September , it was absent on the issue of Kyoto .
It is non-existent with regard to a common approach on the Middle East , which is our most critical contemporary political problem , and on which the US unfortunately adopts a partisan role .
It was cast aside by the recent decision on the part of the US to impose import tariffs on steel .
Furthermore , the return to US unilateralism - especially evident in its perceived intention to extend the war on terrorism to Iraq - displays contempt for our role in international affairs .
It would seem that for the US , the transatlantic relationship is simply one of convenience , to be used when it suits , but ignored when US policy and interests take priority .
All these experiences , particularly those in recent days , underline how essential it is for the EU to strengthen its foreign policy role , including its defence and military capabilities , so that a proper equilibrium can be established in our transatlantic relationship .
Mr President , this week in Barcelona the European Council will gather in order to seek to build upon the Lisbon Process .
At that meeting , we will be pressing for more action to be taken in relation to deregulation , for more liberalisation , ensuring that we learn the lessons of employment flexibility .
There are those of us who have felt ever since we have arrived in the European Parliament that there is a lot of rhetoric in this place about free trade , but that there is also a great deal of protectionism with Member States here in Europe .
The entire agenda in Europe of taking forward a uniform competition policy and bearing down on state aid is geared towards ensuring that we have free trade .
In those circumstances , those of us who count ourselves as the best friends of the United States are hugely disappointed by the action that the US President has taken .
It is not putting it too strongly to say that , in a sense , we feel betrayed by it .
I do not link this to our support for the United States following the events of 11 September .
The events of 11 September were so horrific that they should not be linked with any sort of agreement in any other policy area .
But for those of us who have been pointing to the United States as an example of a deregulated and liberalised economy , it has been a shattering blow to see the way in which President Bush , faced with the difficulties that his steel industry is encountering , has gone for protectionism .
What is even worse is to read in the Financial Times today a justification of this action from Robert Zoellick , the US Trade Representative .
I feel sorry for Mr Zoellick , whom again we would regard as a friend of British Conservatives , because I must say that article destroys any credibility that he had in terms of discussion of trade issues .
The United States representatives watching this debate need to know that , while we may have heard from the usual suspects in terms of anti-Americanism , those of us who are friends of the United States feel very badly let down indeed .
Transatlantic relations are now in stormy waters .
The dingy of the European Union is struggling hard to cope with the waves of American power display .
The steel crisis is mainly political .
President Bush is backed internally by his electorate .
Retribution or a political reaction were not likely from the outside world , which opened up the opportunity to pass on the problem of unemployment to the outside world .
The European Union dingy is now wearily following a course of legal procedures .
We must take full advantage of all the options and means available to us within the WTO .
Our retaliation must be convincing . But even so , it does not give much hope of a positive outcome in the short term .
Our boat should be big enough to weather the storms . But we also need good helmsmanship .
A political crisis does require a political answer , and we must deliberate upon this .
Meanwhile , I should like to urge the Commission , and above all , Commissioner Liikanen , to take political action internally .
We must build a solid ship .
We hardly have a steel policy left , let alone a steel strategy .
We are on an ocean without any rescue boats for the workers .
If there is anything to learn from the steel crisis , it is that European steel policy should be restored .
Mr President , we can all stand here today and condemn the actions of the US Government in imposing these unjust , illegal and completely unfair tariffs on steel products imported into the USA .
We all know that the tariffs have simply been put there for short-term political advantage and we regret it for that alone .
But we must also stand united behind some clear , firm and serious action .
We must show we mean business .
The Commission must now act swiftly within the WTO to overturn these tariffs .
We must see safeguarding measures brought in to prevent a flood of cheap imports from damaging our own industry .
Those measures must be implemented in respect of all non-EU sources of steel in the form of quotas based on 1998 import levels if we are to do a proper job in protecting our own industry .
I do not recommend fighting fire with fire in this circumstance .
Instead , we must dump a large cold bucket of logic , common sense and international law onto the head of the US Government and bring it to its senses .
Mr President , the Presidency-in-Office of the Council has listened very carefully to all the speeches made during this debate and we have taken very good note of the positions expressed .
As the Foreign Minister has already stated in his introductory speech as President-in-Office of the Council , our commercial policy is a common one , and the European Commission has full autonomy and authority to make whatever decisions are appropriate .
Accordingly , I believe the Commission has , on behalf of the European Union , taken a firm stand on the steel problem , a stand that was publicly expressed and unanimously adopted by the Council of Ministers last Monday .
I therefore believe we must trust the Commission 's ability - as I have said - to deal with this matter , protest as appropriate , call for suitable compensation and use retaliatory measures , while fully complying with World Trade Organisation rules .
The Presidency-in-Office of the Council believes that our most powerful option is to call on the United States to comply with the rules that all the founders of the World Trade Organisation have set for themselves .
It is therefore very important that the European Union should set the example that we are the first to comply with not only the procedures but also the rules of the World Trade Organisation .
The clementine issue has also been mentioned - another trade issue with the United States that has yet to be resolved .
In this respect , the Presidency-in-Office can only say that it is up to the Member State affected - in this case Spain - to submit its claim to the Article 133 Committee and the Commission will act in accordance with what the Committee decides .
Everything seems to indicate that the measures adopted are disproportionate to the alleged threat from the so-called Mediterranean fly , which has been the argument used by the United States to ban the import of clementines .
These points will be assessed by the Article 133 Committee , which deals with such matters , and the Commission will be given a mandate to act accordingly .
With regard to other considerations that have been expressed here on the United States ' lamentable tendency to act unilaterally in many areas , not only in these matters of trade policy but also in other matters of general policy , the Presidency can only agree with many of the positions expressed here . I therefore believe that the forthcoming EU-US Summit to be held in Washington on 2 May will be a good opportunity for the Presidency of the Council and the Presidency of the Commission to remind the United States ' President that the spirit of the Transatlantic Declaration , which , as has been mentioned , was signed in 1995 , binds the parties to maintain a spirit of cooperation , to seek common ground and not to seek ground that separates us and , in the fine tradition of the intense relationship between the United States and Europe , it is in the interests of both parties , the United States and Europe , to seek points of agreement and not of disagreement .
Positions that separate the United States not only from the European Union but also from the general current of international opinion are , of course , not at all helpful in finding points of agreement .
I believe this debate has been highly fruitful ; we shall incorporate many of the opinions we have heard here into the general corpus on which we shall reflect in order to prepare the forthcoming transatlantic summit , and so I should like to thank you , Mr President , and this Parliament for all the ideas that have been put forward in this debate .
Mr President , I should first like to point out that the Commission also believes that our relations with the United States are essential , but that must never stop us from firmly carrying out the actions needed to defend the Union 's interests .
Today 's debate has drifted towards the existing conflicts between the United States and the European Union , particularly the steel dispute , although other matters have also been mentioned .
The major problem facing us is what we should do .
According to some of you , the best formula is to establish a link between the steel dispute and other trading problems with the Union .
Really , though , as our strong point is upholding multilateralism , it is reasonable that we should attack that contradiction by applying multilateral rules .
We do not think it is a good solution and it is not the one that best serves the Union 's long-term interests .
Others amongst you have suggested linking this issue to other matters ; the Foreign Sales Act has been mentioned , as has the matter of hormones .
Again we wonder whether seeking a package solution dependent on a political debate is the formula we should be using .
We believe that the strength of our position with the United States lies in the need to comply with what has been agreed multilaterally .
This must be the road we take ; we therefore consider that the first decision , without any question , is to use all existing procedures within the World Trade Organisation , and by all procedures we mean not only those that will take a long time to implement but also the necessary retaliatory measures , but all this must be done through the World Trade Organisation .
This may , of course , make it necessary for us to implement specific safeguard clauses which , I may say in advance , we intend will affect developing countries as little as possible , since our opinion on safeguard clauses is not to close off our markets but to maintain our traditional trade relations with our suppliers .
Clearly , the possibility some of you have suggested of making restrictive voluntary agreements to reduce exports is not compatible with the World Trade Organisation .
With regard to the clementines case - the President-in-Office of the Council has already referred to this matter - I shall only point out that we are negotiating with the United States in an attempt to find a solution to the problem before the next harvest .
Clearly , in this case too , just as in the last one , we are prepared to use all the legal resources established in the World Trade Organisation .
The Commission has been pleased to see the broad consensus among the European institutions regarding the need to make multilateral institutions work and to tackle the challenges of globalisation by seeking the best of solutions with our American counterparts and seeking to ensure that the unilateral option is not the one chosen .
I endorse Pascal Lamy 's comments here this morning that it would be fundamental to seek an agreement , as we have seen here , among all those supporting a new and positive boost to transatlantic relations .
However , that must not mean failing to tackle existing problems with all the means or all the facts at our disposal .
As you know , right now we are studying and working on various options , and any new contribution this House might make would be welcome .
Lastly , I should like to thank you for your unambiguous support for the firm line held by the Commission .
We hope that the resolution you are to vote on will strengthen the European Union 's positions on this fundamental issue for us all .
I have received six motions for resolutions tabled pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .

Mr President , firstly I should like to apologise for the absence of our committee chairman , Mr Bouwman , who unfortunately is ill this week , so that , as Parliament 's rapporteur on this issue it has fallen to me to introduce the question .
Parliament has long been aware of the problems concerning the legal base for the inclusion of third country nationals on the same footing as European Union citizens under the proposed simplification of modernisation of Regulation ( EEC ) No 1408 / 71 .
As Members know , this regulation seeks to coordinate social security systems between Member States for people moving and working across borders .
Some of the reservations I have heard voiced about the extension of this regulation to third country nationals border , at times , on the xenophobic rather than the rational .
You will be aware that the legal opinion provided by Parliament 's Legal Services felt that Articles 42 and 308 of the Amsterdam Treaty , as initially proposed by the Commission , formed the appropriate legal base for this extension as well as for the regulation as a whole .
The European Parliament agreed , as did the majority of the Member States , and that legal base provided for the equal treatment of third country nationals legally resident in the European Union and for the full involvement of Parliament through the codecision procedure .
Additionally , this parity of legal base seemed to many of us to provide a strong signal in terms of the recognition of the contribution from third country nationals to the life of the European Union and certainly met the twin aims of simplification of the process and natural justice .
To me that parity was a clear signal of an inclusive Europe .
I and many others find ourselves at a loss , on reading the Khalil judgment from the European Court of Justice , to understand why this should materially change the legal base on which Council and Commission are now proposing the extension of the regulation .
The Khalil case , insofar as legal experts have explained it to me , involves people covered by Regulation ( EEC ) No 1408 / 71 already , should they be allowed to legally reside in another Member State and thus cross borders .
They are included under this judgment because they are stateless people with rights to social security equivalent to those of nationals in the state in which they now reside as a result of international historical agreements .
But no right of free movement is provided for by their inclusion under the regulation .
The regulation does not grant freedom of movement .
It maintains certain rights for those who move through coordination of social security systems .
Council 's statement last December and the Commission 's new proposal do not explain the change in the legal base .
They simply state it .
It is an explanation that Parliament is now seeking .
What specifically in the Khalil judgment has led Council to its conclusion that Article 63.4 is the correct base , when this was not the majority opinion before ?
Has the European Court of Human Rights case of Gaygusuz v Austria providing for nationality being no barrier to equal treatment to nationals in relation to social security not led to a conclusion of equal treatment in relation to the regulation and thus the parallel legal base ?
And why should the European Parliament not be involved in this area which is directly relevant to the lives of so many people ?
Hence our desire as well also to clarify the situation of workers in accession countries during any transition period when they will not be enjoying freedom of movement .
Council and Commission will also be aware of this House 's concern for the complex situation facing cross-border workers .
The Belgian Presidency had put forward a number of proposals in this area , yet the agreement reached at present is only minimal , as parameter 8 concerning medical treatment shows .
So what are the prospects for further improvements for this group of workers ?
We are also asking the Commission for its perspective on a number of issues where Council seems to be less enthusiastic about the Commission perspective as well .
We would also ask whether the increasing links between the tax and the social security systems are being addressed by Council and Commission , either within the context of the regulation or elsewhere .
We are all well aware of the desire of Council and Commission to see increased mobility within the workforce and , as a Member of Parliament 's Committee on Petitions , I know as well that a number of those who work in other Member States find their situation made more difficult by the lack of effective information , but also by anomalies within the coordination system .
Many of us are concerned that Council appears reluctant to make free movement an easy reality .
We know this is a complex administrative issue , but many of the niceties of exclusion of certain benefits and complex rules simply appear as barriers .
It appears at times that it is easier to move ball-bearings around the European Union than it is to move people .
Mr President , on 6 February 2002 the Commission presented to the Council a proposal for a regulation to extend the provisions of Regulation ( EEC ) No 1408 / 71 to nationals of third countries who , solely as a result of their nationality , are not covered by those provisions .
The said proposal is based on paragraph 4 of Article 63 of the EC Treaty .
The Council has agreed on the possibility of using paragraph 4 of Article 63 as a legal basis , as the Commission proposed .
In accordance with the provisions of paragraph 4 of Article 63 , the Council will have to adopt measures which define the conditions under which nationals of third countries , who reside legally in a Member State , may reside in other Member States .
The Council considers that Article 42 of the EC Treaty , interpreted in the light of the judgements of the Court of Justice - in particular the judgement handed down in the Khalil case C-95 / 99 - does not seem to offer a sufficient legal basis for this extension .
In fact , Mr President , it can be deduced from the Khalil judgement that the Court has not criticised the inclusion of stateless persons and refugees in Regulation ( EEC ) No 1408 / 71 , based on Article 51 - currently Article 42 - of the EC Treaty , solely insofar as it involves a small category of people , in relation to which the Member States have made international commitments .
In fact , the Court decided as follows : ' The Council cannot be criticised for having , in the exercise of the powers which have been conferred on it under Article 51 of the EEC Treaty , also included stateless persons and refugees resident on the territory of the Member States in order to take into account the abovementioned international obligations of those States .
As the Advocate General pointed out in paragraph 59 of his Opinion , ' coordination excluding stateless persons and refugees would have meant that the Member States , in order to ensure compliance with their international obligations , had to establish a second coordination regime designed solely for that very restricted category of persons ' .
Therefore , the Council believes that the applicable procedure for adopting a decision should be the one laid down in the EC Treaty .
If the legal basis adopted for extending coordination to third-country nationals turns out to be paragraph 4 of Article 63 , the Council will have to give its opinion in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 67 .
In relation to border workers , the Council has reached an agreement in principle in the field of sickness and unemployment benefits according to which the situation of former border worker pensioners will have to be studied .
According to the provisions of the current Regulation , the border worker may receive healthcare in the territory of the competent State , but does not enjoy this right as a pensioner .
For reasons of continuity , so that treatments already started may continue , the former border worker should be allowed to continue to receive sickness benefits in the territory of the State in which they formerly worked .
Finally , with regard to the unemployed worker , who during their last job resided in the territory of a Member State other than the competent State , the main objective is to incorporate them as best as possible into the labour markets .
Furthermore , it will be appropriate to guarantee the social protection of the unemployed while bearing in mind the financial aspects of the issue and guaranteeing effective control .
As regards the relationship between taxation and social security , this is an issue which essentially falls within the competence of the Member States and not the Union .
It should be stressed that , in a general sense , the guidelines for employment for 2002 draw attention to the need to adapt the tax and benefit structures in such a way that they do not have a negative effect on participation in active life , particularly in relation to women .
Nationals of candidate countries who become Community nationals purely as a result of accession will be included , by virtue of that accession , within the scope of Regulation ( EEC ) No 1408 / 71 .
The possible exceptions to this principle , which could take the form , for example , of transitional periods , will be determined within the framework of the accession agreements , which are currently under negotiation .
Mr President , in response to the doubts raised in the oral question by Mr Bouwman , I would like to stress the following on behalf of the Commission : firstly , in relation to the legal basis , we agree with the view of the President-in-Office of the Council ; in our opinion , the appropriate legal basis is paragraph 4 of Article 63 of the EC Treaty .
There is no need to read out its actual text , since the Presidency has already done so .
We believe that the Khalil sentence , of October last year , raises the inadequacy of the legal basis of Article 51 ( currently 42 ) and obliges us to reconsider that of the Decision proposed in 1997 .
Since the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam , with the new provisions of Title 4 , we believe that the appropriate legal basis is paragraph 4 of Article 63 of that Treaty , while bearing in mind that Article 308 of the Treaty can only be applied if there is no other legal basis .
You also ask for the Commission 's opinion on a series of parameters proposed by the Council , specifically parameters 6 , 10 and 11 , relating to agreements between countries , unemployment benefits and family benefits .
With regard to the first point , the Commission believes that parameter 6 is acceptable , since this possibility is laid down in the current Regulation .
The Commission believes it positive that in the Regulation , unlike the current one , criteria are established to maintain these agreements , especially in cases which are more favourable to the person affected .
Secondly , with regard to unemployment benefits , the Commission regrets the lack of progress in relation to parameter 10 , which does not provide any essential modification of the current provisions , above all because it does not offer any specific solution in the relation to the situation of border workers .
With regard to family benefits , parameter 11 does not correspond exactly to the Commission 's proposal , but , in any event , the Commission considers it positive that that parameter intends to guarantee the beneficiary the maximum amount of benefits .
This parameter will improve the situation of pensioners and orphans in comparison with the Regulation , since these people will benefit from the same provisions applicable to the same category of family benefits as self-employed and salaried workers .
The relationship between taxation and social security is another of your questions .
It is true that Regulation ( EEC ) No 1408 / 71 refers to the coordination of social security systems in the Member States .
There are no explicit rules for the coordination of these tax systems and this issue is largely resolved by the bilateral agreements on double taxation which have been reached by almost all the Member States .
The agreements follow the model of the OECD , which means that , in most cases , the income from salaried work ( and also freelance work ) is only subject to the taxes of either the country in which the work is carried out or the country of residence .
Therefore , if they are subject to the taxes of the Member State in which they work , that country has competence both in terms of taxation and in terms of social security .
The Court of Justice confirmed that , in the absence of harmonisation at Community level , the Member States have the competence to establish the criteria for allocation of fiscal competence in order to eliminate double taxation , but , in doing so , it is logical that they should respect the principles of Community legislation and , amongst others , that of the prohibition of discrimination on the grounds of nationality .
My final comments relate to enlargement .
Firstly , the negotiations with the candidate countries , as the Presidency has said , on Regulation ( EEC ) No 1408 / 71 , in its part relating to Chapter 2 , have provisionally been concluded - or have been concluded - with all the countries apart from Estonia , and this Chapter 2 also includes the coordination of social security systems .
However , the annexes are still under negotiation .
It has been entrusted to the administrative Committee for the social security of migrant workers , which will shortly present to the Council 's working groups the results of its debates on entries , which the candidate countries have asked to be included in those annexes .
Finally , Regulation ( EEC ) No 1481 / 71 will be applied to nationals of candidate countries as soon as they accede to the European Union , since there is no provision for a transitional period in the field of the coordination of social security systems .
Mr President , I am both angry and sad . Why ?
Because I am not getting a straight answer from the Council or the Commission .
Within this internal market , we are in favour of the free movement of goods , people and services .
I have included people , for this is particularly a problem in border regions . However , the answers that I am receiving are inadequate .
If I consider my own region , I notice that the labour market there can no longer function without workers from abroad .
Needless to say , we must make the conditions attractive for these people to come .
This means , first of all , that we must ensure that shop-floor workers who work in a Member State pay both taxes and social premiums in the same way .
I would therefore like to know whether it would not be possible to draft a kind of 1408 that applies to the fiscal status of border workers .
This is my first question .
My second question is directed at the Council concerning what is so nicely termed ' Council parameters ' .
Incidentally , I very much regret that the Commissioner is not present , for he is truly competent in this field and knows how long this issue has been outstanding .
Studying these Council parameters - and , Mr Miguelez , I hold you in very high esteem - I note that what you have written in the Council parameters is diametrically opposed to what has been presented to us in recent jurisdiction by the European Court of Justice .
And I wonder whether you really believe that you can get this issue , in which Parliament has also been involved since Amsterdam in terms of codecision , approved .
For the aspects you mention , such as sickness benefit and child benefit , are incompatible with what has been pronounced , and the Commissioner will back this up .
So , with all due respect to Mrs Lambert , for she made some valid points on third-country problems , among others , which I endorse , a change is needed here .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we had two reasons for asking these questions . First , to obtain some clarification , and second to get things moving in this whole field .
Clarification , because we Members of Parliament soon realised that the contributions made by Commissioner Solbes and the representative of the Council did not make it clear why the legal basis has been changed in Article 63 ( 4 ) .
It was simply stated , without any justification being given .
Since Tampere , we have taken very seriously the Council 's announcement that the legal status of third-country nationals , that is to say citizens who live and work in the EU , who are legally resident here and do not come from one of the 15 Member States , should be approximated to that of Member States ' nationals .
Europe 's institutions want more clarity and transparency without waiting for the Convention .
However , these new proposals are creating more confusion than before , because , if we have to deal with two different legal bases , that is certainly very confusing .
It is also unsatisfactory because it rules out codecision by Parliament .
What a short-sighted strategy on the part of the Commission !
You know that up to now we have always been on your side when it comes to modernisation , to changing and improving things for Europe 's employees , Europe 's workers .
I think it would be not only very short-sighted but also a dangerous strategy to exclude Parliament at this stage .
It is of course possible for the United Kingdom , Ireland and Denmark to apply to opt out under Regulation 1408 , and that would really be disastrous , because no one in this House could welcome a further social policy opt-out .
The result would be a patchwork quilt of a social policy which would certain not confirm and win the trust that employees ought to have in Europe 's institutions .
So we are all delighted that the United Kingdom has stopped opting out of social policy .
Is this an attempt to reintroduce that ?
The second reason for our question was of course to get the plans for reform moving .
I remember that an undertaking to update this directive was given in Edinburgh back in 1992 .
Please note - an update .
I would like to remind you once again that Regulation 1408 does not involve harmonising social systems , but is about coordinating the framework conditions , as it were , in order to encourage and support our citizens in making use of their scope for mobility in Europe .
Every couple of weeks there are fresh appeals from the Council and the Commission to young people , to workers , to the public in general , to take advantage of this freedom of movement .
However , I would like to say here that the framework conditions consist of some very complicated and unwieldy legislation .
In Germany we would say that is a book with seven seals , a closed book if you like , even for the initiated .
The 12 parameters that we now have before us do not add up to the qualitative improvement that we actually promised ourselves .

I naturally agree with the critical comments made by Mrs Lambert and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , and also with the criticism that you expressed on behalf of the Commission , Mr Solbes .
The other point I should have mentioned was the time frame .
We had expected that the Spanish Presidency would have presented a methodical , reasonable and effective proposal by June .
Mr President , I agree with the Commission 's and the Council 's interpretation of the Treaties . Of course Article 63 is to be used as a legal basis for guaranteeing third countries ' nationals freedom of movement .
Moreover , I have also in the past put forward the view that the actual legal basis was not perhaps the most important thing right now , for what is at issue is guaranteeing the rights of these people .
I think , however , that , in the long term , we must arrive at a situation in which Parliament also obtains direct influence on this area .
It will require a change to the Treaties , and I am ashamed to say that , during the negotiations in connection with the Nice Treaty , my own country resisted our obtaining influence over these matters because of the Danish reservation .
Moreover , I quite agree with Mrs Weiler that we must get away from a situation in which some countries are accorded reservations in connection with parts of such a policy .
We must all pull together .
Mr President , I can only say that I have taken good note of the observations of the honourable Members in this debate and that , naturally , the Presidency will consider this issue .
Mr President , I will try to answer some of the questions raised very quickly .
Firstly , the system of taxation and social security .
The tax system is the responsibility of the Member States and it is decided in accordance with the place of residence .
That is how it is and treatment varies depending on the Member State .
The social security system is regulated at Community level by means of Regulation ( EEC ) No. 1408 / 71 and is defined in accordance with the place of work .
We do not have fiscal harmonisation and that is the reason why the system I referred to earlier is applied , basically taking the agreements of the OECD into consideration .
The second point raised relates to what our objective is in relation to social security .
Our objective is , clearly , to apply the same social security system and the same rights to all citizens of the Union , but also for all legal residents .
With regard to the problem of the opting out by Ireland and the United Kingdom , as the honourable Member knows , it is true that the intention is to use the new legal basis .
Ireland has indicated that it is going to participate .
In the case of the United Kingdom , the issue is still open and it will be until the beginning of May , which is when it intends to adopt its decision .
Finally , with regard to the nature of the new text , it is intended to be more modern than the previous one , with a simpler and more accessible definition for users of the current legal system .
The new text is intended to include both the conclusions arising from the judgements of the Court of Justice and the various amendments which have been introduced since 1971 .
It is true that there is a debate on the legal basis , but we believe , of course , that the one used is the correct legal basis in accordance with the current system , and it has clearly never been the Commission 's intention to affect Parliament 's rights in any way .
The debate is closed .
The next item is the report ( A5-0062 / 2002 ) by Bruno Trentin , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the state of the European economy - preparatory report with a view to the Commission recommendation on broad economic policy guidelines ( 2002 / 2014 ( INI ) ) .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , a slow recovery in economic growth seems to be taking shape in both the United States and Europe , although the timescale and stability of this recovery are still uncertain .
Above all , the extent of the recovery already seems to vary greatly across the various sectors involved , and it is intertwined with restructuring and modernisation processes , which may be supported by heavy public investment and unacceptable protectionist measures , as is the case with steel in the United States .
The problem that the European Union is always faced with is how to prevent such a contradictory and non-uniform move out of recession from coinciding - because of a wait-and-see attitude of European governments and the Union - with a widening , and not a narrowing , of the innovation and competitiveness gap that already penalises Europe in comparison with the United States .
For this reason , the report I am tabling highlights the urgent need to adopt a proactive policy - at the Barcelona summit , let us hope - which is , above all , in line with the Lisbon objectives , a policy mix that makes the social agenda adopted at Nice an integral part of a coordinated economic and social policy centred on the objective of increasing the active population and achieving full employment .
This seems even more essential if one bears in mind the need to abide by the constraints of the Stability and Growth Pact , particularly that of keeping budget deficits down to within 3 per cent of gross domestic product , which only leaves rather modest resources available for a counter-cyclical economic policy in the individual States .
We therefore stress that it is not a question of concentrating new powers in Brussels but rather of making very selective choices and coordinating state intervention in order to achieve a critical mass , creating positive synergies of public intervention and private investment at a European level .
It is a matter , then , of choosing .
In the report we uphold the need to prioritise the revival of a policy of investment instead of an across-the-board reduction in the tax burden , except for further exemption from labour costs .
In the area of public and private investment , we insist on a resumption of the Lisbon strategy , which today , especially in some countries , is making disturbingly slow progress .
This means giving high priority to channelling Community resources and national investment into strategic sectors like research and innovation , lifelong learning as an integral and inseparable part of the structural reform of the labour market , and the creation of a European network of infrastructures and services , starting with telecommunications .

In addition , Community projects need to be better coordinated with governments ' economic and social policy guidelines , and not only coordinated better but in good time - by the summer , in this case - so that they can affect the decisions of the national parliaments , which must be informed of the initiatives of the competent European Parliament committees in due time and be involved in them .
We must not just hope for coordination but promote it too , for instance by proposing - through the Commission - forms of open cooperation between different governments on common projects concerned with research , innovation , lifelong learning and active ageing policies , the latter being a prerequisite for achieving a reform of social security systems that is not disastrous for workers ' pension rights .
Social dialogue must also be involved in this policy mix , based on the need to set out the guidelines and financing methods for the continuing education policy .
The participation of the social partners in defining a modern welfare state , turning it into a decisive factor in sustainable development leading to full employment , is one of the cornerstones of the European social model .
At Barcelona we must therefore reject any attempt to weaken collective bargaining and to remove from the Charter of Fundamental Rights a major part of its content .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by sincerely thanking the rapporteur for his excellent cooperation .
But I would also like to say a few additional words about the report .
In Lisbon , a high-flown declaration was made that we would become the number one in the world .
It is now evident that things will not happen as quickly as some people had hoped .
We might now think that target was over-ambitious .
Perhaps we should be honest and totally forget it .
A lot of things are now attributed to 11 September and to the economic downturn in the USA .
It is certain that the tragic events of 11 September had an additional negative impact , but negative economic trends had already set in before then in Europe .
In particular , from a German point of view we should not lose sight of the fact that Germany is the largest economy in the European Union and that countries that have far closer economic ties with the USA , such as the Netherlands and the United Kingdom , have far fewer problems than we do .
We should move away from that .
However , I fear that the Barcelona Summit has again proclaimed ambitious targets without us having done our homework first .
When all is said and done , Europe should not raise expectations that the European Union does not have the power to meet . Instead , the individual Member States should take the announcements they make there seriously when they return home , and should do their homework , for example in the case of flexible working arrangements and corresponding tax reforms .
I would also warn against repeatedly talking about coordination at European level .
This kind of coordination could lead to additional illusory powers at European level .
Ultimately , however , it is hard to move things forward in this area .
What we need at European level is an offensive on behalf of small and medium-sized enterprises .
It is SMEs that will create jobs in the future , and we assume that nine out of ten jobs will in future be created in companies with less than a thousand employees .
It is important here to create framework conditions so that SMEs are not overburdened with bureaucracy and all the requirements that Brussels creates , and that in future the individual Member States should provide appropriate knock-on financing .
However , at the end of the day it is also important for us to adopt a clear position here .
This is also evident from the debate about the warning letter .
I would like to thank the Commission and Commissioner Solbes for having insisted on the 3 % being strictly adhered to .
The discussions that have taken place in recent months about this have not only been damaging to the stability and growth market , but have also adversely affected Europe 's reputation , its economy and the euro .
We should turn our back on this sort of behaviour and have faith in our own economic strength .
We should not be saying that America needs an economic upturn because it will benefit Europe - we should be able to achieve an upturn by virtue of our own strength and our own convictions .
Just a few more words by way of conclusion .
I have just heard someone talking about " coordinating state intervention " .
I absolutely must warn against that .
The best form of social policy is a good economic policy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this own-initiative report has , first of all , the extraordinary merit of placing the European Parliament at the centre of the discussion of the broad economic policy guidelines for Europe in the years to come .
The rapporteur starts from a correct and appropriate premise and gives a rational presentation of the real causes of Europe 's current recession and provides a logical suggestion for an appropriate remedy .
First of all , at political level , accentuating the need for the European Parliament and the national parliaments to play an active and regulatory role in laying down the broad economic policy options .
Secondly , in terms of public finances , highlighting the need for a stable reference point from which to reaffirm the absolute need to fulfil the final objective of the Stability and Growth Pact , which is to have a budgetary deficit of less than 3 % .
The rapporteur nevertheless acknowledges and recommends an appropriate degree of flexibility , which is necessary if we are to use public policies as instruments of economic recovery , without making the zero deficit in 2004 an obsession that is disproportionate to today 's reality .
Similarly , at structural level , he suggests and endorses the use of instruments to improve the general economic climate , in particular in training , in access to public services , in the creation of a knowledge-based society or in the adaptation of the labour markets . Finally , he takes up the objective of the Lisbon Extraordinary Summit and pursues this objective at the Barcelona Extraordinary Summit .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Liberal Group , I would firstly like to express our support for Mr Trentin 's report .
It is a very well-produced report which has sought a consensus .
We have been able to work together and the result will reflect the efforts we have made throughout its drawing up in committee .
This report could not have come at a more appropriate time : the day after tomorrow the Barcelona European Council will take place and it will deal with issues relating to the assessment to be made and the commitments to be assumed in relation to the Lisbon process , as well as , clearly , a series of issues which the Liberal Group has always insisted on and which the Commissioner is sufficiently aware of and which I am not going to repeat : the need to liberalise the most protected sectors ; the opening up of the markets ; the emphasis on training and education : the provision of more resources for scientific research and technological development ; that is , the fulfilment of the Lisbon objectives .
We hope that clear progress will be made on this issue at this meeting in Barcelona .
I would like to point out that the report by Mr Trentin does not exactly establish a social dimension , which is also included in the Lisbon objectives and that , unfortunately , they are not taken into account and , therefore , I believe that the demonstrations which have been organised against the Europe of capital - of this Europe which we are building and which is a reality - lack justification .
Mr President , may I say that Mr Aznar , the President-in-Office of the Council , very clearly identified the key words of the economic governance of Europe .
As he indicated , the three wells from which the Union draws its economic policies are liberalisation , privatisation and competition .
These wells , if I may say so , contain toxic water .
The dismantling of public services which were operating more or less properly has been the source of all kinds of social havoc and inefficiency : the railways in Britain , the postal and health services in France , electricity supplies in most parts of Catalonia , and so on .
In Lisbon the Council spoke of making the economy of the Union the most competitive in the world by the year 2010 .
At what price ?
At the price of all-out , dog-eat-dog warfare .
We are far from the pursuit of happiness which the most perceptive politicians of the late eighteenth century regarded as an inalienable right of human beings .
Instead , we have the prospect of permanent stress , widespread insecurity of employment , mass exclusion and perhaps , in due course , the same tragedy that has now engulfed Argentina .
In Biarritz , Gothenburg , Nice and Laeken , grass-roots society has demonstrated against such aberrations .
Tomorrow , in my own city of Barcelona , there may well be more demonstrations .
I believe it is essential to listen to the voice of protest , and I feel that the Trentin report pays it insufficient heed .
Mr President , may I express my thanks to Bruno Trentin for the quality of his work and for being a good listener .
In his diagnosis he clearly emphasises that Europe is not cyclically dependent on the United States and that the research and technological-innovation gap between the two sides of the Atlantic is liable to widen , with the Union clearly lagging particularly far behind in terms of public and private investment .
But how should we respond ?
Our Committee wished to adhere to the principle of coordinating national policies , which it sees as one of the mandatory precepts of the Stability Pact .
But who can fail to observe the extremely poor results of this coordination ?
Who can fail to see that the Pact , while providing Member States with a useful discipline as far as public deficits are concerned , does not begin to define the policies that are required if the development targets set in Lisbon are to be met ?
As for the intensification of fiscal competition , it compels governments to cut public spending , even on essentials .
And who can also fail to observe that the Member States will not let the Union acquire budgetary and fiscal instruments that would enable it to support a policy of investment and development ?
This is why , unlike Mr Radwan and contrary to the letter of the report , I believe we cannot continue to operate within the bounds set by the present treaties .
It will be necessary to go beyond the coordination stage and try to extend the powers of the Union .
The broad economic policy guidelines and the Stability Pact must be reviewed if we want to adopt a truly cooperative approach , and we must press for the Union to obtain the budgetary and fiscal instruments without which it cannot pursue real economic policies .
Accordingly , our Parliament should seize the present opportunity to take a historic initiative by formulating proposals for submission to the Convention on the Future of Europe .
It would be a cruel disappointment and , I believe , a political error of the first magnitude if the Convention did not try to strengthen the European Union and its powers in the sphere of economic policy at this precise time when some large question marks hang over the development and cohesion of our Community .
Mr President , Mr Trentin 's work deals very clearly with important matters for the future of the Union , and it does so by appropriately combining economic and social approaches , in a context of involvement and participation , in order to maintain a social security framework , and of innovation as well .
One passage among so many seems significant , however : the one about the need not to wait for the effects of the American recovery .
Among the various reasons for agreeing with this statement is that we do not believe fully in the soundness of the revival across the Atlantic .
The reversal of the unemployment trend and an upturn on the Nasdaq contrast , in fact , with the sharp rise in oil prices , perhaps because of the winds of war blowing through the oil-producing countries .
Each of these aspects taken alone supports the points raised in the report before us , but they also support the need for it to have a wholly European focus , which includes maintaining the Stability and Growth Pact , because another perplexing aspect in the USA is , paradoxically , the increase in floating capital , perhaps as an intentional inflationary nudge to level off the huge public investments that have been made .
This is an aspect that Europe cannot allow itself , with fifteen economies that are sometimes profoundly different from each other .
Of course , the expectation is that as soon as possible the Union will achieve effective open coordination - in social as well as economic policy - with joint consideration of fiscal policies , but with the warning that without constant , real grass-roots participation there will be no economic growth that can be enjoyed by the general public .
The reference to greater participation by local players is explicit , as the second report on cohesion has shown , but from the standpoint of enlargement there is also a clear reference to wider enjoyment , or at least greater access to information regarding Community support , since the fact is that the EAGGF , for instance , has reported significantly low take-up rates in the Member States .
Similarly , what is needed for the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , besides the hoped-for transparency about future action and the procedures for it , is the constructive requirement that the ways in which pre-accession funds are used should be better monitored , bearing in mind that in these countries , still coming to grips with setting up an own resources system , there are generally not enough funds available to support cofinancing .
It is , in fact , extremely difficult to justify scientifically , as the Union demands , the inclusion of environmental sites on the Natura 2000 list before the Trans-European Networks are built .
In the latter respect , more and better participation by the countries of Central and Eastern Europe in Community plans and programmes would be welcome , as would their greater participation in transport policy , including attention to Community corridors .
In conclusion , what I am trying to say is that not only are the economic and social plans extremely opportune , but so is the harmonious and integrated way they are implemented , with a vision that goes from the new , near borders ?
( The President cut the speaker off )
I am sorry , but I have to interrupt you now .
You have spoken for 22 seconds more than your three minutes .
Please stick to your speaking time .
It looks like Europe is not entirely happy with its latest toy , the ' euro ' .
New areas of policy have to suffer interference from European institutions at the risk of being swallowed up by Brussels .
The issue that springs to mind is that of employment , which is currently in the limelight of the Brussels bureaucracy .
The report by Mr Trentin particularly mentions national areas of policy , such as education and labour regulations .
It is a report that pretends to deal with the economic situation , but , in fact , prescribes in a normative manner , that employment must be promoted through education and flexible labour in the Member States .
We are eloquently informed that the promotion of employment should be regulated from Brussels .
Education , scientific research and labour policy are mentioned as areas where Europe must play a coordinating role in order to achieve the objectives of the Lisbon process .
But how is Europe to do this ?
And is Europe able to implement policy in those areas ?
And maybe the most important question : do we really want Europe to have a say in this ?
Education policy and policy allowing people to take part in the employment process belong with the Member States .
For it is they who know what type of education and what measures are needed to allow everyone who is eligible to do so to take part in labour and health care .
Precisely in the Member States , where the government and citizen are closer together , is it possible to let the wishes of those citizens be expressed .
In my view , these matters do not belong in a report on the situation of the European economy .
Let it be clear that I fully endorse the objectives of promoting employment , good education and a fair social system .
However , it is my firm belief that it is not the task of the European Union to contribute actively to policy-making in these areas .
It would therefore be wise if Parliament were to show restraint in this respect .
Mr President , six months after the attacks of 11 September , the United States is reverting to growth and job-creation while Europe lags behind , plagued by uncertainty and contradictory signals .
In this context , the Trentin report , which seeks to assist in preparing the broad economic policy guidelines for 2003 , might have been expected to signal very vigorous reforms that could kick-start the European economy .
This is not the case .
All we see in it are reform proposals that are already very familiar , such as lifelong learning , support for research , completion of the market in financial services and the opening of the energy and transport markets , measures which will bear little fruit in the immediate future .
The report also contains the traditional call for close European budgetary coordination , which is said to release what the report calls ' positive synergies ' , whereas in practice it could well add to the rigidity that already exists .
For our part , we should like to take this opportunity to call first and foremost for a sharp reduction in taxes and other public charges , because these are the number-one problem in the countries where growth is slow .
This will inevitably be a major issue in the French election campaign in particular .
The European Union , of course , has no direct legislative powers in the realm of taxation .
This makes it all the more regrettable that Commissioner Pedro Solbes Mira , in an article that appeared yesterday in a French daily newspaper , spoke out of turn by apparently stating that a candidate 's promises to cut taxes were not backed by a corresponding pledge to cut public spending .
This comment is below the belt , firstly because our candidates ' platforms have not yet been finalised and secondly because Commissioner Solbes is not the head of an economic government of Europe , there being no such thing .
He should leave the French electorate to decide for themselves .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to express my thanks for the positive atmosphere in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , because not only this report but also those that follow - especially the legislative reports in the area of financial services - require a high degree of willingness to cooperate and need to be seen in the context of attempts to strengthen economic and monetary union as the motor of the European Union .
I therefore view the Trentin report in conjunction with the report already adopted on the economic consequences of 11 September .
We certainly always debated them together in committee .
I do not need to repeat that .
I stand by the Lisbon objectives .
Yes , they are ambitious - but we need ambitious objectives , because if we just tread water and are complacent we will achieve nothing .
However , we will only achieve these objectives if we do our homework .
That applies not only to the European Parliament but also to the Council and the governments of the Member States .
We need to get over this period of weakness , as it says in the report .
But to get over a period of weakness you have to take measures and not just wait . We have to recognise that we have a great deal to do and cannot just wait for an upturn in America .
We have to become independent from America 's economy .
For me , that means we need a properly functioning internal market , in other words we must do everything to implement in good time the directives that have already been adopted , to eliminate obstacles to the internal market , and to achieve greater coordination in the internal market despite the variations in competence , in order to remove distortion of competition .
Our objectives are an action plan for financial services , structural reforms , observance of the Stability Pact and the principles of the social market economy .
Mr President , I would like to follow on from what Mr Karas has said , and refer to a level competitive playing field .
Yes , we certainly have an internal market , but we also have 15 sets of national circumstances within this internal market .
So there is not a level competitive playing field .
For example , there is not a level playing field between large companies and SMEs , because there are already wide differences in taxation between them , nor is there a level playing field between companies that operate globally and those that operate at regional level .
There is not a level playing field when you consider the system of taxes and charges in the Member States and how market access is guaranteed .
When we talk about wanting to become the most dynamic economic region in the world , that means that we have to increase our economic power .
In a nutshell , that means that we either have to rationalise , which is in the economic interest of individual companies , but not in our macroeconomic interest , as it of course involves job losses , or else we can increase turnover .
If we want to increase turnover , we need a market - we need customers .
Customers who must have money .
That means that we have to increase demand .
Demand must come from both public and private investment .
That means that people must obtain sufficient income from paid employment , if they are to be in a position to buy products in the first place .
It is no good having the very best , most well-designed , most durable and most keenly priced product if there are no customers who can pay for it .
I therefore simply believe that the contrast that is constantly made between economic policy and social policy is simply wrong .
Mr Radwan , you said that the best economic policy is simultaneously also the best social policy .
I would also like to turn that round : a good social policy is also a good economic policy .
I say that because there is a common denominator here , which is why investments have to be taken into account .
As I see it , education is not a form of consumption , but an investment in the future , because we have to develop new products .
To do that , we need a skilled workforce .
And that has to be built into this whole framework of investment activity .
Mr President , our old Communist friend Mr Markov has not come up with anything new either !
We are talking now about the Trentin report , which we unanimously adopted in committee , and which relates to the broad economic policy guidelines and to a decision-making process which in the first place concerns the Commission .
Parliament wishes to influence this process of coordination and opinion forming at a relatively early stage , without presenting a wish list the size of a mail-order catalogue .
However , this is not just a question of keeping ourselves busy : Article 4 of the EC Treaty specifically provides for this common economic policy , this coordinated economic and finance policy .
And , Mr Markov , that article prescribes the model as follows : " ? in accordance with the principle of an open market economy with free competition " .
That is our principle , and that is why - not because it is what my group wants , but because it is part of the Commission 's programme - the completion of the internal market and the further liberalisation of public-sector services are a priority , as is the fact that we need to equip ourselves for competition at world level , and the fact that we need to dismantle obstacles in the Member States and to tackle the process of reform .
That brings us to the question that Mr Radwan referred to : where does the Commission 's responsibility end and that of the Member States start ?
Where is subsidiarity appropriate and where do we need to act ?
The only answer I can give is that whatever the Commission may bring forward and whatever Parliament may agree , in the past it has been more the Council , which is an amalgamation of the 15 governments , that has acted as a brake on this motor of European development , which has now of course become even more necessary than ever with the euro coming into circulation .
That is why this debate and Parliament 's decision only make sense if we specifically call on the Member States to respect their commitments and not to lag behind .
That means that in the larger Member States , in which there is an especially big backlog of reforms , national reforms will have to be tackled .
Mr President , I wish to thank Mr Trentin for his interesting report .
Even though it contains a clear endorsement of the stability policy , the report , as I interpret it , is characterised mainly by attempts to find new avenues , create openings , relax the rules and bring about greater freedom of manoeuvre .
I also think that the amendments by the social democratic MEPs extend those lines of thought , in other words in the direction of creating a little more scope for expansion and innovation .
That is positive , for I believe that Europe 's economy , which is still characterised by high unemployment , growing social problems and stagnation in important areas such as education and research , requires more expansion , dynamism and innovation .
Anyone who follows the politico-economic debate in the European Union will see that it is greatly concerned with rules , control , prohibitions , cohesion , coordination , discipline and such like .
Really , it does not sound at all as if we are discussing a liberal market economy , but a rather bureaucratic and ponderous economy .
I believe that vigorous efforts ought instead to be made to stimulate the economy and to channel public investment into education and research , something that is really needed if we are to realise the Lisbon objectives .
Major improvements in the environmental sphere also need to be made and , as Mr Markov pointed out , purchasing power needs to be increased and care taken to create demand so that companies can dare to begin investing again and so that we can invest in quality and in initiatives that help enable us to comply with the ambitious Lisbon objectives .
That is unfortunately not what I see .
What I see is something resembling a straightjacket , characterised by stability , rules and discipline .
That is not enough .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Trentin report surely lays the initial bases for major future decisions on economic policy .
These bases do , however , need to be more incisive and detailed in the proposals , so that they do not merely stand as statements of principle but can be swiftly put into practice .
European leaders must apply themselves to rewriting the model for the social and market economy , bringing it up to date and rethinking it with greater emphasis on the social commitment .
Signing up in general terms to innovation , training and flexibility and then backing out at the decisive moment is becoming not only disrespectful but surely detrimental to the working class as a whole .
Today , to get out of this rut , class and corporate interests must be opposed insofar as they are not compatible with modern reformism .
Rather than taking to the streets - or rather getting the workers to take to the streets - the trades unions should be asking themselves how much the workers took home between 1992 and 2000 , given the productivity achieved by companies , which was certainly substantial .
The proposal to turn employment around is based on a new bargaining structure and real pay flexibility .
The new bargaining framework may be a regional or territorial system , half way between centralisation and company-level bargaining , with the aim of strengthening pay flexibility at company level where productivity is created and the individual contribution is valued .
A large contribution may be made by company profit-sharing schemes , which allow ordinary shares in the company to be acquired up to a certain percentage of gross profits .
It has been found that the companies with the highest profits are also those that use profit sharing to ensure that their best staff are paid effectively .
In the USA , the companies that adopt profit sharing tend to have higher pay and higher returns .
The pay of those who join profit-sharing companies goes up , while those that leave have to bear a substantial pay cut .
Mr President , I am going to try to quickly mention most of the issues raised and I would firstly like to thank Mr Trentin for his report .
It is a good contribution to the broad economic policy guidelines which we are going to discuss and I believe that , in accordance with our fundamental concerns , the report focuses on two objectives : one short-term objective ; how to consolidate the emerging recovery and turn it into a lasting growth in Europe ; and secondly , how to deal with our problems of growth potential and make progress with the Lisbon objectives , an issue which is particularly attractive at this time , immediately before the Barcelona Summit .
I agree with the view of some of you that our difficulties did not begin with 11 September .
We were already in a situation of less economic growth and I also share the view that the impact of the evolution of the American economy has been greater than we initially expected , but I believe we should acknowledge that the Union 's action in terms of economic policy during this period has been correct .
The monetary authorities have taken advantage of the lower risk in the field of price stability in order to cut interest rates , and budgetary policies have supported the activity by means of the functioning of automatic stabilisers and tax reductions which have taken place during this period .
I do not share the view that we have had a procyclic policy .
We only have to look at the impact the automatic stabilisers have had in Europe in percentage terms .
Good handling of macroeconomic policy is allowing us to achieve good results .
I believe that we can now say that the slow-down reached its worst during the last six months of the year and that the main indicators demonstrate that we are starting a recovery .
We are currently working on the round of forecasts for 2002 and I can point out that , according to those forecasts , growth has been gaining momentum throughout this year and we believe it will come close to potential growth and may even exceed it by the end of the year .
However , there are two elements of particular interest to us : firstly , the trend in salaries , which has been extremely helpful during this period - both in terms of stabilising prices and creating employment - and we hope the same trend will continue .
Secondly , the need to take advantage of recovery for budgetary consolidation .
We believe that this is a fundamental element .
The difficulties we have had to face during recent months have basically stemmed from not having achieved a situation of budgetary balance or budgetary surplus during the previous improvement in our economic context .
And in this respect it should not be inferred from my comments - which some speakers have referred to - that I had any intention whatsoever of entering into an internal political debate , but that I simply wanted to point out something that I have said many times and that is that , in my opinion , any reduction in taxes to confront our budgetary obligations must be based on budgetary surpluses or must be counterbalanced by spending reductions .
That is all I have said , I have said it many times and I am saying it again , but I do not believe it is the only thing coherent with our budgetary commitments .
Where must we go in the long term ?
The answer is unquestionably to increase our growth potential , that is to say , to implement Lisbon .
And those are the objectives we are also going to find again in the broad economic policy guidelines .
How can we increase our production potential ?
In the report which the Commission has sent to Lisbon , we suggest some of the challenges we consider fundamental .
It is true that Lisbon is a programme for ten years .
We are currently considering what we must do over the next twelve months and , in this respect , we must define certain priorities which we consider essential to the labour market .
Mr Trentin has mentioned this issue and in his motion for a resolution he stresses the importance of continuous training , mobility , flexibility and safety , as well as the non-wage costs of the workforce , above all at the lowest end of the scale .
I completely agree with each of these points .
However , I would like to add one point .
I believe we also have to consider that work must be worthwhile ; we must have a system which provides incentives for participation in work and , to this end , it is essential to modernise the tax systems and also the social construction systems , as well as the legislation on work protection in order to favour employment .
I believe that we must avoid unemployment traps which clearly have a negative impact on our situation .
Safety in employment must be based on training and qualification , and this is a fundamental active element for everybody .
Safety in work based solely and exclusively on rigid protection legislation may be an advantage in the short term , but there is no doubt whatsoever that it hinders modernisation and greater economic efficiency .
As the Resolution stresses , employment is not just a problem of wage costs , but it is also a problem of wage structures which are well suited to the productivity differentials in each sector of activity .
In our report we also refer to goods and services , and your Resolution also stresses the importance of integrated networks of transport and services infrastructures , as well as the need for rigorous competition policy and proposes that consumers be offered the possibility of choosing between different networks of services .
The Commission absolutely agrees with these contributions and we also point to the need to make progress in investment in priority infrastructure projects , an issue which we consider to be fundamental in order to stimulate our capacity for long-term growth .
In our recent report on the application of the broad economic policy guidelines for 2001 , we point out that in some network industries , the older operators still maintain high market quotas , an indicator that the opening up of the market is still not as desired .
Therefore , it is essential to make progress in order to have more robust competition which will finally benefit the citizens .
A final particularly important point has been mentioned by Mr Trentin , and also by some others , and involves the need to pay more attention to the knowledge economy .
Your Resolution stresses the need to attach more importance to R + D. It is true that R + D is an essential factor for a sustainable increase in productivity and competitiveness , which are essential elements if we want to achieve the Lisbon objective of making our economy the most competitive economy in the world .
And it is true that progress has been made with R + D , but it is also true that progress in the financial contribution is taking place essentially in the public sector , although the greatest differences in terms of investment in this type of activity arise in the private sector .
This is undoubtedly a point which warrants attention .
I hope some conclusion in this respect will emerge from Lisbon and we will have to work to try to improve this situation , just as I believe we should work to make progress with the Community patent , an essential element for technological innovation .
Mr Trentin has mentioned other elements connected to the participation of national parliaments .
Nothing would please the Commission more than greater participation by national parliaments in this type of debate and you as a Parliament , and in particular the IMAC , have played an important role in the past in support of certain initiatives of this type , which have undoubtedly been enormously useful .
I will end by saying that the Commission considers at this time that the broad economic policy guidelines , the basic document on guidelines , must continue to function in accordance with what was agreed in Lisbon , and in this regard it is absolutely essential to accept any contribution that the European Parliament may present in order to improve these guidelines .
Your contributions , together with the debates which are going to come out of Lisbon , will be fundamental elements for defining our document , which will be presented , as usual , in April , so that it may be debated in the subsequent months .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Solbes .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the joint debate on the following three reports :
A5-0060 / 2002 by Mr Lipietz on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on the supplementary supervision of credit institution , insurance undertakings and investment firms in a financial conglomerate and amending Council Directives 73 / 239 / EEC , 79 / 267 / EEC , 92 / 49 / EEC , 92 / 96 / EEC , 93 / 6 / EEC and 93 / 22 / EEC , and Directives 98 / 78 / EC and 2000 / 12 / EC of the European Parliament and the Council ( COM ( 2001 ) 213 - C5-0159 / 2001 - 2001 / 0095 ( COD ) ) ;
A5-0069 / 2002 by Mr Goebbels on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on insider dealing and market manipulation ( market abuse ) ( COM ( 2001 ) 281 - C5-0262 / 2001 - 2001 / 0118 ( COD ) ) ;
A5-0072 / 2002 by Mr Huhne on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on the prospectus to be published when securities are offered to the public or admitted to trading ( COM ( 2001 ) 280 - C5-0263 / 2001 - 2001 / 0117 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , nine months have now elapsed since the proposal for a European Commission directive on this ultra-technical but extremely topical subject was referred to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
Last spring , when the bubble of the e-economy burst , we were reminded that banking is a high-risk business .
In the autumn , the attacks of 11 September , coupled with the steady increase in industrial accidents and in natural disasters linked to the greenhouse effect , reminded us that insurance is also a high-risk activity .
The risk will become higher and higher .
For years , the European Union , like the rest of the world , has been standardising both the prudential rules that are essential to these financial activities and the forms of supervision practised by the banking and insurance authorities .
We are now called upon to supplement these efforts by regulating those financial conglomerates which contain both banks and insurance companies .
This is a particularly urgent task here in Europe , the continent that has pioneered insurance banking . It is made all the more urgent by the fact that the development of life assurance and all forms of capitalised pensions savings is compelling our society to run a great risk .
What would happen if the long-term savings of future pensioners were engulfed in a stock-market crash ?
This is precisely what the present directive seeks to avoid .
Its rapid adoption would do no less than make Europe the safest financial area in the world , decisively improving its competitiveness through the geographical factor used by the rating agencies .
I will not conceal the fact that , at the start of our debates , some of my honourable colleagues were loath to impose new prudential constraints on the financial sector .
There were discussions , and some questioned whether it was expedient for Europe to set out its own rules before the completion of the Basle negotiations on the same subject in 2004 .
Such misgivings , however , were to be banished by a single event , namely the collapse of the Enron conglomerate in the United States as a result of failure to comply with the prudential rules and breakdowns in the supervisory system .
If the European Union adopted this directive , Europe would become the ' Enron-proof ' continent , so to speak .
And so the last misgivings have now melted away .
Yes , the directive is needed urgently .
No , it must not be watered down , either in its scope or in the rigour and transparency of the prudential rules that the authorities will have to oversee .
In the course of these nine eventful months , our committee has met with representatives of the banking and insurance professions ; where the latter put forward sound arguments reflecting the public interest , the committee has managed to incorporate most of these into its position .
I refer in particular to two groups of amendments , namely those that relate to the choice of calculation method and those designed to instil a degree of flexibility into capital-adequacy requirements in terms of companies ' own funds in the case of groups which are not yet conglomerates .
Lastly , your rapporteur has benefited , throughout the course of his work , from the cooperation of the Commission and of the Belgian Presidency , and latterly the Spanish Presidency , of the Council .
My warm thanks are extended to both institutions .
We have proved on this occasion that the three institutions of the Union are able to take very rapid concerted action when the interests of the public and of the European Union are at stake .

As I speak to you , at 5.15 p.m. , I have just managed to finalise a handful of compromise amendments incorporating the key points from the amendments that were tabled last week . These seem to offer a good basis for a consensus among most of the groups and to anticipate the bulk of the compromises that will have to be made with the Council .
I therefore believe that the House will be able to adopt an almost unanimous resolution tomorrow and that the amended proposal will be very close to that which the Council will adopt .
In these circumstances , I believe that one reading , or one reading and a half , if you like , will suffice for us to ratify this directive , and I shall be absolutely delighted at such an outcome .
We shall avoid any new Enron-type affairs in Europe , and at the same time we shall have legislation with which we can intensify the Basle discussions by offering our new rules as a model for the rest of the world . This would yield immediate dividends by enhancing the global reputation of our financial activities .
Mr President , it has often been said that the advent of the euro would serve as the catalyst for sweeping reforms in Europe .
This is especially true with regard to the financial markets , which are still largely fragmented .
The view of the Commission is that the creation of a vast financial market should reduce the cost of finance for all economic operators .
Nevertheless , since the financial markets remain vulnerable , there is a need to create , parallel to the establishment of this large market , regulatory authorities vested with wide powers , not to intervene on a routine basis but to take action when the rules of common sense have been breached by players in the field .
These principles are applied in the draft directive on market abuse .
Let me make it quite clear that the proposal from the Commission is a sound document .
It resolutely addresses the key problems .
Europe is not currently able to penalise insider dealing and market manipulation effectively .
Such operations have long been considered with a certain degree of forbearance .
But the fact is that anyone who indulges in insider dealing or market manipulation is guilty of an offence .
He or she is stealing from the other market operators .
When insiders make a killing in the space of a few minutes , small shareholders and honest brokers are the ones who bear the brunt .
The Commission proposal has been a welcome development in the light of the attacks of 11 September .
Confronted by groups of terrorists who can use the anonymity of stock-exchange transactions to obtain funding for the vilest purposes , Europe is duty-bound to respond on the financial front too .
Allow me now , Mr President , to comment briefly on the main objectives of this directive .
Our purpose in clarifying its provisions is to avoid writing a blank cheque for secondary legislation .
We cannot confine ourselves to vague definitions , particularly as regards the definition of market manipulation .
For this reason we have developed this and other definitions , although we have left some scope for them to be supplemented in response to imaginative innovations within the markets .
We believe we have struck a fair balance between precision and flexibility .
The financial products covered by the directive have been specified in the body of the text , but there is still scope for the inclusion of subsequent financial innovations .
Market operators have expressed what are ultimately legitimate concerns about the pursuit of acceptable practices in the financial markets .
In this respect , Parliament puts its trust in what we call the Lamfalussy procedures as a means of obtaining universally acceptable secondary legislation .
Taking a constructive approach , we wished to go further along the avenues explored by the Commission .
Preventive measures must be paramount .
The risk of fraudulent use of confidential information increases if information is not properly disseminated .
This is why greater transparency is essential .
In the first place , issuers will have to post on their websites all inside information that they are required to disclose .
Secondly , persons discharging managerial responsibilities with an issuer of financial instruments must disclose their transactions .
This disclosure must be made without delay so that the market can digest the relevant information .
In accordance with this pragmatic approach , we have amended some of the provisions proposed by the Commission .
For example , the imposition of an obligation on financial intermediaries to reject suspect orders seemed to be rather unrealistic .
How can an intermediary take such a decision in a matter of seconds when the regulators ' enquiries into the activities of suspected offenders may take months ?
By the same token , the principle of a single authority must not rule out a certain measure of flexibility .
Similarly , the single authority should be able to delegate some of its powers to other authorities or to stock exchanges . The single authority would , however , retain ultimate responsibility .
We also turned our attention to the conditions for the implementation of the directive .
The current procedures are glaringly inefficient .
Only thirteen criminal penalties were imposed for market manipulation in the 17 countries of the European Economic Area between 1995 and 2000 .
The subsidiarity principle prevents us from harmonising criminal and administrative penalties throughout Europe .
Our preference is for administrative penalties .
We are asking for an indicative list of administrative measures and sanctions to be compiled by the Commission .
I also wished to draw attention to the financial resources to be put at the regulator 's disposal .
In Europe , regulators ' budgets are often derisory .
In the United States , a debate has been taking place in the wake of the Enron affair on the need to increase the resources allocated to the Securities and Exchange Commission .
But are we aware that the SEC budget is already almost fifty times higher than that of the German regulator ?
Lastly , I wanted to strengthen cross-border cooperation by providing for an arbitration body .
Any regulator who has a request for information rejected should be able to ask his or her peers to arbitrate .
While regulators must be vested with real powers , this does not mean that they should exercise these powers indiscriminately .
The regulator should benefit from the expertise of market participants ; to this end , we propose the creation of a consultative committee within each national regulatory authority .
In conclusion , may I remind the House that modernising financial markets implies not only greater efficiency but also a more level playing field .
The financial markets on both sides of the Atlantic undoubtedly suffer from the same ills : constant conflicts of interest , calculation methods that defy scrutiny and weaknesses in the monitoring of off-balance-sheet operations and of derivative transactions .
The modernisation of financial systems requires the involvement of all players .
An active Parliament must engage in dialogue with all interested parties and listen to all the lobbies . But the latter do not always seek to serve the general interest .
I have the feeling , Mr President , that the proposed text serves the general interest , whilst respecting the legitimate interests of the financial world .
I should like to reply to certain activists by quoting the words of Sir Howard Davies , head of the Financial Services Authority . ' Some well-paid lawyers ' , he said , ' are talking high-priced , high-octane nonsense ' .
This remark is equally applicable to certain lawyers in the Commission who seek to make themselves indispensable by creating a steady flow of new difficulties .
Mr President , may I appeal to Commissioner Bolkestein to preserve the fragile political consensus between our institutions in this domain .
Mr President , this is an important milestone in the creation of the single market .
Today we will be debating two draft directives , including the prospectus directive , on which I have the honour to be Parliament 's rapporteur that incorporate the delegated powers proposed by Baron Lamfalussy 's wise men .
We all very much hope that this new way of dealing with financial regulations will prove to be a step change in creating a single market , the foundations of which have been put in place by the creation of the euro and its successful introduction .
The prospectus directive is designed to establish the ground rules under which an issuer of shares , bonds or other securities may access investors throughout the 15 Member States .
At present , a company has to seek 15 regulatory approvals for 15 different sets of disclosure documents .
This is a nonsense .
It means separate markets in new issues , higher regulatory costs , higher costs of capital for business and less choice for investors .
I have no doubt , therefore , that a single regime for prospectuses can create benefits for all , greater choice and higher returns for investors , lower costs of capital and funding opportunities for companies .
The Single Market is a win-win game , not a zero-sum game .
In drawing up requirements for an EU prospectus , it is important to strike a balance between the objective of lowering the cost of capital for businesses and that of protecting investors .
There ought to be enough potential gains to secure both , and that is the balance we have tried to strike on the committee , I am particularly grateful to my colleagues , Mrs Piia-Noora Kauppi and Mr Harald Ettl as the shadow rapporteurs , and to their respective groups , for their help and cooperation .
We tried to make a break in this proposal with in-depth hearings to understand the issues and I hope that we have a substantial measures of consensus within Parliament on many of the key problems and how to solve them .
We all agreed we wanted , for example , to exempt the professional market for Eurobonds from the requirement for a prospectus , but of course , to insist on one if the issuer wanted to attract retail investors .
The broad framework for that is agreed across this House .
We have one issue to settle : should we have a minimum unit for each exempted Eurobond of EUR 50 000 or of EUR 100 000 ?
I hope you will agree that EUR 50 000 is enough to exclude retail investors , as the larger amount will prove cumbersome even for professional investors who are used to dealing in units of EUR 10 000 .
The second key set of amendments deals with whether companies must annually update their prospectuses or whether , if they do not issue more bonds or shares , they do not have to do so .
Overall , the committee supported the view taken by the EU 's regulators - FESCO and now CESR - and that it makes sense for such annual updating to be optional if the issuer of bonds or shares wants to issue again .
In addition , this is not a directive concerned with general disclosure requirements by companies trading on the market .
We shall deal with the consultation in that area in due course .
I have also been pleased to support an amendment from the Socialist Group to allow smaller companies to update their prospectus , if they so wish , with the filing of their annual report .
We have also generally sought to have the Commission , advised by the Securities Committee , take account of different securities and issuers including small business .
Therefore , the disclosure requirements will be tailored to particular circumstances .
This leads me to a further compromise amendment , which would allow a national authority , if it wanted , to exempt companies with a market capitalisation of less than EUR 350 million from the EU requirement , so long as they are not marketing outside that Member State .
This seems likes a large amount , but I would merely point out that there are a number of quoted companies currently meeting the small and medium-sized enterprise definition that would actually be covered by this .
For example , the British Technology Group employs just 182 people and has a turnover of EUR 22 million and a balance sheet of EUR 32 million .
It is an SME , but has a market capitalisation currently of EUR 1.6 billion .
Small companies can have vast values , and it only takes one or two Nobel scientists on board to ensure that that happens .
It seems to me that , as an investor-protection measure , it is better to have these enterprises included within the scope .
Let me finally explain why I think issuer choice of regulatory authority is important .
We want regulators to cooperate and they are increasingly doing so .
We also want to give them an incentive to do so .
By allowing issuers to choose between their regulatory authorities , largely as they do now , for example , on all securities except equities in a domestic market , we can ensure that that cooperation proceeds and that we gradually put in place the foundation for a single regulatory authority across the Union .
Mr President , I represent the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market as rapporteur for the Directive on market abuse .
We of course primarily tried during our discussions to make sure that what emerges here goes as far as possible to ensure that the directive is legally correct .
The main problem we faced was the issue of comitology .
The original draft directive provided a very general definition of market abuse , beyond which the bulk of the detail , the actual definitions , are relegated to the Annex and made accessible to the comitology process .
We are convinced that criminal law - and we are talking about criminal law here - can only be adopted by the actual legislature and not through the comitology process .
That is why in the first place we are very grateful that the rapporteur of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and also that committee as a whole adopted changes in order to move in the direction requested by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
The second legal aspect which is vital here is that although we have some sympathy for the fact that the Commission attempted to adopt a result-oriented rather than a blame-oriented approach , it is a problem for us - and this is a general legal principle - that without blame , without guilt , no penal sanctions can be applied .
If that approach were to be adopted , it would fly in the face of all the fundamental rights provisions that have become part of the traditional order in our Member States , and it would also be counter to the Charter of Fundamental Rights adopted in Nice .
So without any guilt whatsoever it is impossible to apply such sanctions .
We also considered the degree of guilt .
It is our opinion that market abuse is an offence very similar to other offences against property , such as fraud .
However , there is no such thing as negligent fraud or negligent theft .
Such offences can only be committed intentionally .
For this reason it was one of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market 's wishes that intent should also be included as a matter of principle .
We are very grateful to the rapporteur for his willingness , in a spirit of compromise , to incorporate these points from the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market into his draft .
It now only remains for us to make an appeal to the Council that when it makes its decision it should take account of fundamental rights .
This appeal is , for very good reasons , particularly directed to the Finance Ministers , who are responsible for this .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to thank the rapporteur and in particular the Commission .
In the von Wogau report on comitology we also introduced the area of market participants , and I believe that there was very good cooperation in the area in which I was shadow rapporteur for the financial conglomerates , between the Commission , the Council , market participants and Parliament , especially in the preparatory phase .
This is in fact an appeal to the Commission to carry forward this good cooperation between market participants , Parliament and the Commission , and to eliminate sources of irritation and possible misinterpretations in advance .
We have succeeded relatively well in doing this , and I think that we can work in this way for the future in accordance with market trends .
People keep saying that this is a technical report because it is so complicated .
It certainly does have major implications .
I will of course comply with the President 's wish that I should be very brief , but I would like to touch on one or two points , especially the collapse of Enron , which has been repeatedly mentioned .
I believe that we need to take Enron 's collapse seriously , and we need to think about drawing the necessary conclusions from it .
One conclusion , for example , could be about how we deal with firms of auditors and consultants in Europe in future .
Ultimately , however , in this area as well we need to take account of the changing situation - the fact that ever more financial conglomerates are coming into existence which operate internationally , in relation to the joint forum and at the same time Basel II .
It is our job as the European Parliament to make sure that the public is protected , but also that our companies remain competitive in this global competitive struggle .
We have to take appropriate corrective measures here .
I believe that we have considered these measures here in Parliament as part of a calm dialogue , and that we have been able to eliminate many problems , and I believe that could set a good precedent for how we deal with these topics .
Mr President , I would like to sincerely congratulate the three rapporteurs , and I believe that this cooperation between the Commission and the Council should set the pattern for future discussions .
I believe it is very important for the Commission and the Council to work towards strengthening the way the European Parliament functions in this area , as provided for in the Lamfalussy report , so that we can also exercise our democratic rights in the monitoring committee while preserving complete neutrality .
The three directives that we are discussing today and voting on tomorrow aim to overcome the fragmentation of Europe 's financial markets , to enhance their attractiveness and competitiveness , and at the same time also to strengthen financial stability and consumer protection .
The elimination of obstacles to market access and bureaucratic regulations , the removal of antiquated and rigid supervisory structures and their replacement by flexible and market-oriented supervisory rules and instruments are indispensable requirements for the creation of an integrated financial market and for ensuring the competitiveness of Europe 's financial service providers .
However , this should not be allowed to jeopardise financial stability or to lead to a deterioration in consumer rights as regards cross-border transactions .
We should make total transparency and strict regulatory and supervisory mechanisms , including appropriate sanctions , the hallmark of the quality of Europe 's financial markets .
It is of course also important to regain the confidence of private investors in this sort of saving , not least in the interest of building up fully funded supplementary retirement pensions .
We do not need statements of good conduct for this , but just clear and binding regulations underpinned by appropriate sanctions .
The same applies to the Directive on financial conglomerates , which will most certainly take integration an important step further forward .
If they are to remain competitive in the face of the globalisation and internationalisation of the finance markets , Europe 's financial companies need to reposition themselves in the market , and the growing number of takeovers and mergers in this context demonstrates that this process is in full swing .
This structural shakedown in order to create internationally competitive companies is certainly to be welcomed .
However , it should not lead to a situation in which financial groups and conglomerates of this kind are increasingly no longer subject to the supervision that up to now has been organised at national level and in most Member States , even at sectoral level .
Enron has generally highlighted the risks involved in multi-layered and inadequately supervised finance groups .
The directive before us will create an important harmonised European legal basis for cooperation between supervisory authorities , and it will also prevent multiple gearing of own funds instruments within a group .
In order to avoid excessive administrative burdens , we believe that we are right in calling for responsibility for the supervision of financial conglomerates and groups to be transferred to a single supervisory authority , which will be established on the basis of legally defined criteria .
It is also especially important here that we have fortunately managed to reach a compromise with regard to the scope of the directive and also as regards multiple gearing of prudential capital , a compromise that my group also fully supports .
Mr President , I want primarily to concern myself with the proposal concerning the supplementary supervision of the financial conglomerates with which I had a lot to do in my job as shadow rapporteur of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party .
First and foremost , I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Lipietz , for the huge amount of work he has done in connection with Parliament 's debate of this proposal for a directive .
Next , I should like to thank Mr Radwan and Mrs Villiers , with whom I have had very close contact during our work with a view to tomorrow 's vote .
Last but not least , I should also like to thank Commissioner Bolkestein for his work on bringing about a genuine internal market for financial services .
With the active participation of the Commission , we in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs have , where far and away the majority of points are concerned , found common solutions to the problems raised in different quarters .
The background to the practical proposal is that we wish to secure stable financial markets in Europe .
We want to avoid scandals along the lines of Enron .
At the same time , however , there must be no more regulation than is necessary .
What is most important , therefore , is to secure effective supervision to prevent financial conglomerates from using the same capital to consolidate their positions in several different places .
I should like to express my support for the oral amendments to be tabled by Mr Radwan to Amendments Nos 44 , 46 and 48 in connection with tomorrow 's vote .
I appreciate the Commission 's also being able to accept the amendments tabled .
For me , adoption of the proposal tomorrow will be further proof that the European Parliament accepts co-responsibility when necessary .
I am a great believer in our not dragging matters out if possible solutions emerge .
We have found those solutions here in Parliament , and so it is merely up to the Council to deliver the rest .
Thank you very much , Mrs Riis-Jørgensen .
I regret to inform the Members and Commissioner Bolkestein that this debate is suspended and will resume at 9.00 p.m.
Mr García-Margallo , you will also have to return after 9.00 p.m.
I am sorry about this , but we must comply with the agenda .
Mr President , the situation in Chechnya is still very worrying for the European Union .
Recent reports by the OSCE Assistance Group in Chechnya , by the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe and by two NGOs ( Memorial and Médecins sans Frontières ) demonstrate that the situation in this part of Russia is still dramatic .
On the basis of this and other reports , the European Union has raised the issue with the Russian authorities in all the political dialogue that has taken place recently and will continue to do so .
This is no surprise , since the European Union has repeatedly spoken out clearly against any violation of human rights and on the situation of the refugees and internally displaced people in Chechnya .
Consequently , the Union has adopted a coherent position in principle which makes it very clear to Russia that , while the upheaval in Chechnya continues , the Union will continue to apply firm pressure for a change to come about , taking every possible opportunity and also turning to the relevant international organisations .
However , I believe that it would be misleading to say that nothing has happened throughout the whole of last year .
The question refers to Resolution 1270 of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe which says that , while it has been frustratingly slow , some progress has been made thanks to positive changes of attitude now visible within the Russian Federation in relation to dealing with the conflict .
As an example of this change , we have heard statements from President Putin to the effect that members of the Russian armed forces who do not respect human rights will be tried and punished .
The Union is pleased with this statement and hopes that the Russian authorities will fulfil their commitment and prevent any further violation of human rights .
It has always been understood that the fight against terrorism and extremism should take place within the framework of the Rule of Law and with full respect for human rights .
The indiscriminate use of force will only serve to fan the flames of conflict for many years to come .
At the same time , it is clearly necessary to maintain stability in the region .
The Council absolutely agrees that only a political solution can resolve the Chechen conflict .
It understands that the Russian authorities have tried to reach an agreement with representatives of Maskhadov , but that unfortunately these efforts have not been successful .
The European Union will not miss any opportunity to insist on a political solution and , for its part , the OSCE is still playing a useful role through the presence of its Assistance Group .
The security and independence of journalists are issues of great concern to the European Union , which has recently reiterated its views on the situation of the media in Russia .
The Union has also been very active in terms of achieving the presence of international humanitarian organisations in Chechnya and , by means of ECHO ( the European Community Humanitarian Office ) , it has directly participated in humanitarian aid as one of the principal donors since the start of the Chechen conflict .
The Union has periodically dealt with the problem of security with the Russian authorities and recently a Commission official travelled to Chechnya to assess the current situation on the ground and the Union 's troika is planning another visit to the region on a Head of Mission level .
Finally , in relation to the prosecution of those people who have violated human rights , the European Union would point out that the Court of Human Rights in the Hague is now involved in several cases .
The Court will set a date in the coming months to study the admissibility of some of these cases .
Naturally , the European Union intends to follow these events closely .
Mr President , I am grateful to the President of the Council for his comprehensive answer , and I am pleased that he himself states that the situation in Chechnya is still tragic .
I have taken note of the Council 's statement that it will continue to discuss the situation in Chechnya during all meetings with Russian authorities .
I would also expressly like to thank the President of the Council for his condemnation of all human rights violations and for the fact that he calls for change , and continues to do so .
In addition , I thank the President of the Council for confirming once again that a political solution alone can end the Chechen conflict .
He also states that the European Union will seize every opportunity to achieve this political solution , and he rightly refers to the contacts between the Russian government and the government of the Chechen President , Mr Maskhadov .
It is clear that these talks deserve a helping hand , but Mr President of the Council , I am a little disappointed with your very diplomatic use of language .
It is evident that the contacts with the Russian government will be stepped up in the weeks to come .
The Russian Prime Minister will be visiting Brussels during the EU Summit at the end of May ; I should like to ask you what concrete initiatives you will take in order to translate the fine declaration of intent , which you gave today , into action ?
This is my specific , supplementary question .
Thank you for your response .
Mr President , the Council and the Commission are working actively together in preparation for the summit between the European Union and Russia , which will take place in Moscow on 28 May , and within the framework of this bilateral dialogue we intend to raise all the issues relating to the situation in Chechnya .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , it is now two years and six months since the second war in Chechnya began .
Commissioner Poul Nielson has not yet been to Chechnya .
My question is therefore this : in a matter of this kind - a humanitarian matter , an urgent matter - what time limit does the Council believe should be set for Commissioner Poul Nielsen to visit Chechnya ?
Should he go there within three years , four years or five years ?
And now for my second question : President Putin has appointed a negotiator , and President Maskhadov has appointed a negotiator .
Would the Presidency of the Council be willing to receive the two negotiators , who are recognised by both parties and who are therefore fully legitimate negotiators ?
Could the Council meet with them ?
Mr President , I am not in a position to answer this question .
Mr President , according to reports in the German press , Chechnya 's position is becoming more critical .
Major reports have appeared in our newspapers which indicate that Russian military death squads are operating in Chechnya and that one village turned to the United Nations for help as it had been visited a total of 33 times for " cleansing operations " .
I urge you to ensure that an EU delegation should inspect the position in Chechnya on the ground and check what is actually happening there , because journalists can still only visit if accompanied by officers .
As long as there has been a Council of Europe presence in Chechnya , there has not so far been an EU presence .
Which is why I am asking if you would consider sending an EU mission to Chechnya .
Mr President , the possibility of sending a delegation is a matter which would always have to be agreed with Russia , which is a sovereign country .
The Union has no right to interfere in the internal affairs of a sovereign country such as the Russian Federation .
If we were to reach an agreement with the Russians on the sending of a delegation , we would be very willing to cooperate there , but for the moment that is exclusively a task for multilateral bodies such as the Council of Europe and the OSCE .
Mr Dupuis , on a point of order .
Mr Dupuis , the President-in-Office of the Council has the right to respond to you in that way .
You are not satisfied with it , but let us not get into a debate . Tell us what your point or order is as quickly as possible .
I think that Mr De Miguel can say that he is going to refer to the Council on the matter and will give a more detailed answer later , as he is not in a position to do so at present .
However , I do not think that he is playing by the rules by simply saying that he cannot give an answer .
I think that he can put the questions that we have asked him to the Presidency and to the Council and say that he is not in a position to answer some of them at present . But I do think that , as a general rule , the Council should answer all questions .
Yes , Mr President , I can answer .
I believe that by definition and out of the respect the Council has for the Members of this House , any question asked here , in Parliament and during Question Time , is a question to the Council , and not to the Presidency and that , therefore , the Presidency communicates it to the Council , on principle .
I have therefore told you that I cannot reply to you because I have not yet consulted the Council , but that consultation of the Council va de soi , and I hope Mr Dupuis understands that phrase in his own language .

Mr President , the Council would like to draw your attention to the reply to Oral Question No 0967 / 01 , which refers to Article 33 of the European Union Treaty which states : ' This Title ( Title VI , Provisions on police and judicial cooperation on criminal matters ) shall not affect the exercise of the responsibilities incumbent upon Member States with regard to the maintenance of law and order and the safeguarding of internal security ? .
In relation to data protection , the 1981 Council of Europe Convention for the Protection of Individuals with regard to Automatic Processing of Personal Data has been ratified by all the Member States of the Union .
The conclusions adopted by the Council and the representatives of the governments of the Member States of 13 July 2001 , relating to security at European Councils and similar events , indicated the European Union 's objective , which was to maintain and develop the Union 's status as an area of freedom , security and justice .
In this field , the citizens must have the right to freely express their opinions and to meet in a peaceful way , as laid down in the European Convention on Human Rights , and to do so free from any threat to their security , to other citizens or to property .
The same conclusions stressed the importance of constructive dialogue between organisers of public demonstrations and the authorities of the country in question , as well as the importance of maintaining close international contacts , particularly between police and customs authorities , in order to ensure that legitimate demonstrations are not taken advantage of or abused in order to commit acts of collective or individual violence .
In relation to Mr Papayannakis , I will say that the preparatory bodies who are examining his question met in January and in February and worked as laid down in the Treaty , that is , respecting human rights and fundamental freedoms .
It falls within the competence of the Spanish Presidency to offer the reply it considers appropriate .
Thank you for your reply .
I should just like to say that Mr Papayannakis is not here because he is attending the conference of Presidents and Vice-Presidents .
It seems to me that the President-in-Office of the Council endeavoured to give a very general reply with references to a few interesting principles , such as data protection agreements .
I should like to ask if the Spanish Presidency is making practical arrangements and , rather than following the Berlusconi line , which caused a great many problems and violated the fundamental rights of the citizens of the European Union by refusing to allow peace-loving Greek and other nationals to land in Italy , is making arrangements to follow the Porto Alegre approach in an effort to create a framework within which the protestors can express their views and their claims legally and peacefully .
It is in this regard that I should like to ask what he has to say about agreements with organisers and so on .
Mr President , firstly , I reject any comparison by the Member who has just spoken between the government of Mr Berlusconi and the government of Mr Aznar .

Each government exercises its responsibility according to its competences , and I assure you that the Spanish Government is going to fulfil its responsibilities in the Presidency of the Council of the Union in a way that fully respects the area of security , freedom and justice and the obligations that come with that Presidency .
In any event , I can guarantee that we have no intention of denying one of the fundamental freedoms laid down in the Treaty ( the freedom of movement of citizens ) , but I must warn you that the Spanish Government is prepared to take all the necessary measures to prevent people who intend to turn peaceful demonstrations into a field of battle , violence , destruction of property and aggression against people and objects , from achieving their aims in Barcelona .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we all know that disruptions at meetings of this kind are above all the result of a failure to educate the public .
Hence the European Parliament 's initiative to endow the WTO with a parliamentary assembly , so that in future discussions can be held with non-governmental organisations and interest groups , thus strengthening communication with the public at parliamentary level .
I would now like to put this question to you , Mr President-in-Office : what initiatives does the Spanish Presidency intend to take in order to implement this plan as quickly as possible ?
I would like to say to the honourable Member that the problems raised are not due to a lack of dialogue .
The Council of the Union has expressed its willingness to hold dialogue on several occasions .
The Spanish Government is currently holding talks with all the groups that want to peacefully express their ideas in Barcelona and anybody who demonstrates peacefully will have the right to be heard and to demonstrate , since that is an inalienable right of any European citizen .
But , naturally , I do not think that those people who demonstrate peacefully are the ones who need fora for dialogue , because the fora already exist .
In any event , the honourable Member 's initiative is always good .
If there were a parliamentary assembly , if a new possibility for dialogue were offered , that may help to create more fora , but I do not think that multiplying fora can resolve the most serious problem of this type of public demonstration being organised and used by violent groups and factions who have no intention of dialogue , since all they want is to take the opportunity to spread confusion and violence .
Mr President , the Council would like to remind the honourable Member that it is not within its competence to comment on the positions expressed by one of its members .
Furthermore , it stresses that the issue raised is not within its competence , but that of the Intergovernmental Review Conference , which is currently preparing the Convention created by the Laeken European Council on 14 and 15 December 2001 .
Finally , the Council wishes to refer the honourable Member to the reply it gave to Mrs Rosa Miguélez Ramos during Question Time last February , in plenary session , relating to the representation of the Member States in the Council .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , the President of the Government of the Spanish State refuses , in a way which is arbitrary and quite contrary to the winds of history , to allow the Union 's constituent nationalities and regions to play a role in the Union , not least in the Council of Ministers , and is trying to ignore the practices already in place in Germany , Belgium , the United Kingdom and Austria .
He is trying to base his approach on an absolutist concept of sovereignty , contrary to that of shared sovereignty which is , in fact , a fundamental principle of the European Union .
In its folly - as illustrated by the Minister of the Presidency Mr Lucas , a minister who is very close to the President of the Spanish Government - the Spanish Government is both trying to confine the internal constitutional bodies to a consultative role in the politically useless Committee of the Regions , and also , ignoring the reality of the Union , wants to turn this body into senate , even if this means going against proposals such as the one put forward by the German Chancellor , Gerhard Schroeder , who reserves this role of senate for the Council itself .
They could not be making a worse decision .
This is why I wish to ask the President-in-Office of the Council : why is the Government of the Spanish State insisting on maintaining such an anachronistic concept of sovereignty in the Union ?
I consider that I have already answered the question , Mr President .
Secretary of State , you referred to the reply you gave in this House to Mrs Miguélez Ramos and I , who at that time also spoke in relation to this issue , have not received the same reply .
I would like to ask you firstly whether you can send me a copy of the reply you gave to Mr Miguélez Ramos .
Secondly , I would like you to tell me whether or not it is true that the Treaty on European Union indicates that Ministers of the regional governments can participate in European Councils of Ministers .
Mr President , with regard to the reply I gave to Mrs Miguélez Ramos , I would refer the honourable Member to this Parliament 's verbatim report , which is public , and therefore I imagine he will have more opportunity to consult it than I.
With regard to the second question , I can say that the Treaty gives Member States the power to decide who their representatives in the Council are to be .
That is an internal issue ; each country decides what it wants to do and who it wants to send .
Your are raising points of order .
I must remind you that we are not going to enter into a dialogue on the basis of the issue and that you must raise a genuine point of order .
In what order would you like to raise your points of order ?
I will begin with Mr Ortuondo , on a point of order .
Mr President , I only wanted to stress that on the occasion to which reference was made in relation to Mrs Ramos , I asked a question and I have not received a reply to that question , and I therefore do not have to consult the verbatim report , because I believe I have the right to receive a reply , since it was I who asked the question .
Mr President , my question is , can I ask for an answer from the Council , as happened with an earlier question , and can I do so under the same conditions as before and receive a proper answer ?
As President for the sitting , I believe that the President-in-Office of the Council has recalled a reply he gave on a previous occasion , some weeks or maybe a month ago , to the same questions ; and the President-in-Office of the Council is the author of his reply , and you can therefore judge it as you see fit .
Mr President , the honourable Member 's question relates to two realities : the Action Plan and the World Fund .
Firstly , in relation to the Action Plan , the Council would remind the honourable Member that in the Resolution which it adopted on 14 May 2001 on the programme for action and the speeding up of the fight against HIV ( AIDS ) , malaria and tuberculosis in the context of a reduction in poverty ( document 8495 / 01 ) , the Council explained the actions it considers essential in the fight against these three diseases .
The actions include , firstly , access to pharmaceutical products and , in particular , the flexible application of the ADPIC ( Trips ) agreement in relation to intellectual property , which allows us to confront public health problems , amongst other things , through the discretionary power to grant obligatory licences in certain exceptional circumstances , including those involving the protection of public health .
Secondly , it is a question of strengthening and increasing the financial contributions in the field of research and development .
It is particularly important both to increase the capacity of the developing countries and to offer incentives for the development of specific universal public services , such as new treatments and vaccines .
Another action is the participation in world associations .
The objective consists of strengthening the cooperation agreements amongst the Member States with the WHO , the UNO ( AIDS ) , the World Bank and other international actors in both the private and the public sectors , for example , the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunisation ( GAVI ) .
The Council wishes to stress that that Resolution was presented at the 26th Special Sitting of the General Assembly of the United Nations which took place in New York on 25 to 27 June 2001 , during which the European Union actively participated in the drawing up of the final declaration .
Secondly , with regard to the World Fund for Fighting AIDS , Tuberculosis and Malaria , the Council would remind the honourable Member of the European Parliament and Council Decision adopted on 6 December 2001 , on the European Community contribution to the World Fund for Fighting HIV ( AIDS ) , Tuberculosis and Malaria .
In accordance with that decision , the Commission will contribute EUR 600 million to that world fund for 2001 , which will be paid within the framework of a funding agreement to be reached between the Commission and the World Bank .
That Decision also stipulates that in 2002 the Commission must present the European Parliament and the Council with a first report on the management and working methods of the World Fund .
With regard to future contributions , the Council is waiting for the Commission to present it with proposals for modifications to the existing Regulations .
In particular , the Regulation of 24 March 1997 on actions in the field of HIV ( AIDS ) in the developing countries , which also includes interventions in the field of genetic health , what is know as ' reproductive health ' , as well as that of 22 July 1997 on aid for demographic policies and programmes in the developing countries .
With regard to the activities so far carried out by the Fund , the Council wishes to tell the honourable Member that on 29 January 2002 the management board meeting in Geneva approved its first presentation of proposals for funding of associations in countries seriously affected by epidemics .
The initial series of subsidies , which will be awarded in April , will be the first granted by the Fund .
The second meeting of the Fund 's board must take place in New York at the end of April .
The Council would urge the honourable Member to approach the Commission directly , since it is represented on the management board of the World Fund , in order to obtain more precise information on the Fund 's activities .
Mr President , I would like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council for the exhaustive information he has provided me with this afternoon .
In fact , the concern of this Parliament , and in particular the Committee on Development and Cooperation , is - given the current situation in Africa , essentially in its central regions ( Uganda , Burundi , Rwanda , etc . ) , in terms of AIDS - how the Council , and of course the Commission , is going to control the fund of EUR 120 million which we approved in this House .
Since you have told me that EUR 60 million has already been provided and that the first report is going to be carried out now , in April , from then on we will be very attentive to that control .
Mr President , the Presidency of the Council wishes to remind the honourable Member that , according to the provisions of Article 290 of the EC Treaty , the linguistic system of the Community 's institutions will be set by the Council , which will decide unanimously .
The Council 's position on this particular issue is laid down in its Regulation ( EC ) No 1 of 1958 , successively amended for the purposes of the accessions of new Member States , which lays down that there are currently eleven official working languages in the European Union .
With regard to the presence on the Spanish Presidency 's website of the languages declared as official under the Spanish Constitution , this is not an issue which falls to the Council of the Union .
Mr Secretary of State , I believe that this is an issue of cultural characteristics and open democratic characteristics .
In Europe , there are more than one hundred peoples and more than one hundred different languages .
2001 was declared International Year of Languages in the European Union .
And I say this is an issue of characteristics because , in the Spanish State , we tried to ensure that during 2001 there would be cultural events aimed at protecting and promoting the native languages existing within the Spanish State , which are not limited to Castilian , since there is bable ( Asturian ) , Catalan , Galician , Basque ... and many other languages which have a natural right to continue to exist .
The Government of the Spanish State did not allow any of these languages to be promoted or cared for .
I would like to ask you what the reason is for this closed and anti-democratic attitude to something which goes hand in hand with the wealth of cultural diversity in both Europe and the Spanish State ?
I am afraid that the honourable Member has mistaken this forum for another .
I believe that your parliamentary group would do better to raise this question in the Spanish Parliament .
I repeat that the Council of the Union is not involved in this issue in any way whatsoever .
Therefore , since I am appearing here in the European Parliament as a representative of the Council of the Union , and not of the Spanish Government , I cannot answer your question .
We are going to move on to the next question .
You are aware that some Members , including the President , would very much like to speak in these debates ; but in the case of the President of the sitting , it is impossible , although there has been mention of bable , the Asturian dialect , which is a form of expression in the region I was born .
Mr President , the European Union has systematically given priority to the issue of human rights and the protection of minorities within its relations with the candidate countries .
This issue is a key element of the pre-accession strategy for each of these countries , in accordance with the political requirements for accession established by the Copenhagen European Council in 1993 .
In the case of Romania , one of the specific areas included in the pre-accession strategy is childcare .
In the Commission 's periodic report for 2000 on Romania 's progress towards accession , the Commission expressed its concern in relation to the adoption legislation and practices in the various countries , which allow different considerations of the greater interest of the child influence decisions on adoption .
As a result of this , and other expressions of concern , the Romanian Government decided to suspend international adoptions .
In the revised Association for the accession of Romania , adopted by the Council on 28 January 2002 , amongst the intermediate priorities and objectives , it is stipulated that Romania must maintain the moratorium on international adoption until new legislation is adopted which is compatible with interests of the children and with Romania 's international obligations , and the necessary administrative capacity to apply the new legislation is guaranteed .
As well as maintaining the general moratorium , the Romanian Government adopted measures in December 2001 to allow for the completion of adoption procedures in those cases which were already before the courts at the time of the suspension of international adoptions .
The Presidency of the Council believes that the adoptions of those children whose adoption procedures have already begun in the Member States , with all legal guarantees , should be completed within a reasonable time period .
Ladies and gentlemen , the European Union will closely monitor the situation in Romania in this regard , especially within the bodies created within the framework of European agreement , such as the Association Council and the Association Committee .
Mr President , I would like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council , not only for the accuracy of his answer , but also for what he has been doing , both during the Belgian Presidency and during the Spanish Presidency , with a view to resolving ' within a reasonable time period ' - to use his own words - these two problems : that of resolving the Romanian adoption system , in order to make it compatible with international agreements and , secondly , that of resolving the problems of those families who , since the procedures were begun under the former Romanian legislation , have seen no progress .
I am going to ask a supplementary question : is the Council prepared to continue exerting its influence - I do not want to use stronger words - on the Romanian authorities so that they may make progress more quickly than we have seen up until now , despite all the promises in these two fields of applying the new legislation and of resolving these cases ?

My answer is as follows : yes , the Association Council took place yesterday with Romania and the Spanish Foreign Affairs Minister and the President-in-Office of the Council dealt with this issue directly with the Romanian Minister for Foreign Affairs , Mr Geoana , and we received assurances that they would continue to do everything possible to conclude all these adoption procedures which , as you have mentioned , began under former legislation and have become paralysed .
It is a question of moving forward with what has already been started , of satisfying the expectations created within many families which had already started the process and then , naturally , begin a new system under the new legislation .
The Romanian delegation was made aware of this yesterday and we received assurances that they would continue in their efforts to satisfy the European Union in this regard .
I must inform the Members and in particular Mr Ortuondo , who is asking for the floor , that , according to Annex II , ' Conduct of Question Time under Rule 43 ? , in point 4 , which relates to supplementary questions , it is stipulated that ' Each Member may put a supplementary question to any question .
He may put in all only one supplementary question to the Council and two supplementary questions to the Commission ? .
Since today is Questions to the Council , you have asked all the questions allowed you , Mr Ortuondo .
Now , if this is a point of order , I have absolutely no intention of preventing you from speaking .
If it is a point of order , you have the floor , but you cannot ask any more supplementary questions today .
Alright , then I will do so as a point of order , because , if I have not misunderstood you , you have just said that all Members can ask one supplementary question for each question .
No .
You have misunderstood me or I did not express myself well , but I have read you the Rules of Procedure .
During Questions to the Commission , Members can ask two supplementary questions , in addition to those which correspond to them , and during Questions to the Council they can ask one supplementary question .
I realise that the Rules of Procedure are not read carefully and that does not shock me ; but that is why I am reminding you of them .
Mr President , with all due respect to Mr Carnero and Mrs Cerdeira , the Council cannot answer their question for two reasons : firstly , because the Council is not in the habit of commenting on articles which have appeared in the press and , secondly , because this issue does not fall within the Council 's competence .
Mr President , can I therefore deduce from Mr de Miguel 's answer that the Council considers that to propose any initiative against acts of discrimination suffered by European citizens of both sexes because of their sexual orientation does not fall within its competence , and that therefore , it considers that the provisions of Article 13 of the Treaty of Amsterdam , Article 21 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union , and the Council Decision of 27 November 2000 , which establishes a Community action programme to fight against discrimination are also not within its competence ?
I would remind him that , unfortunately , there are many European citizens of both sexes that call upon this Parliament every day describing the discrimination they have suffered purely because of their sexual orientation and this is something that I , as a Member of this Parliament , am naturally concerned about , and I was under the impression that this did fall within the Council 's competence , quite apart from the specific circumstances of the case that has been mentioned here today .
Thank you , Mrs Cerdeira . What I am trying to tell you is that the specific case you are referring to has a religious dimension , which means that this matter falls within the competence of the Catholic Church and not the Council .
The individual concerned is not suffering from any kind of discrimination other than the disciplinary procedures that the Catholic Church itself wants to follow with regard to a priest who has declared his sexual orientation .
Therefore , this is an issue that strictly falls within the competence of the Catholic religion , in which the Council does not wish to intervene .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , in a democratic system such as the European Union , no religious or non-religious body is above the standards and fundamental values that guarantee the peaceful coexistence of citizens on a daily basis .
For this reason , I feel that it is indeed within the Council 's competence to inform us of the exact measures it is going to take , and is taking , to prevent the discrimination against hundreds of thousands of European citizens of both sexes who , in carrying out their inalienable right to choose their sexual orientation , are discriminated against or badly treated .
I think it is indeed within the Council 's competence to state , through the appropriate channels , that every institution must abide by the rules that are , as my colleague Mrs Cerdeira has said , laid down in the Treaty and in the Charter of Fundamental Rights that has very recently been drawn up and proclaimed by the Council .
Mr President , all European institutions are naturally obliged to abide by the fundamental principles of respect for the person and to be against discrimination for whatever reason .
However , I feel that the specific case you have mentioned falls within the competence of the Catholic Church 's internal disciplinary procedure , in which , I repeat , the Council does not wish to intervene , as this does not fall within its competence .
Mr President , first of all , the Council seems to argue that it has no competence in the field of the individual rights .
Is the Council therefore incompetent ?
I would like an answer .
Furthermore , will the Presidency accept that Member States have a duty to condemn such discrimination because they are signatories to the employment framework directive which prohibits discrimination including on the grounds of sexuality and which must be transposed by 2003 ?
Finally , will the Presidency act on a point of principle and condemn such discrimination generally - discrimination which blights the souls of those who practice it as well as those who condone it either by their silence or by their inaction ?
Mr President , no .
The Council does not intend to take any action in this regard .
Mr President , the Spanish Presidency is delighted with the positive state of relations between the European Union and Morocco and is determined to develop these on several levels : firstly , with the implementation of the Association Agreement that entered into force on 1 March , which sets the stage for close cooperation in a number of areas ; the creation of a free trade area and the establishment of political dialogue , elements which all have a particular importance for the development of global relations with this country .
Progress has been made in numerous chapters of the Agreement and working groups have been set up in specific sectors .
The second meeting of the Association Council , taking place today , 13 March 2002 , in Rabat , will provide an excellent opportunity to analyse the work being carried out to implement the Agreement and to lay down the foundations for future work .
At this meeting , the Presidency will also refer to various issues of a political nature , such as the human rights situation in Morocco and the Western Sahara .
It will also provide the opportunity to analyse the ways and means of strengthening relations between the European Union and Morocco with a view to preparing for the third meeting of the European Union-Morocco Association Council , which , in principle , will take place under the Danish Presidency during the second half of this year , given that the last meeting took place in October 2001 .
On the other hand , the objective of the agricultural negotiations the Commission is holding with Morocco , which started in January , is to widely liberalise agricultural trade between the European Union and Morocco .
In accordance with the Association Agreement , negotiations will resume in parallel with the Association Committee on 14 March and , in principle , will be concluded by the end of 2002 at the latest .
The Presidency , for its part , will continue to support Morocco 's efforts in regional and subregional cooperation , such as the Arab Maghreb Union and the Agadir Process .
The latter paves the way for the creation of a free trade area , initially between Morocco , Egypt , Jordan and Tunisia , and , if this proves successful , other countries in the region which have an Association Agreement with the European Union will also have access to this area .
Finally , the Presidency is pursuing dialogue and cooperation with Morocco on migration policy , including illegal immigration , with the aim , amongst others , of jointly implementing the action plan for Morocco adopted by the Council in October 1999 .
This plan paves the way for socio-economic development , the integration of Moroccan nationals legally residing in Member States , the management of migratory flows and respect for the right of asylum .
Several projects are being implemented , having regard , for example , to joint development in the socio-economic area , living and working conditions of Moroccan communities in the European Union , the management of border controls and also support for the fight against illegal immigration .
A meeting of the working group on social affairs and migration was held yesterday in Rabat , and there will be consultations with regard to negotiations for a readmission agreement between the European Union and Morocco during this current six-month period .
With regard more specifically to fisheries , the Council recognises the ever-important relationship between the EU and the Kingdom of Morocco in this area .
The Presidency will not spare any effort to ensure that this close relationship is maintained within the framework of a mutually beneficial arrangement between both parties .
Mr President , to tell the truth , this answer simply consists of reading out the agenda of meetings , which I think has no real political value and is very misleading , given that the question that was , in fact , asked , was what exactly will be the contribution of the Spanish Presidency to our relations with Morocco .
Mr President , the President-in-Office had nothing of substance to say .
This ready-made mould for meetings could be used for our relations with any other country .
Mr President-in-Office , please do not answer me with an agenda .
Tell me the precise objectives and priorities of the Spanish Presidency with regard to Morocco .
Something that we can understand as being an objective or a priority and not simply a agenda of meetings that , I fear , will be no different from the usual blah-blah we always hear .
I am sorry the honourable Member can only remember the dates of the meetings and not their content , so I shall repeat this for her benefit .
Yesterday , 12 March , today 13 and tomorrow 14 , there are three meetings scheduled by the Presidency that will deal with the three greatest priorities for Morocco with regard to her relations with the European Union .
Yesterday , the Committee for Migration met to talk about the most pressing issue , the situation of migration from Morocco to the European Union , the situation of Moroccan immigrants in Europe and aid to Morocco for this very serious emigration problem they are suffering .
Today , the Association Committee is meeting to deal with all the political issues relating to cooperation with Morocco , not only in the economic but also in the political fields , as well as all the projects existing within the association framework and the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement , which is the fundamental instrument in the relationship between the European Union and Morocco .
And , tomorrow , the Committee which is looking at all the agricultural exports from Morocco to the European Union will be meeting in Brussels , which is Morocco 's top priority : to be able to export its agricultural produce to the European Union .
If this seems too little for Mrs Izquierdo Rojo , then , Mr President , then there really is nothing more I can say .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , with regard to commercial dealings with developing countries , the Council would like to point out that the European Union is the second largest exporter and the main importer of agricultural products in the world and , in particular , that it is more or less the main importer of agricultural products from developing countries .
The European Union imports more agricultural products from developing countries than the United States , Canada , Japan , Australia and New Zealand put together .
Between 1997 and 1999 , the European Union imported more than EUR 35 000 million worth of agricultural products every year from developing countries , with no import duty in the majority of cases , or at a very low level in exceptional cases .
In fact , the European Union has a very active policy of supporting these countries , particularly through two main programmes aimed at encouraging exports from developing countries to the European Union .
One is the Generalised System of Preferences and the other , the well-known EBA ( everything but arms ) initiative .
Furthermore , the Council would like to remind you that , within the framework of the World Trade Organisation - comprising 144 member countries , the majority of which are developing countries - an agreement on agriculture was made by virtue of the 1994 Marrakech Agreements with the aim , amongst other things , of reducing the subsidies that cause distortions to competition in world markets .
Recently , in November 2001 , the development cycle initiated by the Doha Declaration set the objective of reducing these trade distortions further , helping , at the same time , developing countries to take fair advantage of world exchanges .
Within the framework of these new multilateral trade negotiations , the European Union has committed itself to contributing to the conclusion , before 1 January 2005 , of a balanced multilateral agreement that will be advantageous to all parties .
The Community position consists of setting up additional reductions to export subsidies , such as export credits , state trading enterprises or other kinds of export monopolies that use one market to subsidise another ; or even specific practices regarding food , whose true objective is to eliminate surpluses and open markets or suppress competition in the markets .
The Council does not yet have proposals from the Commission , which , as this Parliament is aware , has exclusive control over common commercial policy , but as soon as these proposals are presented to the Council , it will study them within the framework of these guidelines which the Commission , naturally , shares .
There is no risk therefore of there being any difficulty between the Council and the Commission in terms of achieving the objective of giving more advantages to developing countries so that they can export to Union markets .
I would thank the President-in-Office of the Council for that detailed answer .
I believe that these major export subsidies are basically divisive and destroy the agricultural market in large parts of the Third World .
It will only be possible to achieve a fair trade policy once the subsidies have been abolished .
I have two follow-up questions .
The first concerns the extensive fraud involving export subsidies , as pointed out by , for example , the Court of Auditors .
What measures are being taken to get to grips with this fraud ?
My second question concerns whether , on the basis of the Presidency 's report , I can assume that , once the Commission has presented its proposal , the Spanish Presidency will support substantial reductions in export subsidies .
With regard to the control of EU expenditure , I believe that the European Union - the Commission , OLAF ( the European Anti-Fraud Office ) and the European Parliament - have the necessary instruments to control fraud , and I naturally imagine that , in the future , it will be treated with the same degree of severity and rigour as it has in the past .
With regard to the elimination of export subsidies , I cannot give you an answer on behalf of the Presidency-in-Office , because this will be the response of the Council as a whole .
I can tell you that Spain is opposed to import subsidies , but the Presidency-in-Office of the Council will , naturally , have to reflect upon the position of the Council as a whole , and I cannot say any more at this time , because we have still received no proposal from the Commission and the Member States have still not given their opinion on this issue .
Of course efforts are being made to change the system of subsidies paid in the past under the GATT agreements and , if it is changed , it will be at the expense of the agricultural produce and income of the poorer farmers .
I have to say that , if you bear in mind that 80 % of subsidies go to 20 % of farms , according to the MacSharry report , the subsidies paid to farmers , especially in the south , should have been increased long ago in order to meet the demands of the European Union for produce in which it is not self-sufficient and of which 70 % are imports , such as cotton , tobacco , oil , fruit etc .
Secondly , this produce is high quality and is good for the consumers of the European Union .
My question to the Council , given that it has not given a clear answer and , we are told , has not yet formulated a position , is this : will it agree to abolish subsidies in all cases on the basis of the conclusions of the Qatar summit and , if it does , will it take account of the fact that farming will be abandoned in countries such as Greece and other countries in the south and all that that implies , with small and medium-sized farms being wiped out , increased unemployment and the adverse impact on the environment ?
It is very difficult for the President-in-Office of the Council to provide any further details on the debate that is going to take place on no more and no less than the reform of the common agricultural policy - which is certainly going to be one of the hottest debates in the European Union over the next few months - because at the heart of this reform is the very issue of agricultural subsidies .
I would ask the honourable Member to be patient and wait until July when the Commission will make its proposal on the medium term revision of the common agricultural policy , in accordance with the financial perspective and what was agreed in Berlin in 2000 .
The Commission will therefore put forward its proposal at this time , the debate will begin in the Council and I do not have the slightest doubt that the European Parliament will very quickly take up all the issues raised and will be closely involved with this great movement for the reform of the common agricultural policy .
In order to do this , this Presidency or the next one will have many opportunities to give their opinion on these issues .
I am sorry I cannot go into any further detail at the moment , because there is nothing on the table .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to remind you that Question Time is for specific questions and not for debates of a general nature .
These can be held at other times , in a different manner and with much more time available .
During Question Time there is just one minute to ask the question and one minute to give the answer .
I am not referring to any Member in particular , so do not take this personally , this is simply a reminder for you all .
Mr President , I shall now answer .
On 12 February 2002 , the Ecofin Council studied the updated stability programmes put forward by Germany and Portugal .
In this regard , the Council also studied , in a similar fashion , the Commission 's recommendations aimed at forewarning , using the famous early warning method , these Member States so that they could prevent an excessive public deficit .
With regard to the concerns expressed in the Commission 's recommendations on the worsening of this deficit , both the German and the Portuguese Governments committed themselves to ensuring that the reference value of 3 % of GDP for public deficit would not rise again in 2002 .
They also committed themselves to the very strict control of budgetary development in 2002 and to avoid any measure that could worsen the budget deficit and , naturally , to taking all the steps necessary to return , by 2004 at the latest , to a budgetary position closer to a balance , in the case of Germany , or an actual balance , in the case of Portugal .
The Council and the Commission considered that such commitments from the German and Portuguese Governments responded to the basis of the concerns expressed in the Commission 's recommendations for which they would be forewarned .
Consequently , the Council rejected the Commission 's recommendations and has opted to conclude the process .
The Council 's motives were given in two declarations on the budgetary situation of these two Member States , which were made public .
I thank the Spanish Presidency for its answer .
I have a number of follow-up questions .
Does the Presidency believe it is a good thing that the Commission and the Council should have arrived at different conclusions regarding Portugal 's and Germany 's budget deficits ?
Is it laudable that different assessments have been made ?
How does the Spanish Presidency view the warning issued a year or so ago to Ireland following Irish tax reductions designed to fulfil specific election pledges by the Irish government ?
Was it a legitimate warning , given the way in which Portugal and Germany are being treated ?
How do you view the Stability Pact 's credibility in the light of the euro 's having become weaker as a world currency , especially against the dollar , in relation to which it has fallen from 1.30 to 0.90 ?
Finally , do you believe , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , that this decision is prejudicial ?
Mr President , firstly , it goes without saying that the decision taken by the Council is not prejudicial .
The Council would never take a decision that would cause harm either consciously or voluntarily .
That is unthinkable .
The Council only takes decisions when it believes they are in the best interests of the Union and its Member States .
Additionally , with regard to the supposed discrepancy between the Commission and the Council , I can only say that the Commission fully complied with its obligations laid down in the Treaties to monitor the Stability Pact and to propose to the Council the activation of the early warning mechanism , and that the Council carried out its corresponding obligation upon this warning from the Commission , and unanimously decided that , having obtained clear guarantees and commitments from the States involved , it should take the decision it took .
You ask me to compare the decision taken for Ireland with that taken for Germany and for Portugal .
In the case of Ireland , the Council took the decision it deemed appropriate - I imagine it took specific considerations into account - and then , in the case of Portugal and Germany , it took another decision it also deemed appropriate .
That is to say , the limits of the Council 's discretion to make recommendations to countries that are in danger of not complying with the Stability Pact are absolutely sovereign and the Council decides on each case according to circumstances , and it goes without saying that the Irish case was not the same as the Portuguese case or the German case .
In the Portuguese and German cases , guarantees were given that were unanimously approved by Council members and the Council therefore took it upon itself to take the decision , in line with its own competences and responsibilities .
I have to tell you that several Members have requested to ask supplementary questions , but I can only give the floor to two more Members in the order in which they asked to speak .
I will now give the floor to Mr Tannock , then to Mr Fatuzzo .
The one-size-fits-all monetary policy and single currency will inevitably lead to foreign direct investment flowing to the Member State with the lowest income and corporation tax rates .
How long will it be before there are demands for serious tax harmonisation in Euroland ?
And how long before the current EU budget - which is capped at 1.27 % of the Member States ' GDP - is deemed to be insufficient to stabilise a single currency zone , particularly after the imminent enlargement programme , which is presumably going to start by 2004 , and particularly if there is an asymmetric shock to one of the Member States , which will need bailing out by some central EU fund ?
You are all aware that you have to ask questions that are as specific and supplementary as possible .
The questions you are asking are of course related , but it remains to the discretion of the President-in-Office of the Council whether to answer questions unprepared .
It is clear that tax harmonisation is one of the European Union 's aspirations , not solely for the Eurozone , but for the whole of the EU - for this is an issue which is also pertinent to the honourable Member 's home country . I know , however , ladies and gentlemen , that you are aware that this is an issue that must be decided upon unanimously , and that progress is being made very slowly , but progress is being made all the same , and therefore , the Council and Ecofin intend to continue working towards tax harmonisation within the European Union .
I hope that this harmonisation is achieved for the benefit not only of the Eurozone but the whole of the EU .
Does the President-in-Office of the Council think there is any truth in the claims made by the Italian Prime Minister , Mr Berlusconi , and the Italian Finance Minister , Mr Tremonti , that when they came into power in 2001 after the previous centre-left governments they found a hole in the budget worth EUR 8 550 million , which had been covered up in the budget by the preceding governments and only came to light when the present government checked the figures ?
Is it true ?
Do you know anything about it ?
Mr President , this issue does not fall within the competence of the President-in-Office of the Council and , therefore , I cannot answer .
We must now have the last question to the President-in-Office of the Council , because he must leave at 7 p.m. on the dot to catch his flight .
Mr President , the Presidency has supported efforts to develop the Barcelona Process from the start .
In the new international climate following the events of 11 September , the Ghent European Council of 19 and 20 October 2001 considered it fundamentally important to encourage dialogue on equal terms between our communities and those from the Arab and Muslim world , particularly within the framework of the Barcelona Process .
Special attention is therefore being devoted to this issue .
Taking this into account , the strengthening of activities within the Barcelona process is , in fact , one of the Spanish Presidency 's priorities , with the intention that the Euro-Mediterranean Conference of Foreign Affairs Ministers in Valencia on 22 and 23 April should be a success .
With the objective of preparing for this conference , from 18 to 22 February we led a mission to countries in the Maghreb and , as a result of this , all the necessary preparations have more or less been made to deal with issues in the three great political , economic and socio-cultural spheres , with the aim of reaching specific agreements at the Valencia Conference .
I should also like to say that , up to now , we have received more or less the same response from all countries in the Barcelona process guaranteeing their presence at the Valencia Conference .
I believe that , in view of the difficult circumstances we are facing with regard to the Middle East peace process , the fact that all delegations have announced their willingness to participate in the Valencia Conference is already proof of a spirit of cooperation and a desire to use the framework of the Barcelona Council to overcome the difficulties faced by the Arab and Israeli parties in the Middle East peace process .
Mr President , I hope that my speech will not cause the President-in-Office of the Council to miss his flight .
Therefore , in light of the response he has given me , I would like to reformulate my question and ask two that are very specific .
The first refers to the proposal from the Presidency-in-Office for a Euro-Mediterranean Development Bank .
Is the Presidency-in-Office able to guarantee the success of this proposal or will we have to be content with a simple line of facilities or with the promise of the optimisation of the MEDA programmes ?
My second , also very specific , question refers to the presence in Valencia , not of third Mediterranean countries , but of Ministers for Foreign Affairs from EU Member States .
Are you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , able to guarantee that there will be no repeat of the scandal of the last Euro-Mediterranean Conference , where , out of fifteen Member States , only four Ministers for Foreign Affairs bothered to turn up ?
Mr President , first of all , I would like to make my excuses .
It is true that I have to catch a plane , and also that in accordance with the Rules of Procedure , Questions to the Council end at 7 p.m. on the dot .
Therefore , while I would love to be able to stay here longer , unfortunately on this occasion I cannot .
In any event , I should like to say that the Presidency is here , in accordance with the Rules of Procedure , until the last minute it is required .
However , having said this , I shall be delighted to answer Mr Obiols ' questions because I believe them both to be very pertinent , especially , I am embarrassed to have to say , the second one .

With regard to the Euro-Mediterranean Conference , we continue to insist on the participation of Ministers from associated countries in the Mediterranean , Arab countries and Israel , and you have reminded us of last year 's embarrassment when only four EU Ministers out of the fifteen expected came to this meeting .
Mr Obiols is aware of the extent of Spain 's current concern about this issue , given that Spain was one of the countries that was represented at ministerial level at the Conference , and the extent of their concern as Presidency-in-Office , which is why we have taken all necessary steps with all Ministers concerned , and have repeated to them on various occasions that , with regard to this meeting , which will be important with regard to the revision of the Barcelona process , the physical presence of the Ministers responsible for Foreign Affairs in the European Union is absolutely crucial .
We have received guarantees from Ministers from all EU States that they will be in Valencia on these dates .
I hope that when I myself or the Spanish Minister for Foreign Affairs , Mr Piqué , give an explanation of the results from this meeting at the session immediately following the meeting or at the next session , we will be able to say that there was full participation , for if this is not the case , we will have to take a serious look at our own consciences .
This European Parliament should really draw the attention of the EU governments to this matter .
With regard to the Euro-Mediterranean Development Bank , I am not in a position to give you any definitive plans at this moment .
What I can tell you is that the Presidency of the European Union is very actively engaged in this regard at this present time , particularly the President-in-Office of the European Council , José María Aznar , by completing the visits we have made to all the EU capitals at the highest level and trying to find a satisfactory solution .
This all seems to hint that in Barcelona we could adopt an agreement on a formula that , as has been said from the start , would consist of creating a subsidiary of the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) , which would have autonomy and furthermore would follow a process of evolution . It would start with a structure and several competences which would be increased over time .
It would evolve into a more ambitious body than perhaps we could possibly have approved from the outset . Frankly , I believe that it is very possible that we will find a solution to this issue in Barcelona , because we would very much like to be able to put this plan forward in the ministerial meeting that will take place in Valencia with regard to the Barcelona process .
The President-in-Office of the Council has always fulfilled his obligations , and today he warned me that he would have to end at 7 p.m. on the dot for reasons that could not be avoided .
Several Members have given up their speaking time , but there is a point of order . Mr de Miguel , you may now go in peace .
I will take charge of the point of order .
Mr MacCormick , on a point of order .
Very briefly , the question which I had on the Order Paper today has been dealt with by Mr de Miguel in an extremely courteous , helpful and kind letter to me , which I received this afternoon .
I would like to thank him very much for that and say how much my constituent will appreciate the point .
Mr President , I received a written question from Mr MacCormick , which I intended to answer , but as I also had a letter from him , I rushed to send him a detailed reply in writing , which I hoped he would receive today .
Naturally , the written reply is much more detailed than the one I would have given here .
I would like to thank Mr MacCormick for his recognition and for his thanks .
I would like to congratulate the President-in-Office and Mr MacCormick on their excellent working relationship .
I never imagined a point of order could be so constructive .
I hope you have a good trip , Mr de Miguel .
Mr Ripoll also wanted to speak on this matter , but I imagine he will give up his speaking time due to today 's exceptional time restraints .
Would you like to make a statement ?

Mr President , I would just like to say that I am pleased Mr MacCormick received his answer , but I feel that , before asking a question of this nature , given the harm he is causing to one of Europe 's major tourist destinations , the Balearic Islands , as a result of these inappropriate comments , we would have liked to have had the chance to ask a question , because I believe that the only thing the person Mr MacCormick is representing wanted was compensation and , given that the British company in charge of the trip did not pay up , they thought that the Spanish State should do so , causing damage to its image in the process , which I believe is inappropriate .
We cannot go any further on this issue , as you will understand , given today 's exceptional time restraints . I am sure you will be able explain this to the Balearic public .
I regret we do not have more time , but we cannot run on any longer .
As the time allotted to Question Time has elapsed , Questions Nos 15 to 33 will be answered in writing
The next item is the continuation of the joint debate on three reports by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs :
A5-0060 / 2002 by Mr Lipietz on the supplementary supervision of credit institution , insurance undertakings and investment firms in a financial conglomerate ( COM ( 2001 ) 213 - C5-0159 / 2001 - 2001 / 0095 ( COD ) ) .
A5-0069 / 2002 by Mr Goebbels on insider dealing and market manipulation ( market abuse ) ( COM ( 2001 ) 281 - C5-0262 / 2001 - 2001 / 0118 ( COD ) ) .
A5-0072 / 2002 by Mr Huhne on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on the prospectus to be published when securities are offered to the public or admitted to trading ( COM ( 2001 ) 280 - C5-0263 / 2001 - 2001 / 0117 ( COD ) ) .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the reports we are examining today show that the sacrosanct objective of ensuring transparency and a high level of disclosure in the financial markets may conflict with other equally important requirements , such as not overwhelming small enterprises with excessive administrative burdens .
I believe that the rapporteurs and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs have done a good job in achieving a fine balance between the various requirements at issue , and I therefore think that Parliament should approve the proposals adopted in committee by a large majority .
Two points now : the first , which is urgent , concerns the creation of the so-called single passport , designed to speed up and cut the cost of raising capital within the European Union .
I believe that Mr Huhne 's framework , which the Committee has adopted , is something we can accept in its entirety .
The second point concerns the chance given to the Member States to exempt companies with capitalisation below the EUR 350 million threshold from the obligations arising from the directive , as proposed by Mr Huhne .
I believe this is a way of tempering the transparency of information with safeguards for the less small companies .
In conclusion , I am also convinced by the arguments in favour of allowing the competent authority to be chosen by the issuer , as proposed by Mr Huhne .
It is a mechanism that may prompt useful comparisons between the practices of the authorities in the Member States .
In these cases , as always , the scaremongers talk of a race to the bottom or , in other words , a decline in quality .
I believe that we should instead have more confidence in the ability of the markets to select and reward best practices .
Madam President , with financial instruments becoming ever more complicated and data being transmitted over the Internet in a matter of seconds , it is no longer easy to distinguish between appropriate use of insider information and abuse .
So in Germany , for example , only ten charges have been brought , because the definition was not clear enough to justify time-consuming and costly legal proceedings .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs unanimously supports the comitology arrangements , reflecting the Lamfalussy report and its parliamentary counterpart , the von Wogau report .
We attached a great deal of importance to a new definition of insider information .
This is information that is not generally accessible and which directly or indirectly concerns issuers of financial instruments .
It is information which , if it became public knowledge via traditional or electronic media , could appreciably influence share values or prices .
Manipulation is considered to exist in cases where false or misleading information on important facts is deliberately given and third parties stand to gain directly or indirectly .
We managed to prevent special rules applying to journalists , who should not be treated any differently to anyone guilty of market manipulation .
However , freedom of the press is guaranteed in each and every case .
We have adopted guidance for Member States on the enactment of sanctions and other measures .
We have agreed on principles as proposals for the Commission , to enable it to exercise its implementation powers .
We have drawn up a list of financial instruments to ensure that new products fall within the scope of the directive .
And we have emphasised the importance of " Chinese Walls " as a preventive measure in combating market abuse , and have called for specific control of this in individual companies .
We agreed that a central authority should be set up or expanded in each EU Member State in order to exercise effective control .
This is intended to bring together the various competences of national bodies so that they can closely cooperate with similarly structured authorities in other states .
I regard the agreement between Parliament , Commission and Council on most of the proposals as a great success .
Special thanks are also due to the rapporteur , Mr Goebbels ; as shadow rapporteur for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and the European Democrats , I wish to congratulate him on his ability to work out good compromises which incorporated many of our amendments .
The work done on revising the directive , which is also geared to new developments , should lead to greater coherence on Europe 's financial markets and above all to more trust on the part of investors : the outlook is therefore good for a particularly sensitive area of our globalised economy .
Madam President , Mr Huhne , although we in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs voted for your report - I am speaking of the Huhne report - that certainly does not mean that we supported it wholeheartedly .
There are limits to our willingness to cooperate .
I would like to repeat once again my group 's objectives , which are market-oriented and user-friendly .
The Directive on prospectuses should make the market easy to understand and make products transparent .
We are in absolute agreement on that .
Likewise , investors need serious information .
Cases like Enron or Maxwell must not be allowed to happen again .
What is clear is that this directive cannot of course prevent fraudulent descriptions of securities , but this directive and all the accompanying measures that we have already dealt with and are already available should help to make sure that in future we are dealing chiefly with serious products .
My main criticism of the report before us , Mr Huhne , is that you as rapporteur have addressed only , or chiefly , big investors .
However , the market is flourishing in the private sector , for small investors , and there are various quite different additional issues when it comes to SMEs .
For example , for SMEs we of course need an attractive capital market and cheap equity borrowing , and our prime objective must be more security and quality for investors buying securities .
Furthermore , it is absolutely vital that the scope of the obligation to publish a prospectus in Europe should be extended so as to achieve greater market transparency , and that is not yet included in the first reading .
Unfortunately , for the time being we have only been able to agree on a market capitalisation of EUR 350 million .
I hope that there will be some additional flexibility on this in the package .
Otherwise , with such a high threshold SMEs will be largely if not almost totally excluded , thus severely limiting the scope of the directive .
Mr Huhne , my group wishes to continue to play a constructive part in developing this directive , and I mean that very seriously .
However , that will require greater flexibility on your part .
That is ultimately what will determine how we vote on this issue and I hope I can give it my approval .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , tomorrow we shall vote on the draft directive on prospectuses , which should make it possible for issuers to be granted a single passport for prospectuses in the European Union .
The Commission 's proposal is in many respects an invaluable step forward .
However , closer examination and contact with the market participants have clearly revealed a number of problem areas in the original proposal that need amending .
Within the limitations of my speaking time I can mention just the major necessary amendments we adopted in committee .
The issuers must be given free powers of decision-making regarding which Member State 's stock exchanges or markets they wish to be listed on .
There are many different types of securities for which there are no markets in some Member States .
Certain market places have considerably more experience of these types of securities .
It would therefore be better for EU issuers if in future they could , as is the case today , have their prospectus vetted by the competent authorities of the country where they are making the public offer or are admitted to trading , rather than in the Member State where they have their registered office .
Companies that wish to remain in their home country will obviously not benefit from this sort of single market and so will have no need for a securities prospectus of this kind .
I therefore support the proposal that Member States could grant the right to make an exception in the case of those companies below a certain threshold seeking a listing in only one Member State .
This would make the work of SMEs , in particular , easier , but would of course also offer them the opportunity , if they so wished , to acquire such a single market prospectus , thereby enjoying the advantages of the single market .
Translation costs have been a considerable problem and must be reduced to make it easier for companies to be listed abroad .
Securities prospectuses are usually very long and contain a lot of detail .
It is quite enough that the registration document should be drafted in the language that is customary in that sphere of finance and that just the Summary Note should be translated into the language of the host Member State .
This is a clearer solution than the Commission 's original proposal and will benefit both issuers and investors .
The Commission 's proposed mandatory annual ' shelf registration ' system is also problematic .
The system would enable companies which repeatedly return to the markets in several countries to raise capital without having to update the entire prospectus .
This is of course a positive move .
The approach is not appropriate , however , in the very common cases where finance is being sought just on one occasion or at intervals greater than one year .
I would particularly like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Huhne , and my other colleagues on the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs for their excellent and constructive cooperation .
We achieved broad and balanced consensus regarding the necessary amendments .
I hope that we can remain in agreement in tomorrow 's vote .
Any deviation from the line of compromise achieved by the Committee would considerably hamper the creation of financial markets in the European Union .
Madam President , I would first like to congratulate the Commission on its proposal on the prospectus that it initially forwarded to us .
I think we can improve the text but I am afraid that Parliament will ruin it if it supports the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , and I hope that the vote tomorrow will enable us to make the necessary adjustments .
We are all in favour of the unification of the financial markets .
It is essential if we wish to fulfil the objectives that we set ourselves in Lisbon .
However , let us not forget what happened across the Atlantic .
How can we fail to mention an affair that is still being talked about even now , the Enron affair , and fail to see that the lack of transparency and the lack of credibility of financial information were also among the reasons for this situation ?
Neither can we fail to mention the number of start-ups that collapse day after day , even though almost as many are launched every day ?
We need a financial market that is open , accessible to all , mature , transparent , safe and sound , with no distortion of competition and with protection for all , which means access to cheap financial services for companies but also protection of savers , which means all savers , including small-time savers .
In order to do that , I think that there are two fundamental principles that we need to restore in the text that we have received from the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
First of all , we need a simple rule regarding the authority responsible for monitoring the prospectus , which is the rule of the country where the issuer has its headquarters .
That is the basic rule in the whole structure of the internal market . Let us maintain it , we need it .
We need a competent authority with a clearly defined role , with no possibility for delegation .
These are three key elements as far as the regulatory authority is concerned .
As far as the scope of application of the directive is concerned , there is the issue of SMEs .
We need just as much information on SMEs as we do on large companies .
It may be possible to make allowances by only requiring information from them on a yearly basis , but otherwise it is out of the question to exclude SMEs from the scope of the directive , as that would compromise the virtues of the European passport .
Madam President , regarding conglomerates I would like to support a number of the amendments adopted in committee .
The Commission proposal needs significant revision .
In particular , the provisions on material holdings are unduly harsh and would unduly restrict banks and insurance companies in investing in a range of equities .
That is particularly important in the context of insurance companies investing their pension funds money .
This House has made it very clear that it wishes that investors be given access to a wide range of different equities .
These provisions , as drafted , would make it almost impossible for an insurance company or bank to invest pension funds money in other financial institutions because of the harshness of the deductions .
I hope , therefore , that the compromises proposed in Amendments Nos 44 , 46 and 48 will be adopted .
I am not sure we have exactly the right answer yet , but it is clear that the material holdings provisions need to be altered .
As regards Article 14 I hope that the Council and Commission will progress the discussions .
I know they are having to streamline the administrative process related to conglomerates with third-country parents .
As regards prospectuses Parliament should follow the example set by the committee .
The Commission 's proposal applies a " one size fits all " framework designed for large equity issues to the diverse range of European financial markets .
Parliament should amend the proposal in order to reflect the diversity of those markets .
Shelf registration should be optional and not compulsory .
Just because they use it in the American regulatory system , that does not mean we should adopt it here .
As recent events have shown only too clearly , the American regulatory system is not always a good one .
We should exempt smaller businesses from part of the proposals , as proposed by the committee , and it is especially important that we recognise that there are particular concerns related to smaller businesses , particularly those which are only raising capital and doing business in one part of the European Union .
We should retain the current regulatory framework for the professional bond markets .
Where there are very sophisticated markets - indeed one of the most successfully integrated markets in the European Union - it makes no sense to apply protections designed for retail investors in equities .
We need issuer choice , otherwise we will have the same problems we have had with the existing prospectus directive .
That is essential if we are truly going to integrate the market for capital raising .
On market abuse the Commission 's proposal has severe problems .
I congratulate Mr Goebbels for tackling a number of them .
I still have a number of concerns about the directive .
There are significant problems with a directive that penalises wholly unintentional conduct , and I hope the Commission and Council will accept the safe harbours put forward by Mr Goebbels in the compromises , which are based on a safe harbour for acceptable market practice .
This is particularly important in the context of derivatives , where the scope of the definition of inside information would make it very difficult to hedge ordinary liabilities , relating for example to an interruption to supply or new research revealing details of potential new supplies .
If such information is instantly disclosable as " inside information " it would make hedging impossible and the derivatives markets would grind to a halt .
I would also urge the Commission , Council and Parliament to look seriously at the amendments we have proposed on that .
It is vital to recognise Chinese Walls where the proposal is being switched from a law which can be applied only to individuals to a law which can be applied to companies .
It is very important that we encourage firms to take care to restrict the flow of inside information if at all possible , and I am very grateful to the rapporteur for responding to the concerns that I have expressed on this .
Chinese Walls can be useful if they are enforced properly .
We should encourage firms to use them and enforce them properly .
Finally , it is vital that we have proper protection for freedom of speech and for journalists .
Hence there need to be some radical changes to the proposals where they relate to the reporting of financial information by journalists .
The lack of momentum at the Barcelona Summit has been very frustrating .
In my view , we are proving in the European Parliament today that we have indeed made progress , and I believe the Commissioner will be pleased about that .
I wish to focus on the report by Mr Lipietz .
I would also like to congratulate him on his report on financial conglomerates . This is something in which we , in the Netherlands , have a great deal of experience .
But , I should like to make a few general observations in particular .
We , in the Netherlands , have been struggling for some time with the issue of supervising dynamic developments within the market at both cross-border and cross-sector level .
The problem is how to tailor this supervision to these dynamic developments .
For the time being , the Financial Services Action Plan has settled for the approach of streamlining the rules of the different supervisory authorities in the Member States as much as possible , and working towards a level playing field within the markets on that basis .
In this pragmatic approach , it is appropriate to leave it up to the Member States to decide on how they will organise their supervisory structure .
I see this very much as an interim solution which also has some drawbacks .
However , it is important in my view to focus on the future solution , future supervision , which will need to take place at European level .
This structure will need to become more efficient , more transparent and less decentralised in order to be truly effective .
It is impossible to regulate everything down to the last detail .
In the Netherlands , we have a great deal of experience with an approach whereby the supervisory authority has a reasonable amount of discretionary power . However , this approach will cause problems if it has to be approved cross-border for other Member States , to cater for the large quantity of existing authorities .
I therefore believe that we will have to hold a debate after all , about a strong , European supervisor , and we will also need to find out how we will distribute this task , and whether this will indeed be done at sector level .
In my view , this comes too late , but we may ask whether we still nevertheless need to draw a functional distinction between supervision of conduct and prudential supervision .
The role of the European Central Bank should also be considered in my view .
I understand that in these circles , more thought is now also being given to a possible role in supervision .
By way of conclusion , I should therefore like to propose that both the Commission and the European Parliament take initiatives for such a far-reaching discussion .
Madam President , the regulation of the stock market must be able to reconcile two objectives : firstly , to give European companies more opportunities to obtain money more cheaply , and secondly , to protect the investor .
I believe that this reconciliation has been achieved in the report on market abuse and also thanks to several compromise amendments in the Directive regulating the audit or control of financial conglomerates .
Unfortunately , there are three attacks on the principle of legal protection in Mr Huhne 's report : firstly , an attack on the definition of the public offer ; secondly , an attack on the choice of the authority designated to approve prospectuses ; and thirdly , an attack on the obligation to inform small and medium-sized companies .
I will deal with each issue in turn .
With regard to the definition of the public offer , the rapporteur proposes that this information should be provided to the investor at the final stage , immediately before the contract is signed .
In my opinion , this information must be available and made public from the moment that money is requested from the investor and it is clear that my formula , which is in line with that of the Commission , does not exclude this investigation from analysing investment possibilities with professional investors .
Secondly , with regard to the proposed free election of the supervisory authority , I , who in a former reincarnation was a tax inspector , do not feel it would be a good idea for contributors to elect their tax inspector , nor does it seem a good idea for the financial institutions to elect the ultimate supervisory body .
I believe that the formula proposed by the Commission is more coherent and gives greater respect to the previous Directives , and shows a greater degree of common sense - that it is the national authority which has the best knowledge of the applicable national law , of which it should inform the investor - and that , above all , it presents the least risks , because the absolute freedom formula , in my opinion , opens up a competition , a race between the supervisory authorities to make things too easy and attract investors who would be a threat to legal certainty .
I cannot agree with the rapporteur on the last point with regard to the exclusion of small and medium-sized enterprises , even more so when we bear in mind that small and medium-sized enterprises have a capital of ESP 350 million , which would mean the exclusion of 80 % of companies quoted on the stock exchange .
I am sorry that I am not able to finish ; I will conclude this dialogue with Mr Huhne , now by letter and I hope , later on , orally .
Madam President , this is a joint debate on three subjects .
I should like to start with the report prepared by Mr Lipietz .
I begin by commending him on that excellent report .
He has mastered a proposal which is both technically complex and economically important .
I can therefore accept the following amendments without reservation : Amendments Nos 2 , 3 , 7 to 10 ; Amendment No 9 as corrected by Amendment No 50 ; Nos 18 to 30 , 35 , 36 , 40 and 42 .
These are welcome reinforcements and real clarifications of the proposal .
In the same way there are a number of amendments which I can accept in spirit .
They go a long way in the right direction but need some refinement to avoid confusion or possible contradiction .
Amendment No 6 could be improved by combining the elements in Amendment No 9 to give a good set of macro-economic criteria to determine which groups are covered by the directive .
Amendment No 17 clarifies how to cover special group structures .
That is also a welcome clarification but the wording could be tightened up .
Amendment No 31 requires the Commission to consult industry .
I agree .
But the amendment seems to us to be too limited .
It restricts consultation to a handful of Brussels federations .
The Commission is in favour of as wide and as representative a consultation as possible .
I think that Parliament would also consider that necessary .
Amendments Nos 32 to 34 , 44 , 46 and 48 seek to amend what should be deducted from capital to prevent the so-called double-gearing of capital and artificially inflate a company 's capital base .
I agree with the spirit of those amendments .
The 20 % threshold for insurance deductions appears to be a good compromise .
The proposed wording just needs some improvement to ensure the overall coherence of the text .
But Amendments Nos 43 , 45 and 47 , which completely contradict Amendments Nos 44 , 46 and 48 , are then not acceptable .
There are only a few amendments which I am unfortunately unable to accept .
Firstly , amendments that significantly narrow the scope of the directive : namely Amendments Nos 4 , 5 , 11 , 12 and 49 .
They will limit the measures to groups with a parent / subsidiary relationship only .
That does not reflect reality .
There are groups that are organised on a different basis which would then escape supervision , for example , horizontal cooperatives or mutual groups such as Rabo Bank in the Netherlands or the DG Bank in Germany .
These amendments also exclude anyone with close links to a conglomerate .
After the Spanish BANESTO case we all know how important it is to include such cases in our supervision , in particular for intra-group transactions .
A second group of amendments which I unfortunately cannot support concern the calculation of capital adequacy .
They are Amendments Nos 15 , 16 , 37 and 39 .
I can accept moving the substance from the annex to the articles of the directive but I cannot support the additional substantive changes on the definition of capital .
They would fundamentally undermine the capital standards for our industry .
Firstly , the English text of Amendment No 16 changes one word in the original proposal and consequently opens the door to acceptance of all types of capital to cover risks , irrespective of the quality of that capital .
I understand that this is a typing error - these things sometimes happen - but I should like confirmation that the French and German texts , which leave the original text unchanged , are the correct text .
Secondly , I cannot accept including minority interests in group capital - that is , the last sentence of Amendment No 15 - if all the risks in the group are not also covered .
The third group of amendments which I cannot support are those that give our financial groups the freedom to choose the way in which they calculate their capital adequacy .
This concerns Amendments Nos 1 , 13 , 14 , 38 and 51 .
That is the role and responsibility of our public authorities .
They cannot abdicate this to the industry through self-regulation , and I agree that the authorities should discuss and agree with each group how its capital adequacy should be calculated .
I am sure that we can work out an acceptable compromise , but I ask for your understanding if I say that these amendments go too far .
In conclusion on this point , this is a most welcome and supportive report .
I should like to underline that .
With a few exceptions which I have mentioned , it really contributes to a rapid agreement and I am confident that it will be possible to work out acceptable compromises on the following amendments : Nos 1 , 4 , 5 , 11 to 16 , 37 to 39 , 49 and 51 .
Progress is being made in the Council and agreement between the institutions appears quite close .
On the second issue , which is the report prepared by Mr Goebbels , may I begin by saying that very good progress has been made on this dossier .
First of all I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Goebbels , very much indeed for all the efforts he has made while working under heavy pressure , as we all do , incidentally .
It is a very complex and sensitive dossier and I should like to applaud the fact that the rapporteur has resolutely defended the aim of this directive , namely to enhance substantially the integrity of European financial markets .
I should also like to thank the shadow rapporteur and the members of the Committee on Monetary Affairs for their readiness to proceed as quickly as possible .
I know we all agree that the European Union has no truck with greedy financial cheats .
We want stable , transparent , integrated and efficient European markets for all consumers and investors .
This directive must contribute to increasing investor protection and to making European financial markets surer and more attractive in future .
It must dispel the international concerns expressed over the last few years about insider dealing and manipulation on European markets .
I am certain all Members are aware that recent events have shown how important those issues are .
It is not only the attacks of 11 September that have proven the necessity of high market protection .
Scandals such as the Enron business , which has been referred to at various times tonight , clearly show the need for rules making markets safer and ensuring that they remain free of abuse and fraud .
The smooth functioning of financial markets and public confidence in them are the conditions for sustained economic growth and wealth .
Market abuse increases the costs for financing companies , harms market integrity and dissuades investors .
We must do everything to stamp it out .
With this directive , we ensure high market integrity , and establish common standards against market abuse throughout Europe , making European financial markets more attractive in future .
The Commission can agree with all the amendments that Mr Goebbels has proposed in his report , except those additionally proposed by Mrs Echerer , Amendments Nos 75 and 76 , by Mr Lehne , Amendments Nos 88 and 89 , and by Mr Herzog , Amendment No 87 .


But the Commission still has doubts about Amendment No 2 regarding comitology .
Firstly , this amendment is not necessary , given that the Commission has already accepted Amendment No 1 , which makes a clear reference to the declaration of President Prodi at the last part-session of this Parliament on 5 February and to my letter of 2 October 2001 to the chairperson of the Committee on Economic Affairs , Mrs Randzio-Plath .
Furthermore , during the debate on the report by Lord Inglewood concerning international accounting standards last Monday , I once again underlined our full commitment to this important declaration regarding the implementation of financial services legislation .
Secondly , the amendment does not reflect all the elements that have been agreed between our institutions , and there are some differences between the wording of the declaration of President Prodi and the wording of Amendment No 2 which might result in misinterpretations .
Furthermore - and this is an important point - I would say to Mr Goebbels that I am not certain whether the different wordings would be agreed by the Council .
I cannot speak on behalf of the Council , but it may well entail difficulties which we would be well advised to avoid .
The Commission would prefer , therefore , to stick to what has previously been agreed .
Let me state unequivocally that the Commission will fully respect - and to the letter - the commitments it has made in its declaration in plenary , as well as in my own letter to Mrs Randzio-Plath .
Should plenary adopt the amendments adopted by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , together with some of the additional amendments proposed for today 's sitting , I very much hope that the Council will be able to accept this text as well , so we would have only one reading .
That would be a major achievement for the integration of European financial markets by the year 2005 to which we all aspire , as well as a sign of confidence for the Barcelona European Council .
I hope that all Members present here and those voting tomorrow will agree and adopt that directive .
Lastly , we come to the report prepared by Mr Huhne concerning the directive on prospectuses .
May I again begin by thanking Mr Huhne for his report .
Many amendments have been proposed and they result in clarification of our proposal .
Good work has been done to improve the wording on eurobonds , which we broadly support .
We can accept 46 amendments : Amendments Nos 1 , 3 , 4 , 7 to 9 , 13 , 18 , 19 , 22 to 26 , 29 , 30 , 38 , 39 , 41 , 43 , 44 to 56 , 58 to 61 , 63 , 64 , 66 to 72 and 75 , but we may have to redraft some of them to ensure the overall coherence of the text .
I am worried , however , by some points which Parliament may adopt .
Firstly , I am concerned that , in the aftermath of Enron , Parliament may even weaken the fundamentals of current EU legislation , i.e. legislation which is now in force , namely , that companies wanting to raise capital among the public have to disclose information in a prospectus approved by the competent authority .
That is what Amendment No 35 is about .
Is this Parliament really prepared to support an amendment to the effect that more than 75 % of all companies listed in Europe should be able to raise capital without publishing a prospectus ?
Mrs Berès made that same point a little while ago .
That would mean that for some EU markets all but one or two companies would be exempted .
How do we explain that to European investors ?
For the Commission , the prospectus proposal has two aims : to facilitate fundraising for European issuers , and to ensure an adequate level of investor protection .
Both these aims are equally important .
Investor protection has been neglected too often in the discussion .
The second cause for worry is that some of the amendments proposed will result in more fragmentation , not less .
We must agree what is good for the EU as a whole , and we do not want any tinkering with national systems .
Let me be clear on this point , and let me be clear to this House , that my colleagues and I will spare no effort to reach an agreement with Parliament on this crucial text for a single capital market , but we must resolve those problems .
Let me now briefly address possible solutions to some of the most important political issues .
On small and medium-sized enterprises the Commission is against their total exemption from the proposal , but it is willing to find a cost-effective solution that would ensure that SMEs should have access to capital markets at the right price and under the right levels of regulation with the necessary investor protection .
We have always advocated adapting the disclosure rules to the specific nature of SMEs and we would be ready to contemplate an exemption for SMEs from the obligation annually to update the prospectus , as proposed by Amendment No 71 .
As regards eurobonds we agree with the rapporteur 's idea to exempt eurobonds with a high minimum denomination but we consider that the level proposed - EUR 50,000 - is too low .
We therefore support Amendments Nos 66 and 67 , as it seems to the Commission that good work has been done here .
As regards the annual updating of the prospectus , we might contemplate exempting SMEs but we shall certainly stay firm as regards big companies , not least because 300 of our largest companies listed in the United States already comply with this obligation .
Our investors should have the same disclosure as United States investors .
I am certain we all agree that our investors are not inferior to the American ones .
Lastly , regarding the competent authority , we want to retain our position of one administrative authority per Member State .
We are ready to clarify that a delegation of powers is possible provided that the ultimate responsibility remains with the single administrative competent authority .
We do not agree with the free choice of the regulator which might lead to the famous " race to the bottom " , but we would be ready to consider some flexibility for issuers of debt securities and those working out of third countries .
To sum up , the Commission rejects 29 amendments .
They are Amendments Nos 2 , 5 , 6 , 10 to 12 , 14 to 17 , 20 , 21 , 27 , 28 , 31 to 37 , 40 , 42 , 57 , 62 , 65 , 73 , 74 and 76 .
Regarding Amendment No 10 , we accept the amendments on comitology because they reflect our agreement on that matter , but we consider that Amendment No 10 is redundant .
The situation is the same as for Amendment No 2 , on the report by Mr Goebbels , so I do not have to repeat the whole argument .
We consider Amendment No 10 to be redundant given Amendment No 1 , which refers to the resolution of Parliament and my letter to Mrs Randzio-Plath .
Thank you , Mr Bolkestein .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 p.m.
The next item is a joint debate on two reports by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs :
A5-0061 / 2002 by Mr Pérez Royo on the effective taxation of savings income in the form of interest payments within the Community ( COM ( 2001 ) 400 - C5-0402 / 2001 - 2001 / 0164 ( CNS ) ) .
A5-0048 / 2002 by Mr Della Vedova on tax policy in the European Union - Priorities for the years ahead ( COM ( 2001 ) 260 - C5-0597 / 2001 - 2001 / 2248 ( COS ) ) .
Madam President , so that we can gauge the importance of this debate , I should like to start by reminding you of the remote origins of this proposal for a directive ; the Directive on the liberalisation of capital movements of 24 June 1988 .
The authors of this directive were aware of the opportunities arising for the evasion of national capital gains tax as a result of this liberalisation , by investing in a country other than the investor 's country of residence ; to summarise this situation , we can say that the risk was , and continues to be , that each Member State , each member of the single market that was being set up at that time and is now up and running , would act as a tax haven for the other Member States .
This risk , as I said , was highlighted by the authors of the Directive on the liberalisation of capital movements , who called on the Commission and the Council to legislate on this matter , the fiscal aspect of the liberalisation of capital movements , within one year , that is to say , in 1989 .
The Commission , and the Commissioner responsible , Mrs Scrivener , presented its proposal on time , but this proposal , basically consisting of the introduction of a deduction at source - withholding tax - for payments to residents in other Member States , was not accepted by the Council and was rejected , and became a sort of abortive legislation .
In 1997 , the Commission made a new proposal , within the so-called Monti package , based on the coexistence model , on which Parliament was able to draw up a report , but at the end of the day this did not receive unanimous support from the Council either .
The next step in this process is the Santa María de Feira Agreement , in which the European Council - that is to say the Heads of State and Government - taking a proposal from the Ecofin Council , reached a political agreement in principle on the basis of the points I will now explain .
Firstly , the Member States would be committed to setting up a system for information exchange with regard to the payment of interest to a resident of another Member State , that is to say , this would involve the lifting of banking secrecy .
Secondly , and as an exceptional and transitional system , it has been stated that certain States , Belgium , Austria and Luxembourg to be precise , should apply , in place of this information exchange - in other words , instead of the lifting of banking secrecy - a system for deduction at source .
Finally , the implementation of the whole of this legal framework was dependent and still is dependent on negotiations with third countries , such as Switzerland , the United States and Andorra , for the application of equivalent measures , and the application of the same measures by the Member States in territories dependent on those Member States , such as the Channel Islands .
Our opinion on the proposal for a Directive applying these Feira guidelines is entirely positive .
We believe , in general terms , that this is in line with the approach taken by the OECD , which is , at this time , the most active forum for discussion in this field .
The main problem with this scheme , and I will conclude on this note , Madam President - and this cannot escape anyone 's attention - are the negotiations with third countries .
In other words , the problem is how to get Switzerland to lift its banking secrecy .
However , at the risk of appearing to be a naive optimist , I should like to remind you that everything in life is subject to change and that not even Swiss banking secrecy is what it once was .
I should specifically like to draw your attention to the following fact ; the United States has been able , by means of an internal regulation , to implement a regulation , the so-called Qualified Intermediary Agreement , by virtue of which the Swiss banks and those from other countries are obliged to communicate to the Internal Revenue Service profits made by an American client - a US person - from assets which are also American , to lift banking secrecy with regard to these payments or even to apply a deduction at source of 30 % .
Nobody can escape the fact that this regulation can be avoided simply by investing in non-American assets .
Recognising that the cases are not precisely the same , with regard to the fight against terrorism , in this case we also find ourselves up against the limitations of the unilateral approach in the fight against improper practices , in this case tax evasion at international level .
For this reason , I must emphasise the positive contribution a joint action by the European Union and the United States could make in this area .
We believe that this should be the path to follow in negotiations with the United States and with other countries .
We have faith - and on this note I shall end , Madam President - in the Commission 's ability , and that they will know how to provide the impetus for these negotiations , which will provide a solution to this problem of the taxation of savings , which , to tell the truth , should have been resolved some time ago .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by thanking my fellow members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , who , especially during the debate and then with countless amendments , have helped to improve this report and , I believe , to finalise a text which I hope will please both the Committee and this House .
The report gives a generally favourable verdict on two Commission communications : one on fiscal policy strategies , and one on a strategy for a consolidated tax base for Europe-wide companies .
The verdict is generally favourable as regards the identification of their general objectives and the instruments that can be used to achieve them .
The first part of the report stresses that the constant growth of the tax burden over the last twenty years - something that has only slowed down slightly and has not stopped completely in the last couple of years - may well be one of the reasons for the poor growth in the European Union .
By stressing that a certain level of tax competition might be inevitable and might help to reduce tax pressure , the Commission communications appropriately recognise that it has a useful role in the context of rules preventing improper conduct .
The report takes up the principle of tax competition and emphasises it , pointing out that it is compatible - as the experience of recent years has shown - with constant coordination of fiscal regulations aimed at eliminating barriers to the internal market .
Tax competition is compatible with the completion of the internal market , which does not imply the absolute levelling-out of competitive conditions , and tax competition is just one of the many variables that determine the competitive regime within each country and between different countries .
Tax competition , as has been pointed out by the Nobel prize-winner , Robert Mundell , one of the recognised fathers of the single currency , does not run counter even to the introduction of the euro .
Moreover , in connection with tax competition , it should be reiterated that in reality there is no sign of any ' race to the bottom ' , that fall in tax revenue that many often dread , fearing that there might be a shortfall in the resources needed by the State .
We have seen that , in a situation of tax competition , taxation has in fact continued to grow in the European Union over the last couple of decades .
We are concerned about the tax burden on work - and the report bears this out ; but there is no proof and it is not rational to think that this might be a consequence of a reduction in the tax burden on capital : there is no sign of this in the data we have before us .
I shall now pass on to other points , Mr President , Commissioner .
As regards VAT , the report stresses the need to set up a system that applies in full the country-of-origin principle - prioritising the definitive system - on which the Commission documents are , in our view , still evasive .
This objective is specified but the timescales and procedures for introducing the country-of-origin regime are not given .
The report welcomes certain suggestions for improving the current system , but the introduction of a definitive system is called for .
As regards excise duties , particularly on alcohol and tobacco , the report reiterates Parliament 's position as already expressed in the Katiforis report .
Then in relation to environmental protection , not only is the ' polluter pays ' principle recognised , but also the fact that taxation is not the only way of implementing this principle .
As regards energy taxation , I must stress that , in actual fact , the current competitive distortions and asymmetries in the energy market make it inappropriate now , at least , to propose tax harmonisation for energy products .
On the subject of direct taxes , Commissioner , the report hopes that progress towards full implementation of the measures contained in the tax package will be completed as soon as possible and , in particular , that any rules discriminating between residents and non-residents , which leave loopholes for fraud and are incompatible with the single market , will be removed .
With regard to the strategy for introducing a consolidated tax base for the Europe-wide activities of companies , the report welcomes the Commission 's decision and proposes the adoption of the Home State Taxation principle , at least temporarily , pending the introduction of the consolidated base .
It confirms that determining the rates and levels of taxation should be left to the individual countries .
In conclusion , as regards the legal instruments to use , I welcome the effort to introduce soft legislation and therefore self-regulation by the Member States .
Lastly , I should like to highlight the principle of Parliamentary codecision in taxation matters and the change to qualified-majority voting for administrative aspects , but not for the definition of rates and the tax base .
As the rapporteur , I support the two amendments .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the report by Mr Pérez Royo is to be welcomed for the balanced approach and technical competence employed in its preparation .
A subject like the taxation of savings certainly ought to be dealt with in such a manner because the field is so sensitive .
The Commission and the Council have considered at least three hypothetical paths to take in their time , often changing their minds and their strategies .
They are : a withholding tax , the exchange of information , and both possibilities together .
In the end , they opted for the exchange of information and , after a heated debate in the Committee for Economic and Monetary Affairs , this was limited to natural persons .
As shadow rapporteur I fought for the exclusion of legal persons from the directive , because a business , whatever form of company status it may have , is obliged to draw up a balance sheet and have it approved .
As soon as investments in savings products appear on it , the income they generate must consequently be indicated in the accounts .
Therefore , extending the communication requirement to legal persons would be not only superfluous but certainly counterproductive , since it would overburden the communication in a manner that is surely avoidable .
The problem of third countries also needs to be addressed .
Should any of them fail to accept the mechanism , it would undermine the whole directive because , if at the time of implementation the conditions in the Member States and third countries were not uniform , it would be highly feasible for substantial amounts of savings to be transferred in real time .
The conclusions of the Feira European Council unequivocally state that sufficient reassurances must be obtained from third countries regarding these or equivalent measures so that the adoption and implementation of the directive may be decided upon no later than 31 December 2002 , by unanimity .
Another important aspect concerns the Member States that are not subject to the communication requirement for a period of seven years : Belgium , Austria and Luxembourg .
These States , however , as laid down in Amendment No 14 to Article 10 paragraph 1 , will be required at the end of the transitional period to fully participate in the automatic exchange of information .
In the way the directive has been drawn up , all attempts to maintain anonymity have been blocked .
It will also be necessary to make it work smoothly and fluently , keeping a watchful eye open for any laundering of dirty money .
Without this opportunity to launder money , national and international terrorism will find it hard to survive .
From this perspective , my Amendment No 6 to Article 3 paragraph 2 ( b ) also seeks to establish the full personal identity of all contractual relations made prior to the directive as soon as they show any kind of activity .
In this regard , it would be desirable to have a European personal data centre to check all major movements of money that may have - or are just suspected of having - connections with international terrorism .
Madam President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Pérez Royo , very warmly for his report , which makes it very clear what progress still needs to be made in this field .
I would also like to thank Mr Della Vedova very sincerely for his well-balanced proposal .
We all know what a difficult area EU tax coordination is .
Virtually no one is talking about tax harmonisation any more .
At the same time , we also know that tax competition can have very harmful effects on Europe 's economies and on the choice of locations for investment in the European Union .
I would specifically like to thank Mr Della Vedova for having highlighted the issue of codecision by the European Parliament again in his role as rapporteur , since I believe that in the context of treaty reform and the discussions on a European constitution we also need to consider where the boundaries of national sovereignty lie when it comes to taxation policy .
So we also need to adopt new approaches in order to define where it is in the general interest to set cornerstones for tax policy .
I therefore believe that the Convention would be well advised to tackle this subject as well and to call for treaty reforms providing for a move away from the unanimity rule and towards the majority rule in EU tax policy .
We are of course still a very long way from that , if we look at this really excellent paper and the very pragmatic but at the same time very accurate paper by the Commission .
The Commission has quite rightly taken stock in a rather sobering way as regards coordination .
The situation on value added tax is certainly disappointing , because we are still a long way from applying the country of origin principle .
The pragmatic approach adopted by the Commission should therefore be supported , even if we should never lose sight of our ultimate goal .
However , it is hard to reconcile various other areas of tax coordination with a forward-looking approach .
I believe that in the case of company taxation we are still a long way from achieving what the Monti Package was at one point attempting to do .
In any case , we need to make sure that tax havens are finally abolished and that favourable tax treatment for non-resident legal or natural persons , which distort competition , is finally eliminated .
That should be our objective , together with the minimum requirement for uniform definitions in tax law , ranging from the basis of assessment to definitions of profit .
I would very much welcome it if we in the European Parliament could agree on a single set of definitions for these arrangements .
That would certainly encourage national governments to take a more progressive line .
In my one minute 's speaking time , I shall confine myself to the Pérez Royo report on the taxation of savings .
I am pleased that the rapporteur has adopted the amendment I have tabled in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , which states that this directive shall be subject to agreement to be reached between the European Union and a number of third countries which have the same duty of notification .
This is indeed the thrust of the conclusions which the European Council had reached in Feira .
In fact , negotiations in this respect are already under way .
It is good therefore that this condition is expressly included in the text of the directive which , so far , strangely enough , had not been the case .
In my view , an agreement of this kind involving a number of third countries and so-called independent territories is of great importance in order to guarantee the equal treatment of savings both inside and outside the European Union , to rule out tax avoidance and to prevent considerable flight of capital .
I do regret , however , that no amendments have been taken into consideration with regard to the application of the directive to legal entities .
This would preclude the placing of significant savings of individuals into the accounts of companies , with the intention of evading this directive , an act which cannot be condoned .
Madam President , I am only going to discuss the Pérez Royo report , and I wish to say that I am far from happy with the compromise reached in Feira on the taxation of savings .
The proposal for a directive that the Commission submitted to us is meant to be cast into a legislative text .
The result is a compromise .
The proposal is therefore no longer the result of the right of initiative that is reserved for the Commission .
If the Commission is happy to act as the clerk that draws up the Council 's legislation , it could at least have submitted a draft to us that complied better with the legal requirements that we have the right to expect from a legislative text .
I am therefore grateful to the Committee on Economic and Monetary affairs for having adopted the majority of my amendments , which I tabled with the aim of ensuring a minimum level of legal security .
Our Socialist rapporteur had tried to radicalise this proposal for a directive by moving away from the Feira agreement .
In particular he wanted to extend the scope to legal persons and to propose the taxation without distinction of all investment funds .
Fortunately these ideas were not taken up .
I obviously regret the fact that in Feira , the coexistence model was abandoned .
I remain convinced that the automatic exchange of information between Member States on interest payments is a means and not an essential condition for ensuring effective taxation of cross-border interest payments .
Withholding tax is , in my opinion , just as valid a solution .
It would also be a model that could be adopted by the third countries that are our competitors and with which we need to have reached an agreement in order for them to introduce genuinely equivalent measures before the Directive is applied in the European Union .
Clearly , if Switzerland , for example , rejects the exchange of information due to its legitimate commitment to banking secrecy , there can be no question of my country , for example , which clearly declared its support at Feira for the exchange of information , implementing it .
I am convinced that the exchange of information will not be the solution that is ultimately chosen .
The most effective and least bureaucratic solution would be full withholding tax , which , with a reasonable rate , could even become an own resource of the European Union .
Madam President , unlike Mrs Lulling , I do believe this proposal to be a valid one .
Surely it is the case that whoever wants to practise good governance should not only draft appropriate laws , but should also ensure that these are complied with .
And if we notice that Member States are unable to do this , then we should help them where we can .
Incidentally , in Belgium , we are all too familiar with this .
We have had monetary union with Luxembourg for years , and it has effectively encouraged cross border payment transactions aimed at avoiding tax on moveable goods .
The citizens are all too keen to forget that they have to declare the income derived from moveables from another country to the tax administration of their own country .
It can therefore do no harm to give them a helping hand .
Ultimately , this can help prevent tax erosion and allows for a more naturally functioning internal market .
It has always appeared judicious to me to set matters straight in this area , primarily within the internal market , and without necessarily making it subject to agreements with third countries .
However , if I have understood the conclusions of Feira correctly , this is a stipulation which the Council does want to put in place .
When I read the Commission proposal , it once again fails to state this in the text which normally should reflect the agreement of Feira .
This is why I should like to ask the Commissioner once more what , in his opinion , are the advantages and disadvantages of including this stipulation , and I should also like to ask him if he could once again inform us of the current state of affairs in the negotiations involving third countries .
Parliament would be interested to know whether these are promising , when they are likely to be concluded and how we should couple the timing of the implementation of this proposal with the results of these negotiations .
Madam President , I should also like to thank Mr Della Vedova for his report on the Commission 's communications , on our general tax policy and on company taxation in the internal market .
I should also like to thank Mr Pérez Royo for his report on the proposal for a directive on the taxation of savings .
I should like to begin with the report of Mr Della Vedova , which I very much welcome .
It may help if I recall briefly the Commission 's motivation for producing these two communications .
Individual Member States retain , quite correctly , responsibility for many aspects of national tax policy .
But there is an ongoing demand for an EU tax policy in many areas .
A key question is : what degree of harmonisation is appropriate ?
A high degree of harmonisation is necessary , it seems to the Commission , in the field of indirect taxes .
Such taxes can create an immediate obstacle to the free movement of goods and the free supply of services within the internal market .
Indeed a certain degree of harmonisation in that area has already taken place .
I am very conscious that this Parliament has had its differences with the Commission on the issue of rates of excise duty on tobacco and alcohol - an issue dear to the heart of Mrs Lulling .
It is clear , however , that the existing wide rate divergences between Member States constitute a strong incentive for both fraudulent transactions and legitimate cross-border shopping which lead both to distortion of competition and diversion of trade .
I am therefore of the opinion that the permanent solution for these problems requires enhanced approximation of rates to a level at which the above effects no longer occur or are brought back to a sustainable level .
On the other hand , there is no need to harmonise personal income taxes unless they entail discrimination or double taxation .
But there is an intermediate zone of direct taxation of mobile tax bases - in particular the taxation of companies and capital - where the situation is less clear-cut and which may have direct effects on the internal market .
The so-called tax package , of which the directive on savings taxation is an important element , seeks to address the potential erosion of tax revenues and eliminate harmful tax competition .
But to achieve a balance in European tax policy , attention should also be paid to the concerns of taxpayers , both individuals and companies .
That means addressing obstacles that hinder the exercise of the fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the Treaty .
This is where our communication devoted to company taxation comes in .
In that communication we review the tax obstacles faced by companies who operate cross-border in the European Union .
We have identified a significant number of those obstacles , which , we must all agree is astonishing , given the fact that it is nearly 10 years since the internal market was established .
We have also identified potential solutions .
We have examined a number of possible solutions to this problem in the form of both targeted and comprehensive approaches .
The latter would , in the longer term , provide companies with a consolidated , corporate tax base for their EU-wide activities .
Naturally I am extremely grateful for the support given to this principle by Mr Della Vedova in his report .
In pursuing the various objectives I have just outlined in relation to taxation at EU level , the Commission will need to employ a variety of methods , including non-legislative mechanisms .
Again , I am very grateful for the unqualified support for this policy in Mr Della Vedova 's report .
I now turn to the proposal for a directive on the taxation of savings .
Firstly , I am pleased to note that a substantial number of the proposed amendments correspond to changes agreed by of the ECOFIN Council in the draft directive approved on 13 December 2001 , for the purpose of negotiations with third countries .
The large measure of agreement between the Council and Parliament on the text of the proposal cannot but strengthen the Community 's negotiating position in the discussion with third countries .
The Commission takes the view that the amendments agreed by the Council on 13 December improve and clarify the legal texts , but that they do not substantially change the proposal for a directive .
The Commission therefore considers that these amendments do not justify presenting a revised proposal for a directive given the particular time constraints that we are operating under .
A number of the amendments proposed by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs related to the negotiations with third countries and Member States ' dependent and associated territories , and more particularly to Parliament 's role in these discussions .
Parliament may rest assured that I intend to keep Parliament fully informed of these negotiations and that I have no intention whatsoever of undermining Parliament 's prerogatives .
I fully share the view expressed by Mr Pérez Royo that this proposal has an important international dimension .
This is exactly why the Commission asked for and obtained authorisation from the Council to enter into negotiations with the six third countries mentioned in the Faro European Council conclusions .
They are : the United States , Switzerland , Andorra , Liechtenstein , Monaco and San Marino .
The aim of these negotiations is to secure the adoption of measures equivalent to the system applied within the Community .
At the same time , Member States are committed to promoting the adoption of the same measures by their own dependent and associated territories .
The discussions with third countries and dependent territories should hopefully be finalised before the summer .
I must emphasise that the Faro Agreement provides that these negotiations with third countries and dependent and associated territories should precede the adoption of the directive .
The Commission cannot therefore accept amendments that would make the application of the directive , once adopted , dependent on the outcome of such negotiations .
There is a risk that such amendments might undermine our negotiating position vis-à-vis the third countries who quite rightly want to be sure that Member States will implement the directive if they agree to apply equivalent measures .
On the particular point raised by Mrs Thyssen , the discussions with third countries should precede adoption of the directive .
Those agreements are a political condition for adoption of the directive .
Therefore we have to live with that .
In closing , I once again thank Parliament for its support for the proposed directive on taxational savings .
I assure Parliament that I shall keep it informed of developments to the best of my abilities .
Madam President , I asked for the floor on a personal matter .
I can only express my surprise at what Mrs Thyssen has said about me and about my country .
Mrs Thyssen is not a member of the Committee on Economic and Monetary affairs and did not take part in the discussions in my group on the taxation of savings .
I would therefore like it to be noted that what she has said on the subject is completely wrong .
I think that Mrs Lulling has misunderstood me .
I only referred to the people of my own country .
I certainly did not attack or ill use anyone in Luxembourg , or at least I hope not .
And although I am , of course , no longer a member of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , I did fulfil this role for 10 years .
Since I was shadow rapporteur for my group during a previous round - dealing with the second proposal by the Commission on this subject - I did follow this issue to some extent , Mrs Lulling .
But I certainly had no intention of offending anyone in Luxembourg or anything of the sort .
I do not think I did ; but if I did , my apologies .
I would advise Mrs Lulling to read my text carefully , and she will conclude that there is no problem whatsoever .
The next item is a report ( A5-0409 / 2001 ) by Mr Carnero Gonzàles , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the legal personality of the European Union [ 2001 / 2021 ( INI ) ] .
Madam President , at this late hour , anyone can make a mistake .
If a market research institute were to ask people if they thought the European Union had its own personality , I think that the majority would say yes .
They would most certainly be mistaken , but this error would demonstrate at least three things : firstly , the current lack of transparency in the European Union 's institutional architecture ; secondly , the lack of information for citizens from their governments in areas such as those we are dealing with and , without a doubt , the most important thing , that reality is way ahead of the decisions taken at Intergovernmental Conferences to date .
The citizens believe that the European Union has its own personality , yet the governments in these Conferences have had no desire to provide it with one .
The European Union has existed since the Treaty of Maastricht , which is some time ago now , but neither at that time nor since has it wanted to expressly take on a legal personality ; the latest example of this was the Treaty of Nice .
The issue is on the table .
Why have governments refused to act ?
Under these conditions , the EU continues to act like a child living under the legal authority of its parents : the European Communities .
The question I would like to ask is the following : can we really uphold this contradictory and barely understandable situation for much longer ?
The answer to this question is becoming more and more clear - ' no ? - because the current situation causes legal confusion , political confusion , international and internal confusion , institutional confusion and , above all , as I said at the beginning of my speech , confusion amongst the citizens .
I would now like to give you three examples of this in an international setting .
We could go to a country such as Equatorial Guinea and see that the Commission delegation there is the Commission of the European Communities and not that of the European Union ; we can listen to our representative in the United Nations and notice that he or she is from the European Communities and not the European Union , or , we see that a commitment made by a united Europe to very speedily endorse the Kyoto Protocol is not in fact endorsed by the European Union but the European Communities .
Furthermore , this report has been produced at the same time as the start of the Convention on the future of Europe , which this Parliament hopes will produce a constitution .
This will therefore be our first contribution to the Convention after it has been set up .
It is logical that this issue should also be dealt with .
We hope that the Convention and subsequently the Intergovernmental Conference , taking on board the issues that came to light at Laeken , will tackle the issue of giving the European Union a legal personality , which will have advantages that cannot be denied : firstly , legal clarity ; secondly , the improvement of the Union 's image and its capacity to take action on the international stage ; thirdly , it will be a key element in establishing a system for the protection of fundamental rights at Union level ; fourthly , to give Union policy a higher profile and make it easier for citizens to identify with the Union and , fifthly , to help remedy the dysfunctions caused by the pillar system .
We also think that a legal personality is needed to bring the process of political union to a conclusion and that the process of the constitutionalisation of the Union will also require it to have its own legal personality .
In fact , this is a necessary prerequisite to achieving these objectives in a coherent way .
If this is not the final outcome , what will be the objective of the future constitutional text ?
Which body will take on the leading role in the European Constitution ?
The Union , the Communities , one of which is due to expire next Summer ?
For this reason we ask that legal personality be given to the European Union in the future European Constitution .
We ask for this in the report from the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , for which I am honoured to be the rapporteur , in agreement with the opinions of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy and the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , which I think are very positive contributions .
I believe that this request for the Union to be given a legal personality was also apparent in the last Presidencies-in-Office of the Council , a desire expressed by both the Belgian and Spanish Presidencies .
This , Madam President , is not an issue for legal experts , but a point that can be easily understood by any citizen : to know that he or she is a citizen of a European Union with its own personality , which can and should govern democratically and transparently , and they demand it fulfils its responsibilities .
.
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the rapporteur has explained the position as regards the three Communities and the European Union .
This subject is particularly problematic when it comes to foreign policy .
For example , in international organisations , in the FAO , we have full membership for one of the Communities , and a seat and a vote on United Nations bodies , but this does not apply across the entire foreign policy spectrum .
Let us consider in particular the changes that have taken place on the international scene over the last three years , with Mr Solana taking office in 1999 , which represented a political step change in European foreign policy , the introduction of the euro on 1 January 1999 and the objective of a common foreign and security policy by 2003 . These are ambitious targets which , however , are no longer rooted in the legal basis provided by the treaties .
Today , Articles 24 and 38 provide a legal basis for concluding agreements , but they make one of the Communities or the Member States as such responsible .
And this House also needs to be aware that agreements are entered into at present without Parliament having a chance to approve them beforehand .
Budgetary commitments are made in international agreements which then have to be honoured by Parliament at a later stage because of our particular role .
That is why I believe that this issue of the legal personality of the EU needs to be put on the agenda of the Convention again .
We need this legal personality in order for the European Union to make a stronger contribution to the United Nations , for example , especially following the events of 11 September .
This is in addition to the role of the Member States and is no substitute for individual Member States ' membership of the United Nations , but it would give our foreign policy a higher profile , it would increase our scope for action and above all be more transparent to the public .
That is the goal that we in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy would like to see included in the discussions of the Convention .
Mr President , the resolution on the legal personality of the European Union is one of Parliament 's contributions to the Convention charged with drawing up the European Constitution .
The Carnero González report stresses that the attribution of its legal personality is an essential step towards the constitutionalisation of the Treaties and improves the coherence of the various European policies .
Opponents of the Union speak of a superstate , a Europe that has fallen into the hands of a stateless bureaucracy .
In reality , Europe is not a threat to national identities , and national identities are not a threat to Europe .
Political unity is the only way to prevent the individual countries from being overwhelmed by untamed globalisation or to prevent difficulties from making the ghosts of nationalism re-emerge .
Anyway , we are not starting from scratch .
In the past the Treaty has attributed legal personality to the European Communities , but with the birth of the Union there is a legal void to fill .
The Council has addressed this several times , without , however , reaching clear conclusions .
Public opinion and all countries that have relations with Europe are convinced that their relations are with an autonomous and unitary system .
Moreover , in the sphere of foreign policy , defence and security , the European Council can deliberate on procedures that represent the beginnings of a legal personality .
One has to recognise the benefits for European citizens and for the Union 's international image .
It is not true that we are trying to build our common house from the roof down .
Construction by pillars reveals a problem , which Mr Carnero 's proposal remedies by taking up a 1997 Parliamentary resolution on international law , Community law and the constitutions of the individual Member States .
This resolution made express reference back then to the need to give the Union a legal personality .
We cannot , of course , pre-empt the Convention , but this resolution gives a great boost to a constitutional process to which , in our opinion , the future of a democratic Europe is bound .
Mr President , the Carnero González report raises a fundamental and timely issue , an important aspect of which is the problem of the Union 's legal personality .
It is easy to say what the issue is : the European Union needs at last to be given a face , a clear profile .
Look , quite recently we were told to be careful : the building of Europe has progressed under wraps , without revealing its features and its intentions , playing on calculated ambiguities to disarm resistance and dodge the stiffest opposition .
Thus for decades there was a succession of partial achievements and de facto solidarity , to borrow an expression dear to Jean Monnet and enshrined in the Schuman Declaration of 9 May 1950 .
Things went forward like that , without too much definition of the political and institutional individual that was growing up , without too much pretence at coherence in the building of Europe .
Well , we reply , the time has come for clarity , the time has come to explicitly characterise the supranational body that has gradually been taking shape until now we have a single currency .
The Convention must say who we are and what we want .
The fact that the European Community may have been an original construction , without historical precedent or pre-established models , cannot mean that it should remain inexpressible or indefinable , and certainly not that it should remain incomplete .
We must respond to the citizens ' legitimate questions and present ourselves as a union that has its own plan , that equips itself with clear institutional checks and balances , that recognises itself through a Constitution , that wants to play a strong international role , and therefore endows itself with a legal personality .
Hence the coherent , convincing argument of Mr Carnero González 's report , which the Committee on Constitutional Affairs has fully endorsed .
Mr President , most people would now say that they want the European Union to play a stronger role in world affairs , but they appear sometimes to be uncertain as to the ways and means .
This evening , in the splendid Carnero González report , we have part of the answer .
The acquisition of an international legal personality would be a powerful instrument for the Union .
First , it will raise its international profile .
Second , by giving the Union more respectability , it should encourage us to act more responsibly .
It will open the door for a more proactive part for the Union inside the United Nations , the IMF and the World Bank .
It will consolidate our role and the functions of the Commission in the field of trade and the environment .
But international legal personality cannot simply be asserted unilaterally .
It must be earned if it is to win recognition under international law .
What will assist us in winning this acceptance is for the Union itself to become a contracting party to the Council of Europe 's Convention - a move that will complement the development of our own fundamental rights regime funded on the Charter .
This report prepares those of us in the Convention to take the lead .
We are grateful to the rapporteur for his sterling work .
Mr President , giving the European Union legal personality as well as the European Communities , which already have it , would change very little , at least if we consider it in isolation .
In order for it to radically change the institutions , it would need to be combined , as Mr Carnero González suggests several times in his report , with several other much more significant reforms : merging the pillars , the power to conclude treaties on its own behalf , generally incorporating decision-making into the Community sphere and adopting a supra-national constitution .
This is why the report is right , in a sense , in saying that this reform would not in itself imply transfers of powers to the Union .
It is true that a simple association of States making unanimous decisions could have legal personality .
However , it is wrong to say that this alone could bring about the characteristics of coherence , unity of representation and visibility that the report ascribes to it .
In other words , this reform is nothing , or if it is to be something , it has to be accompanied by a merging of the pillars , an incorporation into the Community sphere and a constitutional process , which whatever we choose to call it , would be the distinctive signs of a superstate or of something that would strongly resemble one .
That is why I have drawn up a minority opinion , which is included with the report .
And that is why I am proposing a deal to Mr Carnero González .
I am happy to accept the legal personality of the Union if , in exchange , Mr Carnero González agrees to say that , if a European constitution came into being , it should first and foremost acknowledge the superiority of the national constitutions , the freedom of choice of the Member States on the world stage and unanimous decision-making or variable geometry in the third pillar .
If you agree to say all of that , Mr Carnero González , I would perhaps vote for your report , but you will not say this because your report is in fact hiding something other than what it claims .
Mr President , on this report the British Conservatives will abstain .
Within the delegation there is deep disagreement .
Some believe that what is proposed is a step in the direction of a European superstate .
Some , after considerable reflection , really do not know ; and some believe this is a proposal that will create an entrenched bulwark against a superstate , and so are in favour .
These views are individually deeply and honestly held , as indeed are my personal and private ones .
In these circumstances , trying to compel one 's colleagues to vote against their views on this kind of topic , in these kind of circumstances , is not only unlikely to work , it will not change their views either .
All it does is cause trouble .
While the subject matter of many of the non-legislative resolutions of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs is very important , Parliament 's resolutions themselves are , in the world of real politics , some of the less important items we vote on ; it is therefore folly , it seems to me , and shows lack of judgement , to engage in civil war about things which do not matter all that much .
Hence we are approaching this and other similar topics here within the framework of a broad church , which has the overriding advantage of being sensible , which I am not sure can be said about any other course of action open to us in the circumstances .
Mr President , Mr Carnero 's report to this House is an important one , and if this call for the EU to be given a legal personality is acted upon , that would be a qualitative leap forward in the unity that Europe represents for the citizens of our countries and also for the EU 's partners throughout the world .
No one understands the difference between the European Community and the European Union .
It is complicated and confusing and also has many drawbacks .
Mr Berthu is quite right in saying that this request forms part of the major overall reform that we want .
Merging the three pillars and streamlining the decision-making structures are all things that we have already approved in the Leinen-Méndez de Vigo report and in various other reports .
The question of legal personality is a cornerstone that is needed to bring the whole thing together .
This cornerstone was missing and we are providing it now with Mr Carnero 's report .
I very much support this .
The Convention is an excellent opportunity to do this work .
We need Europe to have a single voice in the world .
Mr Laschet and others have already mentioned examples of this absurdity : in some cases the Community is represented , but not the Union .
It really is very complicated . But it is also important for justice and home affairs policy .
I just asked him to say that we have agreed to make EUR 5 million available for Europol .
That is a good thing , because we want Europol to function , but the funding cannot be accepted , because Europol cannot accept money from the Community budget , but only from the Member States .
This demonstrates the absurdity of this situation , and I hope that our representatives and others involved in the Convention will take a step forward as regards legal personality and that the rights of our citizens will finally become binding , so that they can take the Union to court .
On that note , I wish this proposal every success and say thank you to Mr Carnero .
Mr President , with your permission , I feel I must point out that one person is still listening to the debate from the gallery .
That deserves our full attention , given the hour .
The Commission fully supports the terms of the proposed resolution .
It comes at the right time because the Convention to prepare the next IGC has just started its work .
It is very important that those who will be taking a position in the Convention and during the next IGC should be aware of the importance of this question for the effectiveness and the credibility of the Union and of the need to find an appropriate solution .
We know the weaknesses of the current system and how difficult it is for outsiders to understand - just like the other solutions resisted by the Commission in the past , such as the addition of yet another legal personality to the current set-up .
We have to convince people that it is essential to accord a single , full and complete personality to the Union .
For this , it is obviously essential to have the active support of the European Parliament , together with the measure of agreement now seen in several parliamentary reports such as the Carnero González and Lamassoure reports , and in the opinions of the various parliamentary subcommittees consulted .
The European Parliament can count on the Commission to support the terms of this resolution in the forthcoming debate .
Commissioner , on behalf of our sole but very attentive spectator , I thank you very much .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0050 / 2002 ) by Mrs Carlotti , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the work of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly in 2001 ( 2001 / 2012 ( INI ) ) .
Mr President , every year the European Parliament presents a report on the activities of the ACP-EU Joint Assembly .
Since 2000 , however , the Cotonou Agreement has brought about a new context that profoundly changes the very nature of this report .
The Cotonou Agreement made profound changes to the cooperation objectives , with the new goal being a renewed partnership that is more balanced and more effective .
This means that there have to be changes in the JPA 's modus operandi . More than just changes in the modus operandi , it requires a real cultural change .
Where are we in this process ?
The Joint Parliamentary Assembly is at a watershed .
After 2000 , which had raised great hopes of a new era in relations between the EU and ACP States , 2001 did not fulfil all its promise .
The working group did undertake a massive adaptation of its working methods , but many delays and a great deal of resistance hindered progress .
Here are three examples of this : firstly , the European States ' inertia in the ratification process .
Only three countries have ratified the agreement : Denmark , Sweden , the United Kingdom , and us , the European Union .
Although we are aware that the procedures are long in many European countries , this sends out a political message and a negative signal to the ACP countries .
All European Member States must ratify the agreement before the end of 2002 .
The second example is the untimely use of voting by separate college in the Assembly .
This is detrimental to its parliamentary nature .
I propose limited use , and in particular I propose a moratorium on its use among Europeans .
The question of voting rights is fundamental , and the debate over Rule 2 of the Rules of Procedure has led to numerous controversies .
The principle of representation by parliamentarians alone must be forcefully reaffirmed , and the compromise drawn up by the Working Group , which specifies limited cases of difficulty in which voting by non-parliamentarians is permitted , is the final position that we can accept here .
We need to get through this bad patch .
This report proposes a few paths that we could take .
I will only mention some of them , such as a specific instrument to contribute to democracy : the democratic bonus , financial or material aid to improve the functioning of democratically elected parliaments and a better representation of the opposition .
For the ACP countries , the principle is one country , one vote .
In fact , each country speaks with just one voice .
It is impossible for opposition Members of Parliament in the ACP countries to make themselves heard .
In order to remedy this , we need to have an open debate , without taboos , on the re-weighting of votes .
For now , the proposal of three delegates per country , put forward by my fellow Member Mr Martinez last year , is heading in the right direction .
As a result there is the question of funding .
Following a rigorous financial assessment by the Commission , a special fund would be reserved to cover the travel costs of ACP parliamentary representatives only and for the organisation of sessions .
From a more general point of view , the JPA is the only assembly that has no budget .
It should be given new powers to enable it to exercise financial and political control over the funding of cooperation .
Finally , my last point : the European Parliament should devote special attention to the work of the ACP countries in a comprehensive debate , at least once a year , here in the European Parliament , on the different aspects of cooperation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mrs Carlotti for her excellent report .
Mrs Carlotti , your report represents a kind of political road map indicating the route to a genuine parliamentary and democratic assembly .
It contains many helpful proposals for modifications .
So it is a good thing that it is to be adopted before the plenary session in Cape Town and can be taken on board in the discussions there .
Mrs Carlotti has already gone into many of the recommendations contained in the report just now .
As shadow rapporteur , I would like to comment briefly on a few points .
The Cotonou Agreement led to a fundamental reformulation of the goals of cooperation between the EU and the ACP States .
Some of the key substantive and political improvements to that agreement are the result of proposals made by the European Parliament .
Mr Corrie has done excellent work in this area in recent years as co-President .
The result is an ambitious agreement that opens up new horizons for cooperation .
But it now needs to have life breathed into it .
The working methods and procedures of the JPA need to be streamlined and to correspond to a genuine parliamentary , joint , democratic assembly .
This process was initiated last year and needs to be continued .
These new powers should make it possible for the Assembly to exercise tighter financial control over the expenditure of EU development aid .
Stricter monitoring and budgetary control combined with regular contacts between the Members of the Assembly and Members of Parliament from the recipient countries could help to ensure proper use of EU funds in line with the actual needs of the ACP countries .
The report calls for enhanced cooperation with civil society and non-governmental organisations .
In view of the political dimension of the Cotonou Agreement , it seems desirable to establish a dialogue between the public and politicians in the ACP and EU States .
The obstacles in the way of making the JPA a genuine joint parliamentary assembly need to be eliminated as soon as possible .
It is very regrettable that ratification of the agreement in the EU Member States is moving forward at such a sluggish pace .
The risk that this will send the wrong signal to the newly industrialised countries with which the EU has strong historical , political and cultural links should not be underestimated .
Mr President , Mrs Carlotti 's excellent report is both an optimistic declaration of confidence in the potential of the Cotonou Agreement and a call on the responsibility of each and every one of us to make sure that this potential does not end up as yet one more lost opportunity , but rather that the most ambitious plans of the agreement come to fruition .
The report underlines that Cotonou is a major step forward in the process set out some decades ago for cooperation between the European Union and a growing number of African , Caribbean and Pacific States , with the aim of aiding their development .
It reminds us that we are facing a process that has matured and that has also adapted to the current situation .
Europeans have not granted this new agreement to our partners , but have fully and rigorously negotiated it with them .
This is , therefore , an association agreement between partners that are equals in their mutual respect , recognition and rights .
It is an agreement which , in addition to its economic and commercial component , introduces an innovative political dimension that should allow the ACP-EU Community , united in its proclaimed democratic values with a great capacity for influence in its pursuit of a just , balanced , free , lawful , peaceful world where prosperity is reasonably divided and shared , to burst onto the world stage .
However , all the confidence expressed in the report is naturally conditional upon our responsibility to take advantage of the provisions of the agreement .
Hence the appeals of the rapporteur , first of all , to those Member States who do not consider the ratification of the Cotonou agreement a priority .
She also calls on the European Parliament to give the implementation of the Cotonou agreement the attention it deserves .
She calls upon those MEPs who act as Parliament 's representatives in the ACP-EU Joint Assembly to act responsibly .
She also calls upon us to make sure this Assembly is truly parliamentary and well balanced , and to commit ourselves to acting in a way that shows solidarity , and is fully democratic within this Assembly .
The report also highlights our ACP partners ' responsibilities to achieve what is set out in the agreement so that the Joint Assembly can be set up once and for all .
They will then need to adjust themselves to democratic standards , the respect for human rights and the Rule of Law , as guarantees for their own progress and to effectively contribute to a world of stability and peace which is the objective of the Cotonou agreement .
Mr President , I too should like to begin by congratulating Mrs Carlotti on her report .
This is a fine piece of work , and it is also excellent that the work has been completed before the next meeting of the ACP-EU Joint Assembly takes place , which is as early as next week of course .
It is an important report , and Mrs Carlotti has also put forward a number of theoretical observations .
I shall examine a couple of them more closely but , before I do so , I should just like to emphasise that it does not of course help a great deal to stand here and talk about the Cotonou Agreement if we cannot get it ratified , and we must once again call upon the Member States to make such ratification possible .
I believe that , in the course of the last few months , only one additional country has come on board .
And even if there are many countries that have planned to ratify the agreement , we have still to see the final signatures .
The situation is a little better where the ACP countries are concerned , but the overall number of signatories is , of course , still by no means large enough .
The second thing that can be said is that such an agreement is not really , of course , worth very much if we do not arrange for proper aid .
Here , too , there are , no doubt , difficulties , and I hope that the Commissioner - or whoever he now has to help him - will succeed in getting a process under way before tomorrow 's formal meeting of foreign ministers .
The target I should like to have seen , namely one of 0.7 % , will certainly not be adopted , but I have to acknowledge that this target is impossible to achieve at the present time .
Simply getting a binding process under way will , however , be of absolutely crucial importance .
I should like now to address two points in Mrs Carlotti 's report .
The first is the issue of our own working methods .
On that issue , I definitely do not think that we have made enough progress .
I think we have too many resolutions and too little debate .
The second point is the composition of the ACP-EU delegation , which is not of course particularly appropriate .
The fact that the delegation includes only one person from the ACP countries introduces a distortion , democratically speaking , and I therefore also think that we should look again at the composition .
Should we , for example , have twice as many delegates from both sides and then only meet once a year in order to obtain greater representation ? Or can we come up with some other solution ?
Mr President , I should like to warmly welcome this report by Mrs Carlotti and congratulate her on her very thorough and far-reaching work .
I am struck , in particular , by how strongly the theme of genuine partnership shines through ; how the EU / ACP Joint Parliamentary Assembly is a unique relationship in modern political life and - imperfect as it is - it can stand as a model for new and innovative relations between North and South , which are perhaps today needed more urgently than ever before to build a more peaceful and sustainable world .
That does not mean that there is not room to improve the workings of that relationship .
I commend Mrs Carlotti for the proposal she makes in that regard .
I would like to expand on a couple of them .

First , if a partnership is a genuine one , then it must also be a consistent and coherent one ; one that manifests itself not only in the EU 's development policy but also in the EU 's trade and economic policy ; not only a partnership within the confines of the Joint Parliamentary Assembly , but a partnership that extends into other international institutions like the WTO , the World Bank and the UN .
At the WTO in particular , there is enormous scope for the EU and ACP working more closely together .
On trade there are some huge political challenges ahead , not least the negotiation of the regional economic partnership agreements .
These have the potential to have damaging effects on some of the poorest ACP countries who are simply not ready to open their markets to the EU and who do not have the negotiating capacity to engage not only in this process and the WTO process but also in the process of their own regional cooperation agreements .
It is therefore essential that the JPA plays an active role in shaping and monitoring this process .
Greater involvement of civil society will also be key .
I appreciate the proposals in the report which would enable the views of NGOs to be heard far more systematically in the JPA 's proceedings .
Finally , a partnership must be a partnership of equals .
We urgently need to find the means and the resources to fund it , to address the basic imbalance between the representation of the EU side , reflecting Parliament 's political make-up and spectrum of political views , and a system of representation of the ACP states based on one country , one vote , which prevents different political views being expressed .
The JPA is a unique instrument of cooperation and solidarity , North and South .
We need to value it , improve it , and build on it as a model for North-South cooperation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Carlotti 's report , a very important document on ACP-EU cooperation , has taken on a new dimension because it also presents the new possibilities open to us following the Cotonou Agreement .
ACP-EU cooperation has gained a new democratic aspect , and that means that we also need to provide a new democratic dimension in shaping this cooperation .
That is why the emphasis on the parliamentary nature of the Assembly presented in this report is so important . Flesh needs to be put on the bones of this idea .
And that is also why it was so important for this report to be approved by this House before the session in Cape Town , so as to give us moral support for the reform of this cooperation process .
We need a following wind if we are to strengthen the parliamentary dimension and to achieve what we have pledged to do .
We have been told that the work on the new Rules of Procedure has not been totally without conflict - that is why it will be very important for us to have the support this report so that the negotiations in Cape Town can be brought to a satisfactory conclusion .
I am sure that we will be able to agree on a structure for the standing committees , which will accordingly change the nature of cooperation in this parliamentary assembly .
The standing parliamentary committees make it possible to work continuously on problem areas , whereas up to now it has only been possible for us to work in ad hoc working groups .
I hope that this form of cooperation will facilitate far more intensive work on various themes and closer cooperation with our colleagues on the ACP side .
The regional meetings will also lend new weight to our work .
They will also give a voice to other people involved in ACP cooperation who have not so far had an opportunity to have their views heard .
Mr President , the dominant theme of 2001 for the ACP countries was the entry into force of the Cotonou agreement .
Its ratification by the European Parliament in January will encourage the Member States to follow that example , thus enabling the financial part to be implemented .
The Joint Parliamentary Assembly has adapted its work according to the new role that it has been given , in particular to promote democratic processes .
As a forum for the expression of the will of the people and of democratic values , it has a central role to play .
But its powers are limited .
It remains just a platform for political expression , without any decision-making or executive powers .
It should therefore be given new powers , both political as well as financial and operational , and the logistical resources to go with them .
A working group responsible for evaluating the involvement of civil society in the partnership should therefore be created .
In the same way , parliamentarians should be involved in the forthcoming negotiations on the future ACP-EU trade regime .
We will therefore vote with conviction in favour of Mrs Carlotti 's report , which makes excellent proposals on the other points , as she set out a while ago , while pointing out that the way that the ACP countries will become democratic is by making the associated institutions and development cooperation more democratic in general .
Mr President , I would firstly like to congratulate Mrs Carlotti on her report , which is a reflection of her unflagging dedication to relations between the EU and ACP countries .
Our current partnerships with 77 countries in Africa , the Caribbean and the Pacific should set an example for relations between the European Union and the United States , and also EU candidate countries , which we have been very enthusiastically debating in the recent past .
If EU Member States do not show much interest in these partnerships , which is borne out by the aforementioned fact that only four Member States have ratified the Cotonou Agreement , Parliament should do so , particularly because relations with these countries are based , according to the new agreement , on political dialogue , of which the Parliamentary Assembly is a fundamental pillar .
On behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , I would like to ask the Member States , particularly my own , Spain , which holds the Presidency of the Council , to speed up formalities so that the agreement can be ratified .
The Joint Assembly , like this Parliament , is deeply involved in a process where its Rules of Procedure are being reformed , having , as its aim , the true democratisation of ACP-EU relations .
Our efforts are directed , first and foremost , towards improving the functioning of the Assembly , converting it into an assembly which is effectively balanced and parliamentary .
At the moment it is not balanced because , whilst on the European side the range of ideologies and political sensitivities that make up the European Parliament are represented , the ACP countries have only one vote per country ; a vote which obviously represents the authorities ' opinions ; it is not balanced in terms of equality between the sexes either .
Nor is it parliamentary , because the representatives from ACP countries are not , on the whole , Members of Parliament .
The credibility of our cooperation with ACP countries , which is far from negligible , is in doubt if it is not accompanied by reforms and the strengthening of the institution that is the most representative of the association , that is to say , the Joint Assembly .
Last week , in a seminar , we said that ' without democracy there can be no development ' and this is a priority objective of the international community and the European Union .
I would ask the Commission and the Council to make resources available to ACP countries to improve their institutional capacity , especially with regard to representative institutions , and to promote the organisation of civil society and their participation in cooperation programming .
I think this is a good report whose content should be applied .
Mr , President , let me first add my thanks to the rapporteur , Mrs Carlotti , for the good work she has put into preparing this report and also thank those who have contributed to the discussion tonight .
I note that in her report , Mrs Carlotti emphasises the importance of the parliamentary nature of the Joint Parliamentary Assembly and the role it should play in achieving the objectives set out in the Cotonou Agreement .
I fully endorse this , and can only encourage the Assembly to reinforce its own legitimacy and democratic nature , for example by ensuring that it is composed purely of parliamentarians .
I have noted what has been said by a number of people about the need to broaden participation to allow for a more representative reflection of views .
This may prompt something of a discussion , in fact , since such matters are defined in the Cotonou Agreement , but I sympathise with the attempt to make room for opposition parties to express their views within the work of the parliamentary assembly .
Another important point concerns a revision of the rules on financing to ensure the full participation of ACP parliamentarians in the Assembly 's sessions and other meetings .
The Commission is , of course , concerned that ACP parliamentarians should play their full role , on an equal footing with their European counterparts , to ensure parity between ACP and European members .
We are prepared to look into a possible revision of the agreement governing our contribution to the fund for the participation of ACP members .
I hope that we will soon receive the financial forecasts we need from the ACP Secretariat to allow us to do this .
Mrs Carlotti suggests that a special fund should be set up to finance the Assembly .
If I understand correctly , such a fund already exists , and is mentioned in the Declaration on the Joint Institutions annexed to the Cotonou Agreement and is , in fact , specified to be in the region of EUR 4 000 000 .
This fund covers financing of the Joint Council and Joint Parliamentary Assembly , and is managed by the ACP Secretariat .
The Community 's contribution to this fund cannot be increased , but with a little planning there should be no problem as to the amount of money available to cover ACP participation .
We will have to look at this in a practical way .
Basically , given the relatively large strategic effort to strengthen civil society and to fund directly civil society NGOs in our ACP partner countries , it would appear unfair to leave the work of parliaments somewhat weakened while strengthening the political work of non-elected bodies in our partner countries .
Hence my sympathy and understanding with regard to the need to ensure that this can actually operate smoothly .
Mrs Carlotti also suggests that the Assembly be more actively involved in scrutiny of the management of EDF funds .
I agree with the spirit of her argument , and everything should be done to ensure that the Assembly fulfils the consultative role given to it by the Cotonou Agreement .
However , I am sure you will understand that this should not lead to the establishment of new complicated procedures and reporting requirements that will add to the problems we already have in making the whole system function .
I can promise that we will provide information on the implementation and functioning of the EDF , and of course discussion of this theme in the Joint Assembly is to be welcomed . All the more so since in launching the Cotonou Agreement and the preparatory work for the country strategy papers for the 9th European Development Fund activities we have reached out and included parliaments and public in our ACP partner countries in a way that intentionally raises expectations .
For that reason , it is even more relevant and natural to engage the parliamentarians closely in specific discussions about the overall functioning of cooperation .
Finally , Mr President , it is true - several Members have pointed out - that we are lagging behind in the ratification process .
Four or five Member States have completed ratification .
They are Denmark , Finland , Sweden and the UK - and I think France has also completed its ratification process now .
Technically speaking , this has not raised any real problems until now , but it will do so if we have not completed the process before the summer recess .
I would not like to see a situation emerging where we have a slowdown in the real disbursement and real level of planning activity because of a failure of one or more Member States to ratify .
That would simply be too embarrassing .
I very much appreciate what has been said tonight and urge Members of the European Parliament to encourage completion of this process in their own countries .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0049 / 2002 ) by Mrs Carrilho , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation extending and amending Council Regulation ( EC ) 1659 / 98 on decentralised cooperation ( COM ( 2001 ) 576 - C5-0509 / 2001 - 2001 / 0243 ( COD ) ) .
First of all , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , and thank her for the efforts she has made in this field .
I know that the negotiations with the Commission and the Council have not been easy and that , above all , the time available was very short , which brings me to my first point .
I have the impression that the Commission and the Council , certainly since the European Parliament was granted codecision powers in Amsterdam in the field of development cooperation , have a tendency to try to rush proposals of this kind through Parliament .
And due to lack of time , there is , in fact , little opportunity for us to discuss these matters in any great detail .
And if you ask who will ultimately be responsible for how the money is spent , it is not the Council , nor the Commission , but we , the people 's representatives .
It is thus regrettable that there is so little time available .
I should now like to turn to the report on decentralised cooperation .
As you know , to us , Christian Democrats , civil society is not just a hollow phrase . And we are pleased that other groups are also gradually beginning to recognise its importance .
Needless to say , the involvement of NGOs and social organisations in granting aid to developing countries is of key significance .
It is an important step on the road to greater independence and a higher level of self-sufficiency for the people in the affected areas .
What we should bear in mind - and various NGOs with whom I have been in contact concerning the report remind me - is the importance of a well-defined framework for decentralised aid in order to prevent this aid from becoming fragmented .
This brings me to the amendments I have tabled on behalf of our group .
In order to provide targeted , decentralised aid , it is important for the Commission to give us the expected notification about civil society promptly .
Mrs Carrilho made reference to this as well .
The organisations on the ground , those who are actively involved in the countries themselves , would like to know where they stand .
And the promise was that the Commission would have this notification ready under the Belgian Presidency .
The Agreement of Cotonou underlines the role of civil society .
However , it is important for non-ACP countries too for a preliminary debate to be held about this , so that decentralised cooperation can be placed in a more strategic framework and so that we gain more clarity concerning the future of this Regulation ; in other words , on what is set to happen after 2003 .
This is why I wanted the Commission to be explicitly reminded of this promise in the report .
We are all watching the events in Zimbabwe unfolding with sadness .
We notice how a country which , to a large extent , relies on aid from the EU , treats all appeals from the same EU for fair and democratic elections with contempt , and even forces us to withdraw our observation mission .
Is this not the ultimate proof that the traditional model of development cooperation does not work ?
Personally , I am convinced that development from the bottom up , which directly involves small groups of citizens , has a far more positive effect with an eye to the fair , democratic and self-sufficient society which we hope to build .
Mr President , the European Parliament was behind the creation of a budget heading for decentralised cooperation in the 1990s .
The Lomé Convention Section 4a also incorporated this idea , thus departing from the principle of cooperation between States .
Now , according to the Commission , the concept has gained ground and proved that it is valid and effective .
The Commission is therefore proposing that its application should be extended by two years .
We can only approve that proposal , although we have reservations regarding its form .
As well as the fact that it is transitory , the Regulation remains vague .
It contains a little of everything : decentralised cooperation , civil society and NGOs .
Could it be that there is a lack of Commission strategy in this area ?
In the same way , the Cotonou Agreement dedicates the participation of civil society in the ACP countries to the partnership , at the expense of decentralised cooperation , which seems to have disappeared .
The communication on civil society in developing countries promised by the Commission several months ago should have clarified these notions and set out a coordinated approach for the European Union in this area , but we are still awaiting it .
The two areas of ' aid for decentralised cooperation ' and ' aid for civil society ' go hand in hand .
In both cases , the goal is to support local dynamics , avoiding the cumbersome nature and sometimes the lack of transparency of implementing national programmes .
The Commission appears to have realised this , as it plans to merge these two budget headings , but the limited adjustments that are being made , without consulting the European Parliament , are not sufficient .
The transfers of funds from one budgetary heading to another demonstrate a lack of an overall perspective and show little consideration for the budgetary authority .
We are , of course , in favour of direct aid to projects on the ground .
But we are somewhat irritated with last minute action .
This reform of the budget can only be done as part of a thorough review of the concept of decentralised cooperation and of relations with the NGOs of the North and the South .
These two extra years should therefore be used for in-depth discussion on the European Union 's cooperation with local players in developing countries and their contribution to sustainable development .
We should look at the definitions : what is decentralised cooperation , cooperation between sub-national entities in the North and South or aid to local and regional authorities in developing countries ?
What is civil society ?
This question is becoming increasingly urgent with the implementation of the Cotonou Agreement .
The real question is in fact the more general one of governance and democracy .
In order for the countries of the South to develop they will have to become democratic , which means that citizens need to become involved in directing the country .
They can take part in several ways : by voting for local , regional or national governments .
In this respect , support for elections and increasing institutional capacity at the different levels of decision-making and administration are essential .
They can also take an economic and social role in companies or associations .
Direct aid to NGOs and SMEs is therefore equally important .
These two aspects are not contradictory but do in fact complement each other .
The Commission must continue the debate and continue to push it forward as it is high time that we provided the local populations with the resources for development .
Mr President , I wish to start by sincerely thanking the rapporteur , Mrs Carrilho for her work on this proposal and especially for the efforts she has made to conclude the legislative process at the first reading .
The objective of our proposal was simply to extend the legal basis for the decentralised cooperation budget line for an additional period of two years .
This will ensure the continuity of the budget line and give time for a thorough discussion with all the partners concerned on the role the budget line should play in the strengthening of local actors in the South .
In his speech , Mr Rod suggested that we have not been engaging in proper consultation , but the fact is that by doing what we are doing , we are , in fact , ensuring that consultation takes place .
The outcome of this discussion should then provide the basis for a revision of the strategic guidelines for the decentralised cooperation instrument .
I understand Parliament 's concern that the various instruments to strengthen local actors should be integrated into a coherent strategy on the involvement of civil society in the South in development cooperation .
I agree that there is a need to have a debate on this .
A communication on a strategy to support civil society in developing countries is planned for the second half of this year .
As has been mentioned , we had promised this communication earlier , but we started out on too narrow a basis , which did not offer a global perspective .
And has been said here , we have systems which vary quite a lot among the ACP countries and the rest of our partner countries .
We expect the debate on civil society involvement to feed into the discussion on the continued promotion of decentralised cooperation and the future of a specific budget line in this area .
I would like to make one more comment on this : the support we can give to NGOs and non-governmental actors in the future in ACP countries is something that goes far beyond the power and potential of this budget line .
For countries outside the ACP , the situation is different and much more dependent on the individual strategy that we agree with each country .
This does not rule out the possibility of similar action if it is agreed with the partner country .
Furthermore , there is broad agreement on the benefit of urging European NGOs to work in partnership in the South .
This was , in fact , the main idea behind this special cofinancing budget line .
In a sense , this budget line could be deemed a phenomenal success because we have brought it into the ACP philosophy and we are now also urging NGOs in general to engage directly with partners in the South .
This is the background against which we think it useful to have a broader and more open discussion about the virtues of a specific budget line for this item , but my own decision is that we need a broad , open discussion and should give ourselves enough time to allow everybody to participate in the discussion .
This is exactly what is being made possible by the report we are discussing at present .
The proposed amendments are mainly intended to ensure compliance with the latest comitology procedures and coherence with other recently adopted regulations in the area of development cooperation .
They also clarify the eligibility of some civil society actors .
The Commission is happy to agree with all these amendments .
They reflect well the fruitful discussions between the rapporteur , the Council working group and the Commission services .
I hope that the Council will also agree to all Parliament 's amendments and that the regulation can thus be adopted as soon as possible in terms reflecting this first reading .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is oral question ( B5-0009 / 2002 ) to the Commission , by Mrs Berès and others , on behalf of the Parliamentary Group of the Party of European Socialists and the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , on parental responsibility .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in view of the lateness of the hour , I would particularly like to mention the ladies and gentlemen in the interpreters ' booths .
Our thanks are due to them .
They are always there and help us in Europe to understand each other better , and to get on better with each other .
We now have before us the question on parental responsibility that we have tabled .
We as a legislature should not lecture people about how to run their lives , but we do need to help them find the right path through life .
We need to make that right path possible .
That is why the European Union has pledged itself to honour fundamental rights , both in the treaties and in the Charter .
The Member States have now been co-existing very well for over 50 years .
Peace has reigned between very different societies , but within families there is often conflict when love is shattered .
Generally , it is the children who suffer .
In such cases we then read in the newspapers about children being kidnapped by their own parents or being unable to develop properly because of the pressure they are under .
We should not pretend that these things are not happening , and we have to recognise that what are apparently merely family arguments between a few individuals indicate problems with a European dimension .
Ultimately , it is the rubbing points in cross-border judicial arrangements that grind down families and children .
That is what we need to put a stop to .
That is why our question to the Commission includes points that we have identified in conversation with the people affected .
Our question includes proposals for solving the legal problems and facilitating judicial cooperation for the benefit of children .
I do not want to read out the details again here , Commissioner . You have had a chance to read them and I would be pleased if you could agree with each of them .
You would be doing a great many people a service if you were to do that and if you were to make it clear to even more of our citizens that Europe is more than a legally defined area of freedom , security and justice .
Please take this opportunity to make it clear , together with the European Parliament , that Europe is an area in which people can feel secure outside their own borders , even if there has been conflict between partners .
That is why - and our question relates to these three things - we need clear and comprehensive legislation , properly motivated lawyers who jointly implement legislation with a common understanding for people , and , last but not least , good common fundamental concepts .
I hope that you can also satisfactorily answer this question for us .
Mr President , I will , of course , do my best .
The Tampere European Council identified visiting rights as a priority in the creation of a single judicial area where decisions can circulate freely from one Member State to another .
This priority responds to the social reality of people increasingly relocating from one Member State to another with families breaking up and reforming .
As the honourable Member has said , the Commission is now working on a new proposal that brings together the Commission proposal on parental responsibility of September 2001 , the French initiative on rights of access of July 2000 and the Brussels II Regulation .
We expect to be able to present this proposal in April 2002 .
As was the case with the Commission proposal and the French initiative , the aim is to fashion solutions that build on the mutual trust inherent in a common judicial area to best protect the child .
This means going beyond the balance struck in the Hague Conventions while , at the same time , recognising their value in addressing international situations .
To this end , in November 2001 , the Commission presented a proposal on the signature of the 1996 Hague Convention .
The Commission fully shares your concern about making progress fast .
This now appears possible , especially in the light of the recognition during the informal meeting of Justice and Home Affairs Ministers in Santiago de Compostela in February 2002 of the need for a Community-specific solution giving the final say in cases of child abduction to the Member State of the child 's habitual residence with the Member State to which the child has been abducted being able to take provisional measures only .
We trust that this work will continue to benefit from the support of the European Parliament .
Honourable Members are perfectly correct in pointing out the importance of mutual trust between national judges for the execution of decisions issued in another Member State .
For several years the Commission has , through the Grotius and Grotius-civil programmes , continuously supported projects aimed at bringing together judges from different countries to improve mutual understanding of legal systems between Member States .
A significant number of these projects have focused on family law .
Support for such projects will continue to be available through the new framework programme for judicial cooperation in civil matters , to be adopted by the end of March .
The new programme , which will apply from 2002-2006 , will be endowed with higher budgetary means than the previous programmes .
You may wish to know that , as concerns the implementation of the new programme in 2002 , the Commission is considering giving priority to training for legal practitioners on Community instruments in the area of judicial cooperation in civil matters , including , for example , the Brussels II Regulation .
Moreover , the new programme will also allow for direct actions taken by the Commission to ensure the sound application and implementation of Community law .
Such actions will , needless to say , also cover instruments in the family law area .
Mention should be made of the European Judicial Network in civil matters , which will be operational towards the end of the year .
The network will also facilitate mutual understanding of the legal systems of the Member States , as well as providing a means of identifying and solving problems related to judicial cooperation in civil matters .
Consequently , the Commission considers that the necessary instruments - as concerns judicial cooperation in civil matters , including the family law area - are already in place to reach the objectives the Members refer to .
Building on the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child , the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union provides that the best interests of the child must be a primary consideration in all actions relating to him or her .
As has been pointed out , the ' best interests of the child ' is a fluid concept that is open to different interpretations and ultimately rests on the appreciation by the judge of all the elements of the case at hand .
A multidisciplinary project that sheds light on the state of play as regards the different conceptions of the ' best interests of the child ' would usefully complement our work by promoting mutual understanding of legal systems and thus reinforcing the requisite mutual trust for the free circulation of decisions .
Such a project would be eligible for financing under the above-mentioned new framework programme for judicial cooperation in civil matters .
Mr President , Commissioner , you have listed a lot of very worthy projects .
As rapporteur I hope very much that I will receive the tidied-up proposal which is due in April .
It has been mentioned in the question as well .
The problem is that there are quite a number of serious practical problems that we have to deal with .
For example , Mrs Gebhardt and Mrs Berès sit on a particular committee in France dealing with these issues .
I understand that there are , at this very moment , about 50 outstanding cases .
The biggest problem - from the case-load I have - seems to be where parents are denied visiting rights by the custodial parent .
I should like to list , for the record of the House , the active cases I am working on at the moment .
Mr Eric Comet , whose children are in Finland , was granted custody by the courts in Finland .
This custody he could never exercise .
His children no longer wish to see him .
In Sweden we have two cases of fathers seeking visiting rights to their children : Philippe Paquay and Kevin Willoughby .
In Germany , believed by most people who work in this area to be the country where most of these difficulties exist , we have Mr Guy Foster and Mr Chris McMullen ; and probably one of the best-known cases of all , Lady Catherine Meyer , the wife of the British Ambassador in Washington , who has seen her two sons for precisely 24 hours in the past six years .
In the Netherlands we have Mr Morales-Gouvenne and in Austria we have Noël Dumont .
The problem is that particularly in Germany , social workers seem to be able , under German law , to make decisions about access and custody which , in some cases , take no note of decisions made in courts in other countries .
In very many cases , the judges involved have perhaps only one case of this sort throughout their working life and are therefore unfamiliar with what the Hague Convention and hopefully now this new regulation will entail .
We still see - and unfortunately this is at the heart of most of these cases - parents using their unfortunate children as weapons in the war between the sexes .
Commissioner , you mentioned the Hague Convention of 1996 which , thankfully , was recognised last November .
However , it has not been signed by any Member State , nor by the Community .
This is causing serious problems because at the heart of that legislation is the recognition of the right of every child to know and have access to both its parents .
Mr President , I hope that you will be able to tell Commissioner Vitorino to what extent the MEPs here are rallying on this issue , that they want to make it a political challenge , because children are not capable of making as much noise as bombs , but that they too need exequatur procedures to be abolished .
They need policies to be implemented .
If the Commission indeed wants to make the mobility of European citizens one of its priorities in order to harmonise and promote the European labour market , it should face facts : we will also need European family law within the European judicial area .
Experts have been working for years on drawing up these texts and are despairing of ever being able to mobilise policies .
We need to take this task in both hands , and I think that this oral question can contribute to that .
What European law should we draw up ?
There are the mechanisms of the Hague .
There is certainly a particular place for Community law , for law of the members of the European Union .
From that point of view , I would like to draw your attention to a few difficulties .
The first is that through European law we should not call into question the principle of the authority of the judge of the resident country .
This is an inviolable right if we wish to face up to the reality and resolve conflicts in a harmonious manner .
There is the possibility of developing networks of trust .
This is essential , otherwise automatic return , which is what should be standard law in the European Union , will never come .
You mentioned some programmes for developing those trust measures .
Use them .
We need them in order to promote exchange , so that when a French judge rules on a child custody case , on return after abduction , he will not be tempted by the nationalist reflex .
Neither the French judge , nor the English , Irish , German or Finnish judge .
There is also the hope that came from the Informal Council meeting in Santiago de Compostela , which was a positive sign .
But as it is the details that cause the problem , it is essential that the conditions for the return of children be respected .
Whether it is after an abduction or after exercising rights of access or rights to have a child to stay for a limited period , the return should take place according to the law of the country of residence .
Finally , I would just like to ask you for clarification on the third part of our question : what do you think of the idea that the Commission could launch a working group in order to have a discussion between Europeans of the tricky notion , which pollutes many of the judgments , that of the interests of the child , which we have included in the Charter of Fundamental Rights ?
Mr President , I should like to thank the Commissioner for his attendance at such a late hour .
We have heard a reference to abduction , but of course abduction takes many forms and can be subtle .
Mrs Banotti has raised the issue of a constituent of mine , Mr Guy Foster ; and allow me to summarise the case because it concerns real human lives .
Mr Foster has been denied access to his child ever since his German wife returned to Germany with the child following their divorce .
The agreement was for the mother to have the right of abode over the son and for Mr Foster to have full visiting rights .
However , once in Germany , the mother neglected the child and spent time in psychiatric care , and the child was subsequently placed in the care of its maternal grandmother .
Despite Mr Foster 's persistent attempts to contact his son , he has been cut off from him ever since , unable to speak with or visit him because the mother and maternal grandparents have withheld information .
A court made a decision on this case , but he was given information about the court appearance after the date .
Documents were served in a foreign language .
The handing over of care to the grandmother was thus allowed to proceed without Mr Foster being able to represent his views .
I believe he has been denied and is still being denied the fundamental right to see this child and has been denied access to justice .
This is surely wrong in the eyes of those of us who believe that we should always serve the best long-term interests of the child .
Mrs Gebhardt referred to two key words : help and enable .
We are fifteen different Member States with different languages and different cultures , but we must never use language as a means of excluding people from the debate or denying them their rights .
Therefore , I urge the Commission to take action , to be imaginative at Community level and at Member State level to ensure mutual recognition and judicial cooperation , and to put an end to these tragic human cases , which have consequences beyond our own time .
Mr President , Mrs Gebhardt began by saying that Europe is an area in which people feel secure .
Indeed , security was the raison d 'être for what has become the European Union today .
The pioneers sought to make a peaceful Europe and they , of course , succeeded .
Nowadays , we are at peace and people expect to be safe , but too often the European Union is accused of meddling in things that are not important and too much of what the European Parliament appears to do is irrelevant to ordinary peoples ' lives .
Sometimes we discover a real area that needs legislation and yet we are powerless to act .
As Mrs Banotti and Mr Cashman have pointed out , this is an area that needs legislation and where , I believe , European action would be positively welcomed .
The cases of access we have heard about ; in which parents are denied access to their children , are desperately distressing .
They make the misery of separation even worse .
Being separated by time and space , by hundreds of kilometres and expensive flights , is painful and distressing for parents and children .
President , Commissioner , over the years Parliament , the Council and the Commission have all worked to secure a common market for goods and capital , fair trade and free trade for those with money .
Now we need to make certain that we have , a fair market and a free trade for people so that families and children can work and move around with rules that are fair , rules that work and European institutions that enforce them .
Mr Cashman said that the European Union is fifteen countries .
He is right , but with the addition of ten or twelve more countries in the pipeline , I shudder to think of the possibilities in this area if we do not act and do not succeed in getting legislation that works - legislation that will make the European Union safe and secure for all its citizens , children and parents alike .
Mr President , I only need to make a few comments .
Mrs Banotti asked if the proposal the Commission has announced for April will be available .
It will be .
Any other course would definitely not be in the interests of the Commission , so we look forward to presenting it and discussing it .
This is how we shall proceed .
Mrs Berès asked whether I had forgotten the third part of the question concerning the child 's interests .
I repeat the final phrases of my first contribution , namely : A multidisciplinary project that sheds light on the state of play of different conceptions of the best interests of the child would usefully complement our work by promoting mutual understanding of legal systems and thus reinforcing the requisite mutual trust for the free circulation of decisions .
Such a project would be eligible for financing under the new framework programme for judicial cooperation in civil matters .
We see this as a way of moving the issue forward .
I have noted with great care and interest the different contributions in this discussion and we have moved it another step forward this evening .
Thank you , Commissioner , on behalf of all the Members present , for your answer .
( The sitting was closed at 12 .
05 a.m. )
Madam President , Commissioner , I would like to thank the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for adopting this report by unanimity .
In addition , I should like to recall Parliament 's considerable institutional support to the nuts and locust beans sector . This is evidenced in a number of resolutions testifying to the significance of this sector within the Union .
At the Council of Agriculture Ministers in July 2001 , Commissioner Fischler announced that a detailed study of the Community nuts sector would be undertaken . The Commissioner also stated that if appropriate , specific proposals to benefit the sector would be made , to follow on from the improvement plans expiring in 2001 .
In the light of this situation , the Commission has proposed an additional one-year extension of the improvement plans . I have certainly welcomed this .
Nonetheless , I would like to make it clear that I trust it will be the last transitional instrument , to be followed by a permanent proposal . Such a proposal must ensure the survival of the sector and put an end to the difficulties and uncertainty European Union producers are experiencing .
The main aim of our report was to settle the issue of permanent support measures once and for all .
The nuts sector is very important to the Union from a social , economic and environmental point of view . Over a million hectares are devoted to these crops .
They extend across the Mediterranean countries , and the land is mostly located in very disadvantaged areas where agriculture is difficult . Much of the soil is hillside or arid .
These products therefore have to overcome many difficulties to remain on the market and be economically viable without direct support from public institutions .
The difficulties are exacerbated by strong outside competition . For instance , there are hazelnuts from Turkey and almonds from the United States .
In both cases the conditions of production bear no comparison to those in Europe . In addition , the outside products benefit from tariff concessions under international agreements .
The nuts sector is an example of multifunctional production and is essential to the socio-economic survival of many families in rural areas of the Union . This is because of its role in regional planning , since no alternative crops exist , and also because of its part in environmental conservation .
It helps prevent erosion and is important in combating fires . It also preserves indigenous genetic material , which is of great organolectic value .
In the light of this difficult situation and lack of competitiveness in 1989 , the Commission adopted a package of specific measures . These were aimed mainly at raising the quality and competitiveness of the products .
The ten-year improvement plans were due to expire in 2000 but were extended until 15 July 2001 .
The results of the plans proved positive . There were notable improvements in production and marketing .
Unfortunately the same was not true of competitiveness , due to the difficult structural conditions at the outset .
The Commission 's present proposal would allow these last plans to be extended to 15 June 2002 with the Community contribution decreasing from 82 to 75 % .
Taking the specific case of hazelnuts , the payment per kilo is retained for the 2001-2002 harvest . Payments will only be made , however , to members of producer organisations not eligible for the extension .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has attempted to introduce considerable improvements to the executive committee 's proposal through its amendment .
Regarding the restrictions on support for hazelnut production , we believe that it is not acceptable to withhold it from those producer organisations wishing to benefit from the extension of improvement schemes .
This would amount to discrimination between producers ' organisations , giving some of them an unfair advantage .
As for the level of national cofinancing , the increase on the current commitment proposed for the extended plans cannot be justified .
In this connection , the percentage relating to nuts is minimal and does not justify the proposal .
As for the areas covered by the plans and entitled to aid , the percentage should be retained on the basis of the area certified in the last year 's plans and not the area for which aid has been requested .
The Committee on Agriculture is of the opinion that in order to improve awareness and production monitoring , provision must be made to set up a geographical information system . The committee is also on record as advocating the need to establish a permanent framework for aid to the sector .
Further , the committee has argued for ongoing support in the form of aid per hectare to guarantee maintenance of the producers ' income in a situation of sustainable exploitation .
Hence the advisability of linking this latest extension to permanent aid , the ultimate aim being to consolidate a system of ongoing aid channelled through the producer organisations .
I must not conclude without mentioning the Committee on Agriculture 's specific request that chestnuts be included in the nuts sector .
The protection of this tree and fruit associated with forested areas and ancient culinary traditions is crucial to preserving a very important ecosystem that is obviously being encroached upon . It also has a bearing on the related environmental issues .
Finally , I should like to point out that two identical amendments have been put to plenary . They both aim at increasing support to hazelnuts by means of an additional marketing season .
I am unable to support these amendments although I appreciate and share concerns over the difficulties currently experienced in marketing hazelnuts .
The request for a permanent regime implies that support to hazelnuts would be covered by that regime .
It is therefore not appropriate to extend still further a temporary arrangement with a set expiry date that has merely generated uncertainty .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I trust we shall be able to continue enjoying the best desserts , the best nougat , and all those products manufactured with the best and most delicious hazelnuts and almonds in the world .
Madam President , Commissioner , I should first like to warmly congratulate Mr Carlos Bautista Ojeda , the rapporteur , on his excellent work .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development should also be thanked for its almost unanimous support for this sector .
The rapporteur has already described the importance of the fruit and vegetable sector for the countries of southern Europe , so there is no need for me to do so .
Almost two years ago , the Council requested the Commission to undertake a specific assessment of the situation of the nuts sector in the framework of the report on the operation of the COM in fruit and vegetables .
This problem has yet to be finally resolved . We are still trying to provide a remedy in extending the improvement plans .
What is actually required is a final and immediately applicable definition , along with the implementation of support mechanisms to replace the present improvement programmes as they expire .
The Commission is adamant on resolving the extensions through this draft Regulation .
A reduction in Community cofinancing is involved , however . In addition , aid to hazelnuts is proposed , but only for farmers not eligible for the extension .
The European Commission 's proposal to extend the improvement plans for a second year is positive .
Nonetheless , it does not allay all of the producers ' concerns . As I stated , the latter are calling for a permanent solution , so they can continue to resist the strong competition by almonds from the United States and hazelnuts from Turkey .
The report adopted by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development deals with the gaps in the Commission 's plan .
The amendments adopted call for specific aid to hazelnuts for all organisations requesting it , not just for those participating in improvement plans , as the Commission suggests .
The amendments also call for the retention of current cofinancing levels for these improvement plans , whereas the Commission wishes to increase the Member States ' cofinancing from 18 to 25 % .
The deletion of a reference to gradual transferral of financial responsibility to the producers in recital 2 is also requested . Finally , there is the call to introduce a permanent regime based on the award of aid per hectare , subject to the implementation of good agricultural and environmentally friendly practice .
Commissioner , these are the main requests from the Committee on Agriculture .
The Committee also calls for this aid to be extended to chestnuts , a product not currently covered by the improvement plans .
The key factor is that the European Parliament is in favour of a permanent solution for this sector in the framework of the COM in fruit and vegetables . Parliament calls on the Commission to put forward a proposal for the implementation of a definitive support regime for the sector before 1 June 2002 .
Efforts to find a solution to the situation of the nuts sector in the European Union within the framework of the COM in fruit and vegetables must therefore be intensified .
Madam President , I must first congratulate the rapporteur on his excellent report .
You will be aware , Commissioner , that on numerous occasions the European Parliament has expressed its institutional support for the nuts sector in the European Union .
It has done so conscious of the fact that they are essentially a multifunctional crop which contributes to environmental conservation and helps combat erosion .
It also has a part to play in regional planning , as it is one of the few activities keeping people on the land in places where other forms of agriculture are not viable . As most of the producer regions in the European Union are disadvantaged , it has economic and social significance too .
We are not in a position to oppose the Commission 's proposal to extend these plans for improving aid to the sector .
We certainly support the rapporteur 's view that it is not acceptable for the Commission to propose excluding producer organisations wishing to benefit from the improvement plans from eligibility for the specific hazelnut aid .
We cannot either go along with the Commission 's intention of reducing Community cofinancing from 82 to 75 % in these extended plans .
Commissioner , we are bound to say that we would like our request for permanent support to this sector to go on record . Such a solution would provide stability and make it possible to produce the crop in Europe .
This can only happen if we succeed in setting up permanent support targeted at producer organisations and within a stable framework , namely the common organisation of the market in fruit and vegetables .
The Commission should pursue this objective and approach during the extra year for which the plans will be extended .
Madam President , I must first join with the previous speakers in congratulating the rapporteur on his report , which has been unanimously endorsed .
In particular , I am grateful to him for showing such sensitivity to the needs of the sector .
The latter is obviously very important in Catalonia . I would also like to thank Mr Bautista Ojeda for being so receptive to the suggestions made by the Catalan regional government .
I think it is worth recalling that clearly we are not dealing with one of the major agricultural or livestock sectors central to the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) . Nonetheless , this sector extends over a million hectares and makes a specific and significant contribution in the immediate vicinity .
It has considerable social impact too .
In my view therefore , the request for maintaining support during 2001 and 2002 must lead , as previous speakers stated , to a permanent support regime per hectare .
Consequently we are against Amendment No 10 tabled by Mr Fiori , because requesting support for 2002 and 2003 at this stage would essentially invalidate the report 's main objective .
We therefore believe that as outlined previously and in terms of hectare as in Mrs Ayuso 's amendment adopted in committee , namely certified areas , this report presents an approach the Commission should certainly consider .
Madam President , I should first like to thank Mr Bautista Ojeda for his excellent report .
I am sure he knows he can rely on total support from my group .
It would be hard to name an issue preceded by more Parliamentary initiatives during the last twelve years .
The House has witnessed the same debate time and again during this period .
The principles are unchanged , but the situation on the ground has worsened .
Turkish economic policy recently caused an artificial fall in the price of hazelnuts and other agricultural products in response to internal pressures .
This is not a new problem , but it escalated because the Commission failed to tackle it in its proposals .
I do not believe the Commission 's suggestion , namely transferring the nuts problem to rural development , is realistic . This might have been said in the Committee on Agriculture .
A problem related to the market should be dealt with using the appropriate tools . It is unwise to keep resorting to the second pillar to solve all our difficulties .
For the last twelve years , the House has been advocating an honourable solution for this sector of production which is experiencing very specific problems .
The Commission 's response has been simply to grant extensions to a regime that does not deal with the problems the sector needs to overcome . The permanent solution put forward by the House on a number of occasions has been ignored .
One might well wonder whether sometimes the nub of the problem is not in fact the Commission 's lack of resolve when it comes to proposing effective measures to deal with the difficulties facing the nuts sector , rather than the difficulties themselves .
For my part , Commissioner , I hope that is not so on this occasion .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , may I start by thanking you for your report , Mr Bautista Ojeda , and for all the time and trouble which you have taken in working out the 16 proposed amendments .
Before I comment on these proposed amendments , I should like to say a few words about the proposal itself .
As you probably know , improvement plans have been implemented for some 600 000 hectares sown with nuts since 1989 .
The European Union spent a total of EUR 900 million on these plans up to 2001 .
The purpose of the improvement plans was to enhance the economic basis for nut growing by pooling supplies , improving quality and building up a production and marketing infrastructure .
These plans were limited to ten years , after which financial responsibility would revert solely to producers .
However , when the first plans ran out , a one-off extension was granted in Council Regulation No 558 / 2001 .
The eleventh year of these plans ran out last year , as did the 10-year deadline for a further series of plans and the plans for the remaining 35 % of land sown with nuts will run out by 2006 / 2007 .
On 23 July last year , the Council asked the Commission to launch an in-depth study into all aspects of this sector and called on it to submit the conclusions of the study and any proposals as quickly as possible .
The study is well under way and will be presented in May of this year .
The Commission was conscious of the fact that something needed to be done in the meantime and that this interim period needed to be bridged , which is why it suggested that the Council and Parliament approve the proposal for a regulation extending the improvement plans by a further year .
This draft also makes provision for special aid for hazelnuts .
Now to the 16 proposed amendments .
The first group of amendments deals with general issues .
Amendment No 1 refers to Regulation No 1035 / 1972 , the proposed amendment to the Commission report to the Council on the common organisation of the market .
Of course we can no longer change the wording of a regulation which has been abolished , but Amendment No 2 is acceptable in principle .
I also agree with Amendment No 3 highlighting the ecological importance of the nut sector .
The second group of proposed amendments contains proposals for fundamental changes to the existing proposal .
All these proposals impact on the budget , some considerably , which is why the Commission cannot agree to them .
This applies to Amendments Nos 4 to 6 , 10 to 12 and 15 and 16 .
The third group relates to the future of the sector .
Amendments Nos 9 and 13 highlight the need for a permanent support regime for nuts , while Amendment No 8 calls for the benefits achieved with the improvement plans to be preserved , mainly by channelling supplies through producer organisations .
Amendment Nos 7 and 14 call for knowledge on production and control to be improved using the Geographical Information System .
All these proposed amendments have repercussions which go beyond the framework of the proposal submitted , which merely recommends a year 's extension , which is why I cannot accept these amendments within the context of this proposal .
However , I can assure you that we have taken good note of your proposals and shall take proper account of them .
As I have already explained on previous occasions , we are all agreed that there is a chronic lack of competition in this sector and that it does not therefore make economic sense to hang on to the belief that EU producers can hold out against free competition with Turkish hazelnuts or American almonds in the long term .
In my opinion , therefore , we need an answer to the following questions . First , does the European Union need to produce its own nuts ?
Secondly , do nuts fulfil a multifunctional role ?
Thirdly , should the EU continue to invest in maintaining nut production ?
And fourthly , if so , in what form ?
I feel that support measures should also help to promote the sustainability of rural areas and protect the environment and should not just be geared to making the sector economically competitive .
Finally , I should like to thank you once again for your contributions .
Thank you , Commissioner Fischler .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0065 / 2002 ) by Mr Cunha , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation fixing the premiums and guarantee thresholds for leaf tobacco by variety group and Member State for the 2002 , 2003 and 2004 harvests and amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 2075 / 92 ( COM ( 2001 ) 684 - C5-0678 / 2001 - 2001 / 0276 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in this proposal , the Commission is seeking to amend the basic regulation on the common organisation of the market in tobacco ( Regulation ( EEC ) 2075 / 92 ) , fixing the premiums and guarantee thresholds for leaf tobacco by variety group and Member State for the 2002 , 2003 and 2004 harvests .
On this basis , one might assume that the Commission proposal is of a fundamentally technical nature and is confined to adapting the main instruments of support for tobacco production , in accordance with changes in supply and demand in the market .
Furthermore , this adjustment is made necessary by the current arrangements , since producers must be notified about quotas before 15 April and the relevant contracts be drawn up before 30 May .
Nevertheless , with the excuse that Regulation ( EEC ) 2075 / 92 needs technical updating , the proposal goes much farther .
In fact , it indirectly introduces a reform of a much broader political scope and goes so far as to set the phasing out of tobacco subsidies as the ultimate objective ( see recital 5 ) .
In doing this , the Commission is in actual fact determining the scope of the decisions which have been proposed and which , in due course and subject to the relevant proposals , will have to be taken by the Community institutions .
There are two reasons for this : first of all , the Commission launched an evaluation study of the COM in raw tobacco , which should enable an assessment to be made of the effects of current Community policy on the sector , and its conclusions will only be available at the end of 2002 ; secondly , it was the Commission itself that undertook to submit proposals on the new tobacco policy at the beginning of next year , but only on the basis of the studies that are now being carried out .
Of course , this proposal will have to be consistent with society 's growing demands for sustainable development and high-quality products and , in the same context , must provide an adequate response to the official statements issued hitherto concerning the sector 's future .
Your rapporteur is of the view that the European Parliament cannot allow the Commission to pre-empt and make assumptions about the decisions that both the European Parliament and the Council will be taking in the coming months , on the basis of the evaluation studies and the latest data recorded in this sector , which I have already mentioned .
In this context , the rapporteur 's amendments are confined to improving the Commission 's proposals in an essentially technical way and explicitly rule out the possibility of entering into a far-reaching political debate on the future support arrangements for tobacco , which can only be tackled rigorously during 2003 , taking into account the studies and reports mentioned above .
It must be considered , however , that this position of the rapporteur does not simply mean accepting the status quo , which , furthermore , he feels is unsustainable .
To this end , the rapporteur tabled Amendment No 23 , in order to regain the original spirit of commitment towards the Community Tobacco Fund .
This amendment has two implications : firstly , not only accepting financing by the Fund of actions to prevent nicotine addiction and of experimental action to encourage tobacco producers to switch to other crops and economic activities , but also maintaining the financing of agronomic research into varieties of tobacco that are less damaging to the environment and to health ; and , secondly , increasing the levy on producers ' premiums from 2 % to 3 % , thereby rejecting both the present figure of 2 % , and the Commission 's proposal of 5 % .
And , in order to ensure consistency with this vision of commitment , the rapporteur proposes that we also reject Amendments Nos 9 and 13 .
The around 130 thousand tobacco producers in the European Union , most of whom live in the least-favoured regions of southern Europe , deserve to have the competent Community institutions concern themselves , in a responsible way , with their future .
Hence , also , the importance of having sufficient evaluation and impact studies of the current situation so that we can make responsible and realistic proposals for the future , but only once we know exactly what the effects of the current policy are .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , tobacco is the mainstay of the economy of large rural areas of southern Europe .
Production of this crop is hardly mechanised , so it has considerable social significance and an impact on employment .
Tobacco is grown on small family plots in regions classed amongst the poorest in Europe .
I shall give you an example affecting my country directly .
Tobacco represents 25 % of final agricultural production in the region of Extremadura .
The argument linking the end of aid to tobacco and consequently the end of its production with health considerations is quite mistaken , unfair and regrettably also hypocritical .
Nobody would dream of suggesting stopping the cultivation of plants used to produce alcohol through distillation because of the health problems caused by alcohol . Nobody has suggested closing down the factories manufacturing cigars and cigarettes either , or banning the sale of these products .
It is certainly the case that the withdrawal of aid would put an end to tobacco production in Europe . This would not , however , improve the health of European consumers because the gap left by Community production would be filled by imports from third countries .
Anyone wishing to continue smoking could do so . What is at issue is simply commercial interest .
The only way of tackling the health issue is to pursue the approach launched some time ago by the European Union . This involves developing methods of cultivation and introducing less harmful varieties whilst also boosting information campaigns designed to reduce consumption .
The opinion of the Committee on Budgets is that agronomic research financed by the Tobacco Fund should be intensified .
The European Commission , on the other hand , wishes to stop research and promote conversion , though no viable alternative is suggested .
The Commission is exceeding its competence on this issue .
Its role should be to extend the aid regime , in a spirit of continuity .
We therefore request the deletion of recital 5 , and we believe the legal service of the Council of Ministers agrees with us on this .
Madam President , Commissioner , whenever we debate the question of tobacco , I always wonder , even if we are all anti-smoking , why do we need to be anti-tobacco ?
These are two separate issues and I think that the Commission should realise that , as should many of the honourable Members .
We are against smoking and we must do all we can to stop it from spreading and reduce it .
I have no objection to that .
But if we abolish tobacco growing , all we shall do is condemn a number of European citizens to financial ruin and give a fillip to tobacco farmers in third countries .
All we shall do is reduce our exports and increase our imports .
All we shall do is increase the dole queues in the European Union .
Is that what we are trying to do ?
Is that our objective ? In other words , do all those who maintain that , if we grub up tobacco farms in Europe , we shall help reduce smoking , mean to tell us that we need to grub up vineyards in order to fight alcoholism ?
Do they mean to tell us we should close our car factories in order to reduce the number of fatal road traffic accidents ?
It is time we stopped being two-faced , faced the facts and dealt with things in the proper manner .
It is time we sat down together , with an open mind and our eyes wide open , called a spade a spade and worked out a strategy to drastically reduce smoking and its harmful effects and a strategy to develop the economy of the European Union .
Madam President , Commissioner , I should like to start by congratulating and thanking rapporteur , Mr Cunha , both for the careful and serious approach which he has taken to the subject of tobacco in his report and for the sensitive and understanding manner in which he dealt with the interventions of the members of the Committee on Agriculture .
For the rest , however , as he himself has said , the subject of tobacco as dealt with in this specific proposal for a Council regulation is a purely technical matter concerning the 2002 , 2003 and 2004 crops .
The Commission was wrong to try and introduce political criteria into the debate ; apart from the fact that they have nothing to do with the aspects of the issue at debate here , they are also completely groundless , premature and even , I would say , provocative as regards the more general working of and prospects for the common agricultural policy .
We all know that tobacco is a prime example of a very labour-intensive crop grown on family-run farms and poor , barren soil , meaning that , apart from anything else , it allows man to live and work in areas which , if deserted physically and ecologically , would have incalculable social and environmental repercussions .
The Commission knows all this and it was the Commission which used to take every opportunity to reiterate it .
Lately , however , motivated perhaps by the expediency of supporting its misguided intervention in Gothenburg , it has omitted to repeat its earlier references and is in danger of putting the debate on this issue on the wrong footing .
The right footing is exactly as suggested by Mr Cunha in his report with the support of the Committee on Agriculture , which plenary is called on to endorse and which the Commission is called on to respect in any future action .

Madam President , we too welcome the Cunha report , which we support .
The statistics show that approximately 130 000 farmers and around 400 000 seasonal workers are involved in tobacco growing , in addition to all those involved in the production chain .
This is therefore a serious matter which we feel requires greater analysis on the part of the Commission , not least in the light of Communication No 264 of 15 May 2001 , which contains a clear statement to the effect that , should the Commission decide on a political proposal for action , all the repercussions and implications of this strategy for tobacco growing and the reduction of aid to growers would , indeed , be assessed .
For this reason and also for the reasons expounded by other Members regarding the limited actual effect the measure would have on cigarette consumption , as regards the issue of smoking , it is therefore important , moreover , to preserve the research fund , particularly for agronomic research on broad-leaf tobacco , for that represents our only hope if we are to reduce the harmful effects of smoking and contribute to the right of all consumers to health too .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as Mr Cunha quite rightly said , this report is an extremely political document , despite the fact that it appears to be technical .
It raises the key question as to whether we should continue to subsidise the cultivation of a plant , the main use of which is in the manufacture of a product recognised as being extremely harmful to human health .
Tobacco , I am sorry to say , is a hard drug , and we must have the courage to say this .
The problem dates back a long way and the Commission is using this proposal for updating the regulation to clearly say that we must move away from the system of tobacco subsidies .
However , as we must give farmers the time to change activity , the debate initially focuses on the time they are given to do this .
And Mr Cunha 's proposal was , from that point of view , very reasonable .
It is natural to allow them time - but not too much time - for the planned assessment .
The Greens believe that the current situation must be tackled now , whether or not we are continually told that these are poor farmers .
As far as I know , Alsace and Andalucia are , in terms of farming , fairly prosperous regions .
The question is to determine whether , at this point , we must subsidise , in other countries , growing dangerous products such as cannabis , for example .
And we must , at this point , have the courage to say so .
There are two points to the second question which is that of the Community Tobacco Fund . The first point is the level of the deduction to be introduced as of 2004 ; the second is the tasks given to researchers who are funded in this way .
We believe that an increase from 3 % to 5 % for this Fund is a positive step ; in this area , the Commission 's proposal has very wisely used the carrot and stick approach in order to refocus these tasks over the long term and to replace agronomic research into making tobacco slightly less harmful with measures to support specific initiatives that encourage tobacco growers to switch from tobacco into other crops .
We must not forget , however , that products other than the cigarette can be produced from tobacco .
It can be an aid to medical research , for example .
It is also an excellent natural insecticide .
But these are specialist niches , and there is a great deal too much cultivated tobacco for these uses .
The Greens will not , therefore , vote in favour of the amendments which have undermined Mr Cunha 's patient work .
Instead , we will support the Commission in this area .
Madam President , I must first thank Mr Cunha for his excellent report .
It is a considerable achievement , if we take into account that he has had to cope with a scenario created by the Commission , which , as stated by a previous speaker , is plainly hypocritical .
We might agree that tobacco is a danger to health .
Taking this argument to the extreme , one could suggest banning the import of tobacco .
I suspect , however , that few Members of this House would be prepared to vote in favour of closing our borders to tobacco from the United States .
Treasury Ministers are delighted with the income generated by tobacco , whilst Health Ministers rail against it .
Just now , for the first time , charges of smuggling have been brought against multinational companies bringing tobacco into the European Union and attempting to avoid paying the duty due .
There are a number of lessons to be drawn from that and from the prohibitionist experiments conducted in Europe and elsewhere .
In the first place , ceasing cultivation without stopping imports has no impact on the availability of a harmful substance . What it does is make the Community market more attractive to goods from third countries .
Secondly , prohibition does not stop consumption . Instead it boosts smuggling , to the detriment of health checks and of the Treasury .
Thirdly , tobacco production generates more employment and stimulates more economic activity than many other agricultural practices such as meat production . Yet the Commission often displays undue leniency towards these other practices .
In conclusion I also believe that the confusion the Commission may create between the documents submitted to the European Council at Göteborg and the conclusions of the Council is totally unacceptable , and drastically alters the institutional balance .
In my view therefore , the Commission 's assessment of the Göteborg European Council destabilises the principles and operation of the Community institutional relationship .
I trust the European Parliament will reject it , taking account of the Council 's Legal Services ' contribution to the work of the COMIT .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission is taking the opportunity provided by the reform of premiums and guarantee thresholds for the period 2002-2004 , to make a change that spells disaster for producers and for the social and economic balance of entire regions .
This change involves paving the way to phase out tobacco production without providing an alternative .
However , tobacco production is valued by disadvantaged areas and by many small- and medium-sized growers .
The workforce employed underpins the economic activity of rural areas .
The European Union produces 5 % of the world 's tobacco and imports 70 % of its requirements .
By ceasing this production , Europe will be dependent on imports and consumption will not be affected in any way .
Tobacco has serious implications for public health and our approach to this subject must take this into account .
Our priority must be to educate young people to deter them from smoking .
Manufacturers also play a part in prevention by financing the Community Fund , which should have been used to inform consumers and also to make progress in research into the harmful effects of products .
Unfortunately , no calls for tenders have been issued since 1997 .
By maintaining production in Europe , we are giving ourselves the means to control the quality of tobacco production and processing .
We are also giving ourselves the means to develop less harmful varieties .
Producers will not agree to increases in levies on the premiums to finance something that will lead to them being put out of business .
Our group can do nothing other than to reject recital 5 of the Commission 's proposal , which spells disaster for small- and medium-sized growers that help to maintain an agricultural activity throughout the Union 's territory .
Commissioner Fischler , like everyone , we obviously share the Commission 's concerns regarding the dangers nicotine addiction poses to public health .
But , given the European Union 's tobacco deficit , our action must , of course , be based on demand and not on supply .
Let us bear in mind two figures : we consume 800 000 tonnes of raw tobacco and produce 250 000 tonnes in the European Union .
Europe imports 70 % of the raw tobacco it needs , and so the European Union is far from being the world 's biggest importer .
It is therefore obvious that any action that seeks to reduce production would only increase our dependence on imports .
It is , however , the social effects of such measures that give me cause for concern .
Need we point out that tobacco growing is very labour intensive and involves 130 000 growers and 400 000 seasonal workers , which amounts to more than 500 000 jobs ?
Need we point out that the first processing stage provides 18 000 permanent and 40 000 seasonal jobs in rural areas ?
Need we point out that tobacco growing is carried out on small family-run farms of between one and two hectares of tobacco , and , on average , tobacco production makes up 60 % of the family 's income ?
Need we point out that most of these farms are situated in disadvantaged regions which many people have left to go to live in towns , which have experienced rural depopulation and problems farming the countryside in rural villages ?
Need we point out that tobacco growing , which brings in a steady income , greatly assists in maintaining the farming population and therefore trade and public services ?
That is why we must take an extremely careful approach to changing the set-up of the COM in tobacco .
When the reform of the COM in tobacco was approved in 1998 , Parliament and the Council planned to carry out an assessment of this reform at the end of 2002 .
This assessment alone will provide a basis for an appropriate consideration of the future of tobacco growing in Europe .
I therefore share the view of the rapporteur that no decision should be taken on the future of the existing tobacco regime until we have the results of the studies that are currently being carried out .
And I would point out that the Commission must submit a new proposal on the tobacco sector in 2003 .
For these reasons , I am pleased that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has refused the planned quota and premium reductions which would have severely affected farmers ' income , would have hampered the restructuring of plantations and would not have encouraged farmers to switch to other crops .
We also oppose the plan to increase farmers ' contribution to the Community Tobacco Fund , given that this Fund - which has an annual budget of EUR 20 million - has been substantially under-utilised .
Lastly , we also rejected the Commission 's plan to refocus where support from this fund is directed .
To sum up , Madam President , the Commission has put before us a flawed reform , one that , let it be said , also has a tinge of shallow populist rhetoric and hypocrisy , and could have serious social consequences for this sector .
The Committee on Agriculture supported the wise recommendations of our rapporteur who has drafted suitable and solid proposals which do not confuse tobacco and nicotine addiction , and I hope that the House will follow suit .
Madam President , Commissioner , we have read the Commission 's proposal with some concern and I must pay tribute to Mr Cunha and the Committee on Agriculture for producing the very balanced report before us today .
It is always difficult to talk about tobacco , for we always end up falling into the trap of populism .
We know that today 's report is only one of the stages in the discussion , for the real debate on tobacco will start with the Commission 's proposal next year .
However , there are three fundamental points to note . Firstly , apart from some rare exceptions , tobacco is produced in the poorest and most depressed areas of Europe .
The populism we talk about is also a characteristic of conversion plans : in those areas - and I am referring to the situation of my own country , Italy , but the same applies to parts of Spain or Greece - it is not possible to convert production .
And this populism continues to confuse production with consumption .
As a great French writer said , although it is certainly possible to kick a habit , it is very difficult , for superhuman willpower and , above all , a great deal of time are needed .
Well then , when it comes to smoking , it may well be that we should invest heavily - and this could be part of the Committee on Agriculture 's proposal - in an educational process which starts with schools .
As regards this sector of agriculture , we must endeavour to realise that entire family networks are dependent on tobacco for a living and that sudden decisions such as those contained in the Commission 's proposal would lead to social and economic collapse that we cannot afford .
Madam President , I too welcome the work done by Mr Cunha in the Committee on Agriculture .
As an aside , it was stated that Andalusia is a very rich agricultural area .
I have to say that I would be delighted with an income from agriculture as high as that enjoyed by the citizens represented by Mrs Auroi , and so would my Andalusian constituents .
I side with those in favour of retaining aid to farmers , although I do not smoke myself and advise everyone not to take it up or to stop .
I believe it would be a mistake to reduce the cultivation of tobacco or do away with it altogether . My reasons are that this would entail a high social cost and that no suitable alternative crops have been identified .
It should also be remembered that those who advocate cutting off aid to the sector on the grounds of health protection fail to take into account that subsidising European production would have no impact on consumption . This is because the European Union imports 70 % of its raw tobacco .
Nonetheless , we have already been presented with a proposal providing for gradual elimination of tobacco without the relevant studies to ensure alternative sources of income following replacement of this crop .
There are no such alternative sources of income at present .
Discussion of reform can only begin when the results of assessment of the COM in tobacco are available , not in any event before 2003 .
The Commission aims to replace agricultural research with action to support the development of specific initiatives encouraging tobacco producers to change to other crops and engage in alternative economic activities generating employment . Deductions from the producers ' premiums are to be implemented progressively starting in 2004 .
The Community Fund financed by deductions from the subsidies has been underused . This was due to serious mismanagement by the Commission .
If the latter handled the existing budget so badly , I have grave misgivings as to whether it would do better with a significantly larger sum . It should be recalled that there have hardly been any calls to tender so far .
The Fund must of course continue to serve its purpose and pursue research into varieties more suited to demand and causing as little harm as possible .
Obviously it must also investigate alternative uses for raw tobacco and its environmental impact .
Increased deductions should not be an excuse for covert reductions of the producers ' premiums .
I should like to conclude by emphasising the important social and economic role played by tobacco cultivation . It calls for a sizeable workforce on family plots .
The debate on tobacco and public health should not therefore be restricted to the agricultural context , targeting the weakest link in the chain of tobacco production .
Madam President , we should like to express our opposition to any attempt to abolish or gradually reduce aid to tobacco , as proposed by the Commission , because it will wipe out tobacco production in Europe .
We disagree with any proposal which is based on the premise of abandoning tobacco production and tries to gild the pill by allegedly seeking alternative forms of employment and income for producers .
We all know full well that tobacco is grown in disadvantaged areas in the south , mainly barren mountainous areas , and that it is a crop traditionally grown on holdings on which nothing else will grow . It is the sole source of income and means of survival for people living in these areas , for whom there are no alternative forms of employment .
It is infuriating that proposals such as this are being made at a time when smoking is on the increase and 70 % of the tobacco used is imported .
Consequently , any reduction in tobacco growing in the Community will wipe out thousands of small and medium-sized holdings and increase imports and merely serves the predatory interests of the huge tobacco industry and distribution monopolies , at the expense of producers and consumers alike .
The only thing we should be reducing are imports , not the income of European farmers , and every suitable measure should be taken in order to do so .
Any other proposal is anything from hypocritical to highly suspicious and a smoke-screen for unlawful interests .
As far as the Cunha report is concerned , it contains a number of good points , but it too accepts the objective , albeit with reservations , of reducing tobacco growing in the Community , perhaps over a longer period of time .
This is clearly illustrated , for example , in Amendments Nos 7 and 12 , calling for tobacco growers to be encouraged to switch into other crops , which is why we shall be voting against it .
Madam President , there were a couple of dissenting voices in the Committee on Agriculture about a subsidy for tobacco and I was one of them . I make no apology for that .
I support the Commission very much on what they are trying to do in phasing out tobacco subsidies and I would encourage them to continue at a faster pace , rather than a slower one .
We cannot justify European taxpayers ' money being spent on tobacco production .
One of the key objectives of the common agricultural policy is to produce good , wholesome food for the consumers of Europe .
I cannot quite see how tobacco fits into this scenario .
I have a great deal of respect for Mr Cunha , the rapporteur , but on this occasion he has got it wrong .
He is a little like King Canute , who wanted to stop the tide coming in but was unsuccessful .
The Committee on Agriculture did not face up to the realities .
Over the past ten years we in Europe have spent GBP 6.5 billion or EUR 10 billion - GBP 2 for every citizen in Europe - to subsidise tobacco .
One third of this tobacco is of very low quality and is seldom smoked at all .
Another third is dumped on Developing World markets which then destroys their markets for tobacco .
Is this a role of the common agricultural policy ?
It is a role we have tried to avoid .
Only one third of this tobacco is smoked in Europe .
We cannot , therefore , justify the support that we are giving .
We all accept the need to support farming in rural communities , but we have to find different crops and different ways of supporting them in the future .
The final point I wish to make is that , of all the areas of this support that I dislike , the continuation in Amendment No 17 of the support for very low-quality tobacco is the most wrong .
If anything should be corrected it is this . I urge the Commission to phase out the growing of this very low-quality tobacco immediately .
Madam President , I have one very brief question to ask Commissioner Fischler .
Today we received the opinion of the Council 's legal services , questioning whether recital 5 of the Commission proposal is legal .
The Council 's legal services question whether recital 5 is legal .
My question to Mr Fischler is this ; does he intend to withdraw recital 5 ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by thanking you , Mr Cunha for your excellent report , which is obviously based on an in-depth analysis of the Commission proposal .
This proposal fixes the premiums and guarantee thresholds for the next three years , changes the scope of the Tobacco Fund and slightly simplifies the common organisation of the market .
As far as premiums are concerned , the Commission proposal is that the current amounts should remain unchanged , with the exception of variety group 5 , which Mr Parish referred to earlier , where we propose a 10 % reduction .
This being the case , we cannot accept Amendment No 17 ; the reduction in premiums for this variety group has only been proposed because the market situation is now totally untenable , with prices in free fall and very high stock levels which will affect future developments on this market .
As far as guarantee thresholds are concerned , the Commission proposal is that they should gradually be reduced by 2.6 % to 334 000 tonnes by 2004 .
This figure more or less corresponds to quantities produced in the 1999 and 2000 financial years .
Amendments Nos 18 and 19 are not acceptable to the Commission because the suggested guarantee thresholds and the way in which they are broken down bears no relation to current production demands and efforts to encourage varieties for which there is greater demand .
Recital 5 , which the honourable Member referred to earlier , reflects the political framework underlying the proposal as regards the Tobacco Fund .
This proposal is a twofold proposal .
First it amends the scope of the Fund , by dispensing with funding for agronomic research in order to support producers switching to other crops and , secondly , it gradually increases the amount retained to 5 % .
The Commission has created a new political framework in its communication on a strategy for sustainable development .
We are working towards phasing out aid for the tobacco sector because we are required under Article 152 of the Treaty to guarantee a high level of human health protection in all Community policies .
We too are aware of the fact that there is no direct relation between tobacco production and smoking levels , that is , people will not stop smoking because we provide less support for tobacco growing .
The political question lies in Article 152 , which quite clearly states that a high level of human health protection shall be ensured in all Community policies , that is , including all aid policies .
Which means that the other question no longer applies .
The deletion of this recital suggested in Amendment No 2 is therefore unacceptable .
Nor is the suggested reference to the European Parliament 's resolution in Amendment No 3 acceptable because it has nothing to do with the proposed regulation .
Amendments Nos 4 to 6 , calling for an assessment of the social and economic impact have already been overtaken by events .
We are already carrying out a comprehensive assessment which also deals with these aspects .
The Commission cannot therefore decide on a timetable for abolishing aid here and now , as called for in Amendments Nos 25 and 26 .
The Commission is aware of the potential impact of phasing out aid to tobacco growing , especially in various production areas such as Greece , Spain and Italy , where the social and economic structure is particularly fragile .
The Commission communication therefore makes provision for measures designed to create alternative jobs and profitable economic activity under rural development plans to support producers switching to other crops .
Amendments Nos 7 and 11 calling for continuing aid for agronomic research are unacceptable because promoting measures to switch into other crops is now a strategic priority and we must move decisively in this direction .
The Commission takes the view that tobacco producers must be offered new ways of diversifying into other crops or other sectors .
Funding can be provided for research under the Community research policy .
Information campaigns on the harmful effects of tobacco consumption need to be extended and new information campaigns need to contain more comprehensive information on the harmful effects of smoking .
That is why we propose gradually increasing the amount retained to 5 % by 2004 and why we cannot accept Amendments Nos 7 or 9 .
Amendments Nos 22 and 23 calling for an additional 5 % to be retained are unacceptable because they will overstretch a great many enterprises financially .
Amendments Nos 7 and 16 are unacceptable ; they are superfluous because the assessment due for completion by 2002 also deals with these aspects .
The same applies to Amendments Nos 10 and 24 .
Amendments Nos 1 and 8 are unacceptable because the derogation for cooperative undertakings is difficult to justify .
However , may I remind you that the auction procedure is optional for producer Member States and they are free to decide whether or not they consider it advisable to introduce this procedure .
Finally , I should like to point out that the individual components of this proposal , by which I mean maintaining premiums at current levels , adjusting thresholds to current production levels , the three-year period of validity and promoting diversification , form a balanced entity which is tailored to producers ' requirements and takes account of new prospects .
In the first quarter of 2003 , the Commission will present new proposals to the European Parliament and the Council for the future of the sector thereafter , based on the results of the assessment , which should be available by the end of this year .
Mr President , I should like to ask the Commissioner to clarify what he just said .
Commissioner , you stated that the Commission is proposing certain measures and alternative employment opportunities in the context of rural development .
That at least is what I understood you to have said .
May I therefore enquire , Commissioner , whether you could provide tobacco farmers with assurances on alternative employment ?
Are you in fact guaranteeing jobs ?
I would be grateful for clarification .
Mr President , it all depends on what the honourable Member understands by the term guarantee .
What we are doing in this proposal is as follows , as I have already explained : in order to be able to take account of the Commission communication to the European Council , we must develop alternative forms of employment for people at the same time as phasing out tobacco subsidies .
We do not just want to apply a wait and see policy here ; we want to test out various alternatives in a sort of pilot stage and see what the best and most promising alternatives are .
Some of the 5 % funds which I referred to will be used for this .
If you take a close look at the Commission communication on sustainable development , you will see that what we are starting to do is to phase out tobacco subsidies and develop suitable alternatives in the areas affected at one and the same time .
That is what I explained and that is exactly what we want to do .
Thank you Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0045 / 2002 ) by Mrs Langenhagen , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the fish processing industry [ 2000 / 2303 ( INI ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to take this opportunity to extol the virtues of fish as a healthy food .
With food scandals left , right and centre , there is surely nothing wrong with highlighting the benefits of healthy eating .
Which is where fish come in .
It is an established fact that an ever increasing proportion of the pro capita consumption of fish is in the form of processed products .
That includes not just canned fish but the whole range of fish on offer , from smoked to frozen fish .
In terms of turnover , the fish processing industry in the European Union is almost twice as large as the fisheries sector .
Given the financial clout of this industry , with turnover in excess of EUR 10 billion , and its vital contribution to the food supply in the EU , I am surprised - with all due respect , Mr Fischler - that the Green Paper on the future of the common fisheries policy pays such scant attention to this sector , especially when the statistics are as follows .
First , it provides almost 100 000 jobs throughout Europe .
Secondly , it involves thousands of enterprises , especially small and medium-sized enterprises , often located in structurally-challenged regions with few alternative forms of employment .
Thirdly , it has a long tradition of added-value processing in its many and varied forms .
All this clearly illustrates that the few sentences on the fish processing industry in the Green Paper are far too little and fail to take proper account of this sector , which is why I proposed this own initiative report , to draw attention to this neglected sector and , more importantly , to test out the room for political manoeuvre here in the run up to the reform of the common fisheries policy .
A hearing on the subject in the Committee on Fisheries gave us an interesting insight into the many and varied working conditions , production methods and problems in Europe .
There are a few problem areas which I should like to highlight . First and foremost , the supply of raw materials .
The fish-processing industry depends on imports for over 50 % of its supplies .
Admittedly , these are raw materials which the EU fleet cannot supply , which is why we need to improve conditions and guarantee security of supply .
That includes reducing customs tariffs .
Secondly , environmental measures .
The profitability of the processing industry , with its piecemeal structure , has been drastically reduced in certain cases by the environmental measures taken by the EU .
Environmental protection is important , whether it concerns waste water , packaging or emissions .
But we need to avoid unnecessary distortions as the result of specifications coming too thick and fast .
What good is the cleanest water to us , if there are no jobs left in coastal regions ?
Thirdly , food safety .
One thing is clear ; the fish-processing industry does not cause pollution and toxins .
Rather , it is the victim of these , which is why it should not be left to shoulder the burden alone .
Surely the purpose of consumer protection is not to set limit values on the basis of the principle : ' Value XY might be dangerous , so let us stick a 150 % safety margin on top of it ' .
Reliable , toxicologically proven limit values make sense , rush jobs and thrashing about in the dark do not .
I should like the Member States in particular to take good note of that .
Fourthly , enlargement .
The candidate countries are knocking at our door .
Some countries have done exemplary work on hygiene and health protection .
But there are still massive problems to be resolved before adequate standards can be reached .
Fifthly , fundamentals .
We need more information on this sector , which is why we have called for an analysis from the Commission .
The impact of aid from the FIFG must also be examined carefully , because we do not want a sector which is drip-fed by the EU , we want an industry which is vital and can hold its own in the twenty-first century .
Waiving aid in favour of self-help should relate at most to areas which are highly dependent on fisheries in future .
The moral of the story is that the fish-processing industry needs a higher profile in Europe .
This was the opinion of the Committee on Fisheries , with just one vote against .
I therefore trust that I can count on your full support for this report when we vote on it at 12 noon .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I consider the proposal of the PPE-DE Group that an own-initiative report should be drawn up on the fish processing industry was a good one .
And , in light of the magnificent report that has been produced , I also welcome the fact that it was drafted by our rapporteur , Mrs Langenhagen , whom I wish to congratulate once again on her work .
As our rapporteur said , we feel that the Commission is not addressing the issue of this industry with the appropriate seriousness .
The Green Paper is a clear example of this .
This is why we expect more from the Commission in terms of its proposals , and I would say that this report is apt for that very reason .
The Langenhagen report addresses the problem as a whole .
In 1998 , we drew up a specific report on the canning industry - for which I had the honour of being rapporteur - but this report provides an update and , furthermore , encompasses the entire industry , including frozen products and the marketing aspects , as well as the products of aquaculture .
From Mrs Langenhagen 's report I should like to highlight her observations on both the global and European frameworks , taking account of enlargement .
In the first case , she considers the liberalisation of imports of raw materials , which is very important , and makes specific exceptions for sensitive products such as tuna loins .
She also refers to quality , to the environmental and health and hygiene standards of European products compared to imports , in order to protect European consumers from labelling fraud , which has occurred in the cases of sardines and tuna .
At European level , as has been said , plans are being made to deal with the consequences of the candidate countries ' accession , but in a way that does not damage the industry in regions which are behind in economic terms , and which are currently experiencing difficulties .
Lastly , the report calls for our fisheries products to be promoted more vigorously and for more assistance with R + D to be given to our companies .
I wish to conclude by stating , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , that we will be supporting the three amendments tabled by the Group of the Party of European Socialists but that we shall be voting against Amendment No 4 by the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reform Party , because we feel that the text submitted by our rapporteur is better .
Mr President , on behalf of the Socialist Group , I wish to say to Mrs Langenhagen that we fully support her report and that we congratulate her on her excellent work .
We socialists have tabled two amendments , to which I should like to ask the rapporteur to give her express support , on the social aspects of the processing industry , urging the Commission , the Member States and social operators to boost the collective negotiation designed to improve the quality of employment in this industry , especially bearing in mind that the majority of these jobs are performed by women , who have very little social protection and who , furthermore , commonly work on a highly casual basis .
It is our view that adopting this approach would bring us closer to the objectives set at the Lisbon Summit to improve the quality of employment .
We believe that improving the training of these nearly 100 000 workers in the processing industry and its conditions of employment , together with this sector 's own capacity for innovation and its dynamic , will help to ensure that this industry remains viable and that it has a future .
Indeed , this initiative is sound , and so is the report . Yet , I would still like to make a few observations .
In the original recital G , it is stated that the import of fish and fisheries products from outside the EU by the processing industry could lead to conflicting interests .
This is not always the case . Such imports often provide good incentives for the processing industry and can thus help maintain a good price level for European fishermen .
Such a misconception is indicative of a general problem which , in my view , we are facing in our committee .
There are many areas where we - to a greater or lesser extent - lack sufficient insight into how matters stand .
Unfortunately , we frequently have to make new policy without having all the relevant information on which to base it .
We must therefore try to obtain more insight into how things are .
I am of the opinion that , with regard to research , the emphasis must be on reliability and speed .
I would ask the Commission to ensure that we can have concrete , up-to-date information at our disposal , so that we can take the right decisions in all these areas at the right times .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Langenhagen for her report .
The fish processing industry employs 18 140 people in the UK , that is , 20 % of the EU jobs in this sector .
The majority of these jobs are in Scotland , and in some of the most peripheral areas of Scotland .
These jobs provide a lifeline to so many people living in rural areas .
Much more than that , they provide us with the finished fish product .
Without the workers in this industry we would not enjoy the fish we take for granted .
That is why the Committee on Fisheries held a hearing and saw that the priorities for the industry were supply , continued employment , the environment , food safety , imports and also the consequences of enlargement .
We know that some of our stocks are at seriously low levels , and therefore when there is a ban on cod fishing , it is not just the fishermen , but the processors that lose out too .
We have to work towards availability of supply , but balance this with high hygiene levels and sustainability of that supply .
The processing industry is an important one , which we should never lose sight of in any fishing debate .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by congratulating you , Mrs Langenhagen , as rapporteur , and the Committee on Fisheries for this own initiative report .
Like the European Parliament , the Commission also sees the European fish-processing industry as an important sector of the economy .
This sector of the economy supplies quality fish products and creates jobs , especially in regions which depend on fisheries , and we are well aware of the challenges which it has to cope with .
There are four main problem areas .
First , the inadequate supply of raw materials from EU waters , secondly , import restrictions on raw materials , thirdly , strict health , hygiene and environmental standards in the EU compared with third countries and , fourthly , increasing international competition .
Now to the individual points in your report .
You complain that we have forgotten this industry in our Green Paper .
May I remind you that it is addressed in our structural policy , especially in items 4 to 7 , 14 and 22 and have already supported measures to modernise the European fish-processing industry .
The structural fund for fisheries has earmarked EUR 637 million for this purpose for the period from 2000 to 2006 .
I wholeheartedly agree , however , that we need the results of the study into the impact of structural funds on the sector as quickly as possible .
This study will be available in time for the interim review of the structural fund period in 2003 .
Now to the supply situation .
I fully agree that we need to develop our supply policy .
In the final analysis , it is the competitiveness of our own processing industry which is at stake .
We shall submit a proposal along these lines before the end of this year .
I expressly welcome your call for the liberalisation of port services in the EU to be harmonised to promote fair competition in the processing industry .
The Commission submitted a proposal for a directive on this in May last year .
On the question of health , hygiene and consumer protection inside and outside the Community , I should like to remind you that the relevant provisions of Community law obviously also apply to imports from third countries and we have a comprehensive inspection programme in place in the Member States and third countries in order to ensure that this is the case .
We want to improve these controls still further and the relevant provisions are being revised as we speak .
In addition , the European Food Safety Agency will provide us with substantiated scientific opinions on food and animal food safety in future .
Another question closely related to that of consumer protection is labelling , which was set on a new legal basis in last year 's new regulation and which also applies to a whole range of processed products , including smoked , dried and frozen fish .
As far as preparations for enlargement are concerned , the SAPARD and PHARE programmes include measures to ensure that candidate countries quickly come up to our standards in fisheries .
Finally , I should like to point out that the new common organisation of the market makes greater provision for cross-sectoral producer organisations which allow the various industries in the fisheries sector , from fishing to processing and sales , to make use of their common synergy potential , for example , by adapting products to market requirements , improving product quality , developing quality labels or environmentally-friendly production methods and so on .
So you see , we have already addressed certain aspects of your initiative , although much still remains to be done and you may be sure that we shall put your proposals into practice as best we can .
Thank you Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0041 / 2002 ) by Mr Lage , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1587 / 98 of 17 July 1998 introducing a scheme to compensate for the additional costs incurred in the marketing of certain fishery products from the Azores , Madeira , the Canary Islands and the French departments of Guyana and Réunion as a result of those regions ' remoteness [ COM ( 2001 ) 498 - C5-0446 / 2001 - 2001 / 0200 ( CNS ) ] .
.
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Regulation No 1587 / 1998 introducing a scheme to compensate for the additional costs incurred in the marketing of certain fishery products from the Azores , Madeira , the Canary Islands and the French departments of Guyana and Réunion as a result of those regions ' remoteness , like the regulations that preceded it , has proved to be a fisheries policy instrument of enormous and undeniable use in economic and social terms and even for safeguarding certain cultural values associated with fishing activities .
Nevertheless , pursuant to Article 6 of the same Regulation , the Commission should , by 1 June 2001 at the latest , have presented the European Parliament and the Council with the evaluation report on the measures adopted in the fisheries sector for the outermost regions , which , as we all know , should receive special aid , in accordance with the Treaty of Amsterdam , which granted them a special status .
The Commission failed to fulfil that objective by not meeting the deadline set and by using as an excuse for this omission the need for a more detailed analysis using external consultants , against the backdrop of the global revision of the common fisheries policy on the basis of the Green Paper , which has already been opened to public debate .
The results of these studies determine when this report is to be presented , with the Commission proposing to delay its presentation until 1 June 2002 , and , as a logical consequence , to extend the scheme in force by one year , until 31 December 2002 , thereby guaranteeing the continuity and stability of the current scheme of compensation for additional costs .
In short , there is nothing to worry about . This is just a pause for thought .
I therefore proposed that the Committee on Fisheries deliver a favourable opinion together with some appropriate amendments to the regulation .
First of all , the scheme of compensation for additional costs must clearly be permanent , with an end to time limits , because the disadvantages faced by the outermost regions as a consequence of their distance from consumer centres are not factors that time and progress will alleviate , being of a structural nature , unless we wish to see the total disappearance of the fisheries sector in these outermost regions one day .
I should like , in order to make these debates a little less formal , to use the powerful metaphor that José Saramago , winner of the Nobel prize for literature , worked into his novel ' The Stone Raft ' , in which he imagines a split occurring between the Iberian Peninsula and the European continent and the peninsula consequently drifting away from the continent .
I do not think that anyone would dare , even ironically , to imagine that the outermost islands could , even at some point in the distant future , become close once again to the European continent , thereby rendering the current concept of remoteness redundant .
It is now , therefore , proposed that we maintain indefinitely the scheme of aid for the additional costs of marketing certain fishery products , maybe allowing them to be gradually adapted . The future regulation must , therefore , take account of this requirement .
As far as I am concerned , there is no reason why it should not change at some point in the future to become a model of income support for the fishermen in the outermost regions based on the model that is being adopted and developed to support farmers .
Whatever the case , Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , fishing activity in the Azores , which employs around 8 000 people and has a huge socio-economic impact on the Archipelago , the 1 500 fishermen of Madeira , the fisheries sector in the Canary Islands , which employs around 13 000 people , as well as the thousands of fishermen from French Guyana and Réunion , cannot be subjected to uncertainties or to the whims of fate .
They need security and stability , all the more so because they have faced some tough challenges recently , with the failure of the agreement with Morocco , which dealt a cruel blow to fisheries in the Canary Islands .
I therefore think it is crucial that we increase aid for fishing activities in the outermost regions and are even more generous than we are at the moment .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to point out that the compensation scheme for additional costs incurred by outermost regions in the marketing of certain fishery products - incorrectly referred to as the ' Fish POSEIDOM ' - is based on a simple principle , namely to support the marketing of species that are most commonly sold outside the European Union , in conditions similar to those in which the economic agents in Europe operate .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his work , which meets the expectations of the representatives of the European Union 's outermost regions .
However , as shadow rapporteur , I would like to make two additional comments .
In the comprehensive list of disadvantages facing the outermost regions , the rapporteur has failed to mention a difficulty which , in my opinion , is of utmost importance , namely the problems of reaching these areas as a result of the transport links between the regions and the continent and the prices charged for this travel .
And for us in the far-flung regions , this problem can increase prices by around 30 % .
I also note that the rapporteur bases his report - and this is obviously something that I welcome - on Article 299 ( 2 ) of the Treaty of Amsterdam , which recommends that the special characteristics of outermost regions be taken into account in each of the European Union 's policies , especially in the case of fisheries .
I think , however , that it would have been more logical to refer in full to Article 37 of the Treaty , which represents the very foundation of the fisheries and agricultural policies , had this Article not proved lacking as regards the EU 's outermost regions .
It turns out that it is totally inappropriate in its current form since it takes into account continental fishing conditions only and fails to consider situations related to remoteness .
Lastly , I fully support the rapporteur 's proposal which calls on the Commission to forward to the European Parliament a copy of the report carried out for the Commission by external consultants on the impact of all Community measures adopted to date in the fisheries sector for the outermost regions .
If we were familiar with the content of this document , it would certainly give us more accurate information to consider when taking into account the specific problems of the outermost regions of the EU .


Mr President , the outermost regions have a special status , recognised in Article 299 ( 2 ) of the 1997 Treaty on European Union , but I would say that this status has existed since the founding of the first European Economic Community , in 1957 , because this Treaty laid down special provisions for the French Overseas Departments .
When Spain and Portugal joined the Union in 1986 , the Act of Accession of these two countries included special provisions and what Article 299 ( 2 ) does is to acknowledge a situation that already had a legislative identity , by means of all the special provisions of the various programmes and specific options dealing with the outermost regions , known for short as COP 6 .
The Community Treaties and legislation , therefore , recognise the reality of the enormous distance of these regions from the continent , making it impossible for them to be competitive , which is what we are always calling for in the European Union .
One only has to visit these territories , which on the face of it seem to be paradises , but which have a host of economic and social problems , to realise what this means .
And Commissioner Fischler is one of the few people to have made the effort to go there .
And I repeat ; it is an effort to visit , because although these territories are beautiful , the lack of time and space and our knowledge of their situation make it clear that they are far from being a paradise .
This report by the Committee on Fisheries is an acceptable proposal ; the rapporteur has done a good job and has tabled some very reasonable amendments and , in my view , Parliament can approve the report .
Of course , the Socialist Group gives its support to the report by Mr Lage and we hope that the Commission continues to develop these special approaches to the fisheries sector .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , once again in this House we are debating European regional diversity ; in this case , the dimension of remoteness , as a result of the report by Mr Lage , whom I congratulate on his work , and which affects one of the most characteristic sectors of production in the outermost regions : fisheries .
I hope that , once the report is approved , we can find a permanent way to address the structural costs of remoteness in the marketing of some fisheries products from these regions which , as you know , are by and large far off , remote and fragmented , where natural energy is scarce and where there is a high dependence on the outside world .
In my opinion , however , the most important aspect of this report is its recognition of the fact that the legal base for adopting this type of measure has been Article 299 ( 2 ) of the Treaty , acknowledged at the Amsterdam Summit .
I am therefore grateful to the rapporteur , Mr Lage , to the Committee on Fisheries and to the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market for understanding and accepting my amendment , which was , in fact , intended to consolidate the unique legal code that applies to these outermost regions .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by thanking Mr Lage for his support for our proposal .
It is true that fisheries play a very important role in the economic and social development of remote regions and a system of aid for marketing specific fishery products from these regions was introduced back in 1992 .
This aid helped producers to offset the additional costs of transporting their products to mainland Europe .
What we are now proposing is to extend the present scheme by a year , that is , until the end of 2002 .
Why a year ?
The Commission will be submitting a report to the European Parliament and the Council in June of this year on the implementation and efficiency of the measures which currently apply , together with a detailed appraisal of these measures .
We can then make any adjustments needed on the basis of this appraisal when the common fisheries policy is revised .
Now to the proposed amendments : Amendments Nos 1 and 3 concern the legal basis .
We have suggested Article 37 of the Treaty because these measures are no different from the provisions of the Treaty on Community policy or general principles .
However , we cannot agree to extend the scheme indefinitely .
The whole point of the extension , as I have said , is to give us time for a detailed appraisal of the measures taken so far .
I must therefore reject Amendments Nos 1 and 3 .
Nor can I accept Amendment No 2 , because the Commission report will not just reflect the results of the study ; the report which we present will also need to take account of the impact of the measures and their application by the Member States .
Amendment No 6 is problematic because , as I have said , the study is just one of numerous documents which we may need to take into account in a proposal for a new regulation .
It would not therefore be appropriate to mention it separately in the regulation .
However , I can accept Amendments Nos 4 and 5 . Thank you for your attention .
Thank you Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0040 / 2002 ) by Mr Maat , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council regulation on the conclusion of the Protocol setting out the fishing opportunities and the financial contribution provided for by the Agreement between the European Community and the Gabonese Republic on fishing off the coast of Gabon for the period 3 December 2001 to 2 December 2005 [ COM ( 2001 ) 765 - C5-0040 / 2002 - 2001 / 0301 ( CNS ) ] .
First of all , I should like to congratulate the Commissioner on the fact that he has succeeded in reaching an agreement within the framework of Gabon at a time when it is increasingly difficult to conclude fisheries agreements .
This illustrates the fact that fisheries agreements and the European Union are a matter of particular concern .
They are partly based on historic schemes , and they now offer not only financial compensation to the countries involved , but simultaneously provide very specific development aid in a large number of African countries .
With regard to the Gabon agreement , the European Union has earmarked EUR 5 million for a four-year period ; 30 % of this is financial compensation and 70 % is spent on education and structural aid for the coastal region .
For the sake of clarity , this therefore shows that these agreements contribute greatly towards development cooperation with African countries .
Incidentally , the amount in annual terms is 70 % higher than the current agreement or the agreement that has just lapsed .
This increase is partly due to the acquisition of additional fishing options in the 6 to 12-mile zone .
And indeed , the question then arises - and this is also addressed to the Commissioner - to what extent the relevant fisheries organisations in Gabon are actually involved in this agreement .
Gabon is required annually to submit a written justification for 70 % of the amount .
Fisheries account for 1.4 % of Gabon 's gross national product .
However , if we realise that two thirds of Gabon 's GNP originates from oil revenues , this means that the fishing industry is indeed an important industry for the country .
Interestingly , only 70 % of the catch capacity was used between 1998 and 2001 .
The Commissioner might be able to account for this .
It is also striking that , with regard to coastal fishing in the true sense of the word , in other words , fishing within the 12-mile zone , only the capacity of ships has been laid down in the agreement , and not the tonnage quota .
This is remarkable because , in the EU 's internal policy , we always talk about actual catch quotas and not about the capacity of the ships .
Perhaps the Commissioner can also indicate that the extension of the agreement from a 6 to a 12-mile zone has no implications for Gabonese coastal fishing .
At the moment , it is insufficiently clear what the actual costs and benefits of the agreement with Gabon will be , also for European fishermen .
Although the European Commission tries hard to describe the previous agreement in its evaluation report , information about the cost-benefit ratio , the state of the fish stocks and the impact of the agreements on the regions in the EU merit further elucidation , in my view .
Mr President , I have already indicated that I congratulate the Commissioner on this agreement and that fisheries agreements are of paramount importance to a number of coastal regions in the European Union .
In that sense , this agreement buttresses the economy in those regions and also gives a structural impulse to the European fisheries industry , which is already under strain .
This does not detract from the fact - and we cannot turn a blind eye to this - that these agreements meet with increasing criticism , inter alia from the World Wildlife Fund and other non-governmental organisations .
In future discussions about fisheries agreements , we must underline more emphatically the importance of the social support base of these agreements , both in Africa and in Europe .
It would be good if the Commission too were to stress that these agreements definitely boost development cooperation with a large number of African countries , for this has not yet struck home where many people are concerned .
With regard to the report itself , I have indicated in a number of recommendations the points that require extra attention .
Among the aspects to which I request that more attention be given are control measures , since the Gabonese Government is not sufficiently able to carry out the control tasks adequately , and information about how the money is actually spent and to what extent the coastal regions are actually strengthened .
Regarding the implementation of this agreement , I would appreciate it if the evaluation of development measures were to be submitted to the Council and the European Parliament every two years .
The amendments as adopted by the Committee on Fisheries receive my unqualified support .
In fruitful cooperation with my own coordinator , Mr Farela , I have once again explained our true intentions in Amendment No 2 .
For that reason , I much prefer this amendment to Amendment No 9 tabled by the Liberal Group .
This means that I would warmly recommend Amendment No 2 , while I consider Amendment No 9 by the Liberal Group to be redundant .
I should also like to thank the draftsmen of the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy and the Committee on Development and Cooperation for the report and the information , and I would thank them for their input , since this too contributes to a broader support base for agreements of this kind .
Mr President , some schemes , which are perhaps the product of the intellectual laziness of their authors , seek to present a picture of a Community fleet that preys on the resources of developing countries .
Today 's report could serve to cast doubt upon this stereotype , because Gabon is a country with enormous resources , mainly oil , which is extracted by Western oil companies , and has a very similar per capita income to Poland 's , as well as an enviable annual inflation rate of 2 % .
It goes without saying that the Community boats of four Member States , which will be fishing under this agreement , will of course do so in compliance with the principles of responsible fishing and under the strict conditions imposed by the CFP .
Many of us , however , are bound to wonder , as we do with regard to other agreements , whether this is a fisheries agreement or a development cooperation programme financed from the CFP , since , out of the total sum , 70 % is earmarked for activities designed to develop the local fishing sector .
This is why we are asking the Commission to direct some of this money to support measures to control and preserve stocks .
Mr Maat , the Socialist Group will be voting against Amendment No 2 and I hope the Commission will do the same , because the fees that should be paid by shipowners whose boats fish under this agreement cannot be different to those paid under other agreements unless we take Greenland as an example , where the shipowners pay not a penny of fees .
I wish to conclude by saying that those who are attempting to prevent Gabon from being able , like any other country , to sell part of its fishing rights at more than three times its market value are doing it no favours .
By the same token , they should be against Gabon exporting its oil and its minerals to places such as the Netherlands , the United States , China or France , for example .
Mr President , my views on third-country fishing agreements are well known but once again I wish to record my disgust at the fact that the European Union is entering into agreements which , despite the honeyed words , are nothing short of economic imperialism .
What is particularly striking today is the sheer impotence of this Parliament , together with the contempt with which it is treated by the Council and the Commission .
Today we are being consulted on an agreement which came into force in December 2001 - nearly three months ago .
If this House had any dignity whatsoever it would protest against such cavalier treatment , but of course it is mute .
This supposed watchdog has been very effectively muzzled .
But even if the whole House rose up and voted to censure this proposal , it would not make a blind bit of difference .
As ever , to its eternal shame , the Committee on Fisheries approved this agreement .
But even if it had objected to it unanimously , once again that would not have made any difference whatsoever .
So as we move to a vote I am sure that this House will do what it always does and rubber-stamp the decision already made by the committee .
As a democratic institution one has to say that it is nothing more than a sham .
But my question , Mr Fischler , is how many hundreds more black Africans need to be killed by European Union boats before you start listening ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by thanking Mr Maat for his report and for backing the Commission proposal .
This is a new protocol , in which we have been able to use the excellent results from the previous agreement to increase fishing opportunities for tuna to 10 500 tonnes per annum .
There is now a new segment with fishing opportunities for shrimps and cephalopods , in return for which Gabon will receive financial compensation of EUR 1.2 million a year , a good 70 % of which will be used to develop local fisheries in Gabon , that is , as development aid .
We have also made several changes to the technical measures , in order to help guarantee the sustainable use of fish resources .
They include , for example , a system of catch declarations and observers ' reports .
Now to the individual proposed amendments .
As far as Amendments Nos 1 , 4 and 5 are concerned , we agree materially .
We already meet these requirements under the current interinstitutional agreements , especially the framework agreement between Parliament and the Commission of 5 July 2000 , which is why these proposed amendments are redundant .
The Commission must reject Amendments Nos 2 and 9 .
Joint financing of catch opportunities negotiated is a fundamental aspect of Community foreign fisheries policy .
What happens with agreements with third countries is that the financial compensation comes out of the Community budget and the shipowners pay the licences .
I should like to say , with respect to Amendments Nos 3 and 7 , that the Commission obviously considers the sustainability of fisheries and the needs of local fisheries when it negotiates fisheries protocols .
I therefore have nothing against these proposed amendments but I think that they are self-evident and do not therefore necessarily warrant separate mention .
As far as Amendment No 8 is concerned , fish stocks are evaluated before any protocol is renewed and both contracting parties can demand that the joint committee be convened at any given time in order to adjust the current protocol if problems with fish stocks should arise .
I therefore feel that Amendments Nos 3 , 7 and 8 are unnecessary .
I cannot accept Amendment No 6 .
According to standard practice , no new mandate is required for periodic protocols renewing fisheries agreements .
Thank you Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.56 a.m. and resumed at 12.02 p.m. )

Mr President , this so-called compromise amendment was submitted to us late last night and then despatched this morning , initially - and inadvertently - with our name .
That was then revised .
I think it is wrong to vote on such a technical text at such short notice , which is why I have serious reservations about voting on it now .
Pursuant to the Rules of Procedure , it has to be the House which decides whether to vote on this compromise amendment or not .
( Parliament decided not to vote on the amendment )
Regarding Amendment No 59
Mr President , I have the same misgivings as before .
We cannot agree to vote on it , hence our request that you put it to the House .
Does the House agree to put this compromise amendment to the vote ?
( Parliament decided not to vote on the amendment )
Regarding Amendment No 52
I have a question , Mr President .
When did the ' honourable ' Member receive this compromise amendment ?
All the compromise amendments were proposed in one go and given to Mr Radwan at the same time .
At 5 p.m. yesterday afternoon , he decided to take the first and ninth amendments - you will see in your documents that their numbers have changed - and as for the others , Mr Radwan refused them .
His two previous comments were made purely and simply in order to manipulate the House .
Nevertheless , the House has the right to express itself pursuant to the Rules of Procedure .
( Parliament adopted the amendment )
Regarding Amendment No 44
Mr President , the original proposed amendment increases the thresholds from 10 % to 25 % .
Having consulted the Commission and the Council and the other groups , we have agreed to reduce this to 20 % .
I trust that this will not be interpreted as manipulation on my part and that there will be a broad consensus .
Mr President , Mr Radwan 's oral amendment is incorporated in the compromise amendment AC55 which , in my view , should be voted on before Amendment No 44 as it includes the following amendments .
Therefore , since the usual order is that we firstly vote on the amendments that deviate the most from the committee 's report , I would propose that we now vote on AC55 , which includes Mr Radwan 's oral amendment , as per the discussion we had yesterday at 5 p.m. , and which also includes Amendments Nos 44 and 33 .

The House accepts the rapporteur 's position .
( Parliament agreed to table the oral amendment )
Regarding Amendment No 46
Mr President , here too the increase is from 10 to 20 % , not 10 to 25 % .
The same applies to the next oral amendment .
Mr President , we have exactly the same problem .
The oral amendment is part of compromise amendment AC53 . AC53 contains aspects of Amendments Nos 46 and 32 .
The adoption of Mr Radwan 's oral amendment , which I approve , does not in any way imply that we are rejecting those aspects of Amendments Nos 46 and 32 .
I therefore support the proposal - a logical one at that - for the compromise amendment , which includes all the proposals by various Members , to be voted on first .
I think it is totally unacceptable that , in the previous vote , the amendment of one of the points rendered other points null and void which had nothing to do with what was a global compromise amendment , whose aim was to make the House vote on this relatively technical problem as quickly as possible .
Therefore , if we do not agree to start with the compromise amendment , we will first have to vote on Mr Radwan 's amendment , then Amendments Nos 46 and 32 , which have not lapsed in spite of Mr Radwan 's amendment .

Mr Radwan , if the oral amendment is adopted , I believe that Amendments Nos AC53 and 32 will no longer be valid .
However , I call upon the House to decide whether to agree to your request .
( Parliament agreed to table the oral amendment )
Regarding Amendment No 54
Mr President , I am dreadfully sorry , but I did not invent the procedure .
The proposed amendment arrived very late last night .
Just so that Mr Cohn-Bendit also understands : the two which were accepted were relatively straightforward .
The others , as the rapporteur himself explained , are very complicated amendments which run through the entire text and I would be more than happy to explain them to you in detail if you cannot follow them .
In any event , we are opposed .
Once again , I call upon the House to decide whether to put the compromise amendment to the vote .
( Parliament decided not to vote on the amendment )
Regarding Amendment No 48
Mr President , this again is the increase from 10 % to 20 % , not 25 % .
Once again , ladies and gentlemen , the increase from 10 to 20 % is a thoroughly complicated issue which cannot be tabled just before we are about to vote .
I think , however , that the compromise amendment submitted to Mr Radwan at 5 p.m. , which he approved without hesitation , should certainly be taken before Amendment No 48 .
I could play the imbecile and say that since Mr Radwan is using tactics that discredit the House , I shall call upon my friends to join forces to reject his oral amendment .
As for myself , in the interests of the stability of the financial markets in Europe , I think his amendment is fine .
Therefore , I approve it and I ask you to agree to vote on it , and then to adopt it .
But I would point out to you that Mr Radwan 's thoroughly devious tactics have also caused amendments approved by the Council and the Commission , as well as many Members , to lapse and I think that devious tactics of this type are a discredit to Parliament .
Mr President , the shadow rapporteurs have reached a new compromise on this point and I should therefore like to withdraw Amendment No 76 on behalf of the Greens .
We accept this compromise .
Mr President , it seems that there is some confusion .
Mr Mann , of the Group of the European People 's Party and I tabled compromise Amendment No 79 , which was to be voted on in three parts .
The first part was adopted , but I do not think that we have yet adopted the second part , since you proceeded to the vote on Amendment No 22 by the committee which should , in principle , be contained in the amended Amendment No 79 .
And then we have the third part of compromise amendment No 79 : Article 1 ( 2 ) .
I was going to propose , on behalf of Mr Lehne , draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market and on my own behalf , this oral amendment , which Mrs Echerer also supports .
I think that we must then vote in favour of Article 1 ( 2 ) ( b ) c and lastly , on Article 1 ( 2 ) ( b ) d .



I am sorry that this is complicated , but life sometimes is complicated .
Are there any objections to the inclusion of this oral amendment ?
It seems not .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Mr President , as rapporteur I wish to move an oral amendment .
There is a compromise amendment proposed by the Socialist Group . It involves an exemption from the need for a prospectus on behalf of the most creditworthy Member States .
We should make it clear that we want this exemption to apply only to debt securities , so that they would not , for example , be able to undertake a privatisation without a prospectus , and therefore insert the word " debt " at the beginning of the compromise on No. 65 .
Mr President , this is the first of three documents on European Union initiatives in the field of the movement of money , insurance undertakings and banks .
In particular , this first report lays down more stringent rules for the supervision of the activities of banks and insurance undertakings .
As representative of the Pensioners ' Party , I support this document because it is important that those who invest and deposit their money in banks and insurance undertakings have guarantees that their money will be well spent and will yield that fruit which is so important for many citizens , including the less well-off , which category , of course , includes pensioners .
I was therefore very pleased to vote for the motion .
- ( NL ) It is surprising to read how anxious a green economist is about safeguarding the burgeoning financial services markets against systemic risks .
Following on from the Lisbon Summit in the spring of 2000 , which wanted to turn Europe into the world 's most competitive economy , Mr Lipietz wants to make the EU the safest haven for financial activities .
This is why he would like legislation which offers the financial markets opportunities to develop .
In his view , it is not the Member States that decide which of the three methods are used for the calculation of the supplementary capital adequacy .
Instead , the financial conglomerates can make that choice themselves , provided that they make their decision public .
I find little concern for people and the environment in his vision and too much understanding of the requirements of companies involved in capital management .
However , I am aware that it is preferable to regulate these markets than to leave them to their own devices on a world scale , whereby those with the greatest spirit of adventure are given free rein and the most immoral companies elbow the others out of the market .
I consider his proposal as a first step which will make it easier to draft rules later on in the interests of the financing of public services , the fight against poverty , democratic control and care for the environment .
The proposed directive establishes prudential rules ( capital adequacy requirements and supplementary supervision ) with regard to financial conglomerates .
We believe the aim is the socialisation of these sectors ( credit , insurance and investment ) because the purpose of these rules , in our view , stems from a public service approach .
In a rational economy , funding should be granted according to social need for investment , and insurance should be integrated into social funds for investment and social protection .
This directive is a feeble attempt to regulate the financial markets , the chaotic workings of which are now seen to be the cause of financial crises and social catastrophes throughout the world , as the Enron affair has illustrated .
I voted in favour of the directive without any illusions , if only to curb the ambient ultra-liberalism and because we are not in favour of making things worse in order to further our own ends , which would amount to waiting for faults in capitalism to result in a final crisis .
Social campaigning alone will put a stop to the erring ways of an uncontrollable system .
. Key elements of subsidiarity and effective choice of a proper regulatory body as the final arbiter give cause for concern in this report .
Similarly , the call for statistical information to be made public as a solution to public awareness of what affects markets is impracticable and impossible to achieve .
The subsequent costs to industry also amount to a disproportionate effect .
The directive proposes to reduce some forms of financial crime , and we welcome this fine objective .
We must be wary , however , of being totally naïve , first and foremost , because , as the rapporteur points out , ' it would have been better to have had recourse to a Community regulation .
But the Treaty does not allow it ' . The fact that criminal penalties fall within the remit of the Member States leaves the net wide open and encourages , as is the case in fiscal matters , criminal operations spanning several countries .
Furthermore , we do not believe to any degree that capitalism can work in a transparent and equitable fashion .
Capitalist competition is a form of war by all available means , such as pacts , lobbying , organised accounting practices and fudged audits , as current events illustrate .
We do not see money-making institutions taking swift measures to try to monitor their methods .
As for ' insider dealings ' , we do not see how they could be dissuaded by declarations of intent - even if they are called a directive - when this does not provide for any genuinely restrictive penalty .
In spite of these reservations , I voted in favour of the directive so as not to obstruct the minimal measures therein .
Mr President , as I explained last night , I am not thrilled with the compromise reached in Feira on the taxation of savings income .
I voted in favour of all the amendments in Mr Pérez Royo 's report because I authored the greater majority of them .
I am also very grateful to the rapporteur for no longer including these overly radical amendments , as I explained to the House last night .
I also voted in favour of the report in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market so that it could be placed on the agenda .
Although I decided nonetheless to vote against the report on this occasion , it was in order to register that I am , in principle , against the fact that , at Feira , we abandoned the co-existence model which would have enabled Member States to choose whether to withhold tax or to exchange information on savings income received .
I also believe that we can no longer have a situation where Member States adopt and publish a directive on this issue before ascertaining whether the same measures will be applied in dependent or associated territories , and before having concluded negotiations with third countries on the application of equivalent measures , on the understanding that withholding tax is not the same as the exchange of information .
Mr President , Mr Fernando Pérez Royo 's report is on a proposal for a Council directive to ensure effective taxation of savings income in the form of interest payments within the Community .
Shivers ran down my spine , Mr President , and my hair stood on end when I read the title of this report : effective taxation of savings income .
Of course , it is right to pay taxes and , as this directive says , it is right to inform States that their citizens have come here , for example , and that they must be taxed on the interest on any savings they may have , but should we not decide once and for all not to make people who save pay interest or tax to governments just because they have been saving money ?
Saving is a very good thing .
It was with great difficulty that I voted for the report .
. ( IT ) Taxation on savings has always been a hotly debated issue .
There are some who support a withholding tax , implemented as a tax levied at source which settles the tax position of the person concerned .
The other , which is certainly more up to date , is the information system : in this case people do not settle their own tax liability because it will be subject to a subsequent levy on their income tax return .
From the point of view of fairness , the second method certainly provides the Community with a guarantee that the income , whatever it may be , is taxed in its entirety .
However , this method is only fair if applied by everyone .
As soon as one country decides not to adopt it , for historical or opportunistic reasons , the structure that has been built upon it is blown apart .
All this applies to the Pérez Royo report , which has taken the information method as the basis for taxation on cross-border savings .
For this directive to work effectively , it must be implemented when the third countries adopt it .
Therefore , agreement with the third countries is a sine qua non for this directive to enter into force .
Implementation without an agreement would cause a disturbance in the savings market , the negative effects of which cannot yet be readily assessed .
The liberalisation of movement of capital has been achieved , not only within the EU but also in non-Community financial centres . It is therefore obvious that the introduction of a new tax , as well as a policy for the exchange of information that is limited to the 15 Member States , will have a negative impact on financial transactions .
The introduction of such a tax would give rise to considerable tax evasion .
For these reasons , we believe that it is essential to introduce effective savings income within the Community in the form of interest payments , which is , in other words , also provided in a number of third countries as well as in all the autonomous territories that depend on a Member State .
Therefore , the entry into force of this directive should categorically depend on the conclusion of agreements on the introduction of identical measures in the countries and territories in question .
Since there is much work that has to be done before this last condition is fulfilled , we were unable to give our backing to this proposal for a directive .
- ( NL ) Banking secrecy makes it appealing to have savings outside one 's own country as a means of evading income tax or property tax .
The EU has been unable to solve this cross-border problem for the past 13 years .
All proposals to make the existence of foreign capital visible to national tax offices have , further to opposition , subsequently been withdrawn .
Precisely in this area , each Member State in the Council has the capacity to thwart a regulation .
If a scheme is not put in place in time for the expected accession of ten new Member States in 2004 , it will probably not enter into force in the foreseeable future .
For me , this is a reason to approve the compromise whereby Belgium , Luxembourg and Austria can continue to levy tax at source for another seven years while the other Member States adopt a scheme for the cross-border exchange of information .
Despite this , the problem is not completely solved by a long chalk , as long as wealthy people can transfer their capital to a separate legal entity which falls outside the scope of such an exchange of information .
I have noted that a majority of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs wish to exempt this latter group , which contravenes the proposal of the rapporteur .
In addition , the condition agreed among the ministers only to apply the scheme if , for example , Switzerland adopts the same scheme can , once again , lead to inertia .
I voted against the adoption of the report by Mr Pérez Royo on the proposal for a Council directive to ensue effective taxation of savings income in the form of interest payments within the Community .
The text of the amended proposal does not mention the agreement reached on this issue at the Feira European Council nor does it mention , more specifically , the following crucial point , which is worded as follows :
' Once sufficient reassurances with regard to the application of the same measures in dependent or associated territories and of equivalent measures in the named countries have been obtained , and on the basis of a report , the Council will decide on the adoption and implementation of the directive no later than 31 December 2002 , and do so by unanimity . '
This has become an essential condition for the entry into force of the directive .
. Whilst the Labour Group supports the " Feira " approach to this matter , it is concerned that amendments in this report voted through undermined the cooperative basis already agreed .
. Mr President , for too long the EU banking sector has been permitted to operate in a culture of secrecy for fiscal purposes .
Not only does this contradict the EU 's aims to have more transparency and openness , but it also creates a situation whereby there is unfair tax competition .
Therefore , I wholeheartedly welcome moves by the Commission to tighten up this situation and combat harmful tax practices once and for all .
However , it is vital , as this report points out , that this directive should apply to dependent territories , such as the Channel Islands .
If these were to be excluded , the entire directive would be undermined by those who choose to bank in certain preferential tax havens .
This directive will do much to ensure that the single market is not distorted by asymmetric tax regimes and it will create a situation whereby , after a transition period of three years , Member States will exchange information on savings income received by non-residents .
These moves will enhance European citizens ' rights vis-à-vis big banking corporations .
Mr President , the British Labour Members did not support this report .
We do not support the extension of the marketing scheme for nuts .
We recognise , however , that production is commonly found in less-favoured areas , principally in Spain , and that much of the production is barely competitive and brings little economic return .
For these reasons it would make more economic sense to support the affected regions by a comprehensive programme for alternative crops or other activities that could be financed through the Rural Development Programme .
Our vote accordingly urges the Commission to bring forward proposals to this effect .
We realise that these views are not universally popular but believe that they should ultimately result in a higher standard of living for the people affected .
This is preferable to continued subsistence living and uncertain financial provision from CAP funds .
We are critical of Mr Bautista Ojeda 's report on certain nuts and locust beans .
In our view , the amendments tabled represent , in general , an out-of-date agricultural policy which does not meet the conditions and needs of modern global society .
In the light of this , and with a view to the impending general review of the EU 's agricultural policy , we have chosen to vote against the report in its entirety .
The support regime for making the nut , locust bean and hazelnut sector more efficient has helped modernise production .
This process has been justified on the grounds that the sector is an important source of employment in parts of the Mediterranean region .
However , support of this kind cannot be provided for ever .
It is only right that these sectors should be covered by the common organisation of the market in fruit and vegetables .
It is not , however , reasonable for the committee to propose a statement to the effect that the support system should be made permanent in order to guarantee the survival of the sector .
Instead , the Commission should conclude its analysis of how competitive production is ( while the present support system is extended by a year in accordance with the Commission 's proposal ) and then decide as to the consequences .
Mr President , the British Labour Members voted against the Cunha report .
Our objective is a fundamental reform involving withdrawal of financial support for tobacco production .
The proposal to extend the present financial provision is unacceptable .
So too was the amendment in the report which would reduce the Commission proposals for higher premia for the Community Tobacco Fund .
However , the economic and social importance of tobacco in certain regions must be taken into account .
The Commission must bring forward measures to develop alternative sources of income with a greater degree of urgency than it is currently showing .
Recognising this as the priority we voted for Amendment No 21 .



Mr President , the Cunha report , which deals with the regulation permitting the financing of tobacco growing in Greece , Spain and Italy , especially , has forced me - like Mr Ebner , who spoke a moment ago - to abstain because many pensioners are smokers , and therefore I cannot be against tobacco , but many of them unfortunately become seriously ill and die partly because throughout their lives they have breathed in the smoke from cigarettes smoked by others in their presence .
I am therefore in favour of those who want to smoke , provided they do so outdoors , in the open air , because it is their own business , and I am also in favour of doing everything possible so that those who do not want to breathe smoke-polluted air are not forced to do so .
I therefore abstained , and I hope the problem will soon be solved in this way , which I think is very fair .
. ( EL ) The Commission proposal for a regulation on tobacco is unacceptable .
It is unacceptable politically because it disadvantages tobacco farmers , on the pretext of protecting health , when the Commission has spent millions on products such as red meat and alcohol , which are also harmful to health .
It is unacceptable socially because it disadvantages tens of thousands of tobacco-growing families in the poorest areas of the European Union , who are unable to grow alternative crops .
It is unacceptable to the state because phasing out subsidies for Community tobacco will not reduce consumption by a single cigarette .
All it will do is increase sales by American multinationals .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development accepted my amendment to delete recital 5 which talks of phasing out tobacco subsidies .
It also accepted my amendments on replacing premiums on Tsebelia - Mavra and on conducting a special study into the ratio between Community production , imports and tobacco consumption .
Despite the fact that I beg to differ with the Committee on Agriculture 's resolution on certain points , it is on the right track if tobacco growing is to be maintained and it has my support .
.
( DE ) We need to look at the ' tobacco ' sector as a whole and take a balanced approach to the various areas ( CAP and the environment , economic and social cohesion , public health ) .
Studies by the Commission into this are under way and their results and findings will need to be incorporated in specific proposals .
We should not delude ourselves that , if we reduce tobacco growing , everyone will stop smoking in the EU .
We must accept that tobacco will then be imported from third countries , where we cannot do anything about tobacco growing , while jobs are being lost in the EU .
We have a duty towards the people who earn a living from growing tobacco and we must offer them reasonable alternatives .
Restructuring measures could be funded from the new area within the Community Tobacco Fund , the budget for which needs to be increased by 3 % .
I also call for information and awareness campaigns to be stepped up on the damage which tobacco consumption causes to health .
In August 1967 , the Commission consulted the European Parliament for its opinion on the first proposal on a regulation to establish a common organisation of the market in the tobacco sector .
I was appointed rapporteur by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , which examined the proposal over the course of nine meetings , adopted my report in April 1969 and debated it in Strasbourg in May 1969 .
Why am I recalling this ?
Because , at that time , we proposed a new type of market organisation based on a contract system , providing , within the framework of the Community preference , a fair income for producers , as well as social measures and assistance for changing activity .
I would like to make it clear that I do not believe that , on the pretext of combating nicotine addiction , we must phase out raw tobacco cultivation in the Community .
There are regions where tobacco growing is a major source of income for small farmers and where changing activity , either to undertake growing other crops or to carry out other economic activities , is extremely difficult , if not impossible .
In 1969 , we had already written that social measures and assistance for changing activity could be justified much more easily than financing excess production of varieties which do not find a buyer on the market .
We pointed out that measures for changing activity as well as those aimed at enhancing tobacco growing in a quantitative and qualitative manner should be integrated in the regional policy and the policy for improving agricultural structures .
We even warned that selling surpluses on the global market could only harm associated countries and the interests of the Community 's external trade policy .
As it is never too late to make amends , it is justified that we support our rapporteur today in order to restrict ourselves to changing the Commission 's proposals solely from a technical perspective and to postpone the in-depth political debate on the future regime on raw tobacco until 2003 .
( Speech shortened pursuant to Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
We are critical of Mr Cuhna 's report on leaf tobacco .
In our view , the amendments tabled represent , in general , an out-of-date agricultural policy which does not meet the conditions and needs of modern global society .
In the light of this , and with a view to the impending general review of the EU 's agricultural policy , we have chosen to vote against the report in its entirety .
. ( NL ) The European Union pursues a policy which , on the one hand , discourages the smoking of tobacco products while , on the other , encouraging the production of tobacco by granting subsidies to tobacco-growing farmers .
Fortunately , there are now plans afoot to phase these subsidies out , but the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development is still opposed to these plans .
This committee draws attention to the socio-economic importance of the production of tobacco , which is located in the poorest regions of the EU , and to the difficulty of switching over to other crops .
In the same way , this committee could refer to the importance of the production of the raw materials for cocaine by the farmers in the poorest regions of Columbia .
The difference is that , in one case , we provide subsidies and , in the other , we tolerate a situation in which , under American influence , armed action is taken against these farmers and foreign aircraft take off from Dutch colonial territory to carry out reconnoitring exercises with a view to spraying toxins .
Applying double standards lacks all credibility .
The money used for the tobacco subsidies could be better spent on informing the public about the harmful effects of tobacco consumption and on supporting regions that switch to other crops .
I emphatically condemn the rapporteur 's opposition to this solution .
It is , in the long term , unacceptable for the money of EU citizens to be used to subsidise tobacco cultivation in certain Member States .
It is important , particularly from a public health point of view , to stop subsidising tobacco cultivation .
The high levels of subsidy militate against conversion to other crops .
The Christian Democrats are therefore in favour of phasing out tobacco subsidies in line with the Commission 's proposal .
Tobacco growing plays a very important role , especially in the less favoured regions of Europe .
About 130 000 landowners and 400 000 seasonal workers are involved in tobacco production and processing in the European Union .
These figures alone are enough to justify and provoke a study on the social and economic costs of suppressing aid to tobacco , even before we get to the political debate on this crop 's future in the European Union .
In any case , restrictions on tobacco growing in Europe would have no effect on consumption except to turn European consumers towards tobaccos from outside the European Union , which are of much poorer quality and certainly more harmful to health .
Added to this is the fact that Commission document COM ( 2001 ) 264 of 15 May 2001 on sustainable development stresses that ' political leaders should determine the pros and cons for other political contexts and take them into account .
A thorough evaluation of all the effects of a proposed political action must include estimates of its environmental and social impact both inside and outside the EU . '
As European Republicans , we therefore believe that the Commission should make a concerted effort to promote studies and research into possible alternative crops that would maintain the rural fabric in a sustainable manner .
We agree with the draftsman , Mrs Redondo Jiménez , that the political debate on tobacco should be held over until Parliament has received an evaluation report on the management of the fund , with any proposed amendments and improvements .
For the reasons given above , we say ' no ' to the under-cover gradual elimination of subsidies for tobacco growing ; we call for the current contribution levels for the research fund activities to be maintained for 2002 / 2003 / 2004 , since agronomic research is today one of the most important ways of making tobacco consumption less harmful to health ; and we support the amended report by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
- ( NL ) According to the Dutch Government , European agricultural policy is in need of reform .
This is reportedly due to enlargement and the fear that , soon , a huge contribution will have to be made to the EU budget .
As we all know , the Dutch watch their pennies .
I support the call for a policy review . However , my reason for doing so is not enlargement , but the fact that agricultural policy includes schemes that are completely unrelated to healthy agriculture .
The common organisation of the market in the raw tobacco industry is , for a variety of reasons , unhealthy .
Although I recognise that agricultural policy must address the social dimension , as well as the economic dimension , of operational management , this common organisation of the market has swung completely towards social policy .
An industry is being maintained which is both harmful to public health and unprofitable .
The premiums remove all incentive from the farmer to adapt his agricultural plan .
In this way , he stands to lose out all round .
Tobacco is a product which damages public health .
I should like to invite MEPs who wish to challenge this notion to initiate proceedings against the warning on cigarette packets .
The argument that the market demands tobacco and that current European production must thus be maintained is a specious argument quoted by various Members of this House .
After all , market demand does not mean that production must be subsidised .
If this is set to become a commonly held notion in agricultural policy , the net payers in the Union are in for a rough ride .
Adjustments to the common organisation of the market in the rough tobacco industry must encourage growers to look for alternative crops .
The Commission proposal is promising . Reference is made in no uncertain terms to the gradual abolition of subsidies , while measures are introduced to develop alternative sources of income .
The rapporteur , Mr Cunha does not do Europe any favours by wishing to delete this Commission comment .
This is why , together with 31 other Members of this Parliament , I have tabled an amendment whereby this report would expressly call for tobacco production subsidies to be phased out .
. ( PT ) We are still waiting !
The specific measures in force for the outermost regions are inadequate and only cover the fields of agriculture and fisheries - a much more modest framework than the one established ten years ago when the POSEI programmes were launched and one which squanders the possibilities opened up by Article 299 ( 2 ) of the Treaty establishing the European Community , and this is both incomprehensible and unacceptable .
Even in the fields that the measures do cover , their overall financial provisions have remained the same , and so , in relative terms , they are worth less today than when the measures were launched .
In agriculture , some small improvements have been made to the framework of measures , and in fisheries , aid has been extended for the disposal of certain products , as is now being proposed once again , for a further year .
What is needed are permanent schemes , periodically adapted and supported by sufficient overall financial provisions , not only in agriculture and fisheries but also in energy , the environment , communications , the new technologies and support for small and medium-sized enterprises .
The Community system of support for the disposal of some fishery products in certain outermost regions , including the Autonomous Region of Madeira , a system established in 1992 following on from the POSEI programmes , has been subject to successive extensions and revisions .
The need to adopt specific measures for the outermost regions with Article 299 ( 2 ) of the Treaty establishing the European Community as a legal base has been constantly reiterated by Parliament .
There can , therefore , be no doubt that it is appropriate to maintain instruments of support for the outermost regions , as laid down in the proposal for a Council regulation presented by the Commission .
I therefore offer my unreserved support to this proposal for a regulation , which seeks to extend the system in force by one year , until 31 December 2002 , thereby ensuring the continuity of the legal framework of the system to compensate for the additional costs incurred as a result of remoteness in the marketing of certain fishery products .
A one-year extension will enable the Commission to come up with a new support system to enter into force after 1 January 2003 , in light of the assessment currently being made of the impact of these support measures on the fisheries sector in the outermost regions .
- ( NL ) The conclusion of fisheries agreements by the EU with Developing World countries , which include many former colonies of current EU Member States , sounds better than it is .
Everyone talks about the mutual benefit .
For those countries , the shortage of funding is solved to a certain extent ; for us , the shortage of fish .
It means that European ships can use those waters for fishing at the expense of the European taxpayer who pays for three quarters of the compensation paid to the less wealthy countries involved .
These are countries which have to sell their rights due to poverty .
Gabon , which is once again selling fishing rights for a three-year period , is itself obliged to import fish .
Agreements of this kind are at the expense of these countries ' own coastal fishing , certainly if it is assumed that the protected territorial waters which fall outside the scope of the agreement extend for only six , instead of twelve , miles .
The rapporteur dutifully refers to the need for scientific research , the environmental drawbacks , alternative funding , development aid and the disadvantages for the countries involved .
I share his views on many of the aspects he includes in his recitals but , unlike Mr Maat , I am not in favour of continuing with agreements of this kind .
. We are very unhappy with the fisheries agreements between the EU and third countries as we are aware that within this agreement with the Gabonese Government 40 % of the money should be set aside for conservation measures .
Due to a lack of good governance , we are concerned that these funds may not be used for the purposes for which they were intended , and thus the Conservative Delegation abstained on the final vote .
I voted in favour of this report .
We must face the fact that the rate of biodiversity decline and loss in Europe and throughout the world continues to increase .
The existing measures do not seem to be sufficient to reverse current trends , particularly the decrease in the number of species and their habitat , ecosystems and genes .
Europe must fulfil a specific role , boosting initiative and providing impetus in this area and it must not merely voice pious hopes that will not be followed up with action .
To begin with , Europe must ensure that environmental legislation is applied .
Too many Member States , for reasons connected with their national political situation , resist transposing certain directives into their law in a swift and efficient manner . This is particularly true of the birds and habitats directives .
We must also take action in the areas of agriculture and fisheries .
Agriculture must play a key part , and the new CAP must be radically reformed and account taken of the requirements of sustainable development .
In the area of fisheries , it is essential that we provide for short- and medium-term coherent measures in order to preserve or restore biological diversity where it is at risk .
Lastly , preserving biological diversity does not mean we have to put a stop to the research effort and the development of knowledge .
Also , in the area of GMOs , for example , although we must not disregard the precautionary principle , we must support objective and step-by-step scientific validation of these experiments .
- ( NL ) In less than a century , mankind has changed the world beyond recognition , and certainly not only for the good .
The world population has risen enormously , previously virgin territory has been bisected by traffic connections , and large areas have been seized for the production of food , the growing of industrial crops and urbanisation .
Tropical forests are being cut down or burnt down on a massive scale , animal species become extinct due to economic exploitation , oceans are emptied of fish stocks , indigenous peoples are driven out of their territories , and plants and animals are being patented .
What until recently was still considered progress is nowadays increasingly seen as a threat to the future .
This is why it is so important to do more to protect what is left of natural plant and animal life and to promote the survival of people who , since time immemorial , have lived in sparsely populated areas surrounded by rich fauna and flora .
This group of people are becoming significantly impoverished and are therefore forced to move to the cities or destroy their natural surroundings to allow for more industry and intensive agriculture .
Appropriate measures include support for non-governmental organisations , adapting development plans for the Developing World and changing the EU 's agricultural policy .
In the midst of all the changes for the worse , the adoption of this proposal with a view to protecting bio-diversity represents a little ray of hope , although I am not confident about its outcome .
I voted in favour of this report .
The European Union , and the European Parliament in particular , consider the protection of citizens , their environment , their daily lives and their health to be of great importance .
Balanced texts on these subjects are very often approved at Community level .
It is apparent to us , however , that the transposition of a number of directives by the Member States is being unjustifiably delayed .
The directive on urban waste water treatment is an example of a directive that has been poorly applied .
It was adopted in 1991 with the aim of protecting the environment against the effects of urban waste water and biodegradable waste water discharge from the food industry .
When it was applied , the directive brought about a measured improvement in water quality .
The Member States ' main duty is to put in place systems for collecting and processing waste water and to respect a pre-established timetable .
However , not only are some Member States delaying in passing on all the information required to carry out an objective assessment of this directive but , even worse , others are not communicating any information on this subject .
This is absolutely unacceptable !
I therefore demand that the time the Member States take to do this should not increase , that all the information is passed onto the Commission , as stipulated in the directive which was adopted in a timely manner by the Council .
I came out in favour of the Commission 's launch of infringement procedures in cases where the criteria for identification of sensitive areas have not been respected or taken into account .
- ( NL ) Candidate countries are keen to call attention to the way in which the city of Brussels treats its urban effluent and thereby conclude that environmental rules only apply on paper and not in practice .
Of the 527 agglomerations comprising more than 150 000 inhabitants , 94 discharge their effluent unprocessed into the environment and 134 others provide insufficient information .
More than 43 % are therefore in default .
The data for the reference date in 1998 is not yet available , and it is even unknown how many infringement procedures are pending at the European Court of Justice .
All of this confirms that the EU is mainly an economic community which sets large multinational companies free from national rules that hinder their operations .
Other matters receive far less attention , and useful rules remain hollow phrases .
In this case , it is not irresponsible companies that are to blame but failing government .
It is important , however , to identify the cause of this failure .
Large cities have many problems and receive far too little funding from their national governments , which economise with a view to reducing taxes and enhancing the profitability of industry and the stability of the euro .
This is why these cities fall into disrepair and are unable to carry out the necessary renovation works .
This too could be clarified if we were to back the rapporteur in her just endeavours to secure openness .
Industrial and domestic pollution has become the main cause of degradation of our European waterways , only 40 % of which are attaining the quality objectives set according to different uses .
To tackle this potentially harmful situation , the Council and Parliament reacted by adopting the so-called ' urban waste water treatment ' directive in 1991 .
Like most of my colleagues in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , I condemn the fact that 11 years after its adoption and four years after the deadline for cities with a population equivalent of above 10 000 to be provided with collecting systems and waste water treatment plants , there are many Member States who still do not conform to this directive 's legally binding timetable .
I also regret the fact that the Committee on the Environment has not adopted one of the amendments that I tabled , namely a common sense amendment which explained the reasons why so many Member States have not yet applied this directive .
It is probably because the very short deadlines imposed by Directive 91 / 271 / EEC ( six and a half years for water treatment in sensitive areas ) did not take into account the situation of several large Member States ' cities .
These cities still did not have an urban waste water treatment plant in 1991 and also had to conform to other common European standards in the areas of the award of public contracts and studies into environmental effects .
Need we point out that the average time limit for awarding public contracts in the sector is three years , need we also stress that a water treatment plant with a connection system for collecting sewage costs an average of EUR 400 million ?
To sum up , a good piece of Community legislation is one which chooses between what is desirable and what is feasible .
We must note that the drafting of the ' urban waste water treatment ' directive has failed to adhere to this essential rule .
. ( EL ) The ' steel crisis ' is proof most positive of the shortcomings of the market economy and neo-liberal system which the USA and the European Union are determined to impose on the world .
It demonstrates yet again that the capitalist system is in too deep a state of crisis to respond to any measures to manage it , even the World Trade Organisation 's ' rules of good conduct ' for free trade and free competition .
The United States has no hesitation in violating any agreements made in order to defend their interests .
This crisis has once again brought the antagonism within the international imperialist system and the more general conflict between the centres of imperialism vying for hegemony to the surface .
The American imperialist system has no hesitation in taking measures which hit the economy of the European imperialist system and the European imperialist system has no hesitation in hitting back , despite its amazing willingness to tread the same path and vie for its share of the spoils of military opportunism .
The demands of the American trades union have clearly been used as a pretext for the decision by the Bush administration to impose customs tariffs , a decision taken on the back of the more general crisis to hit the capitalist economy after the worst year 's international trading for 25 years and after a fall of 38 % in American steel imports over the last three years .
The workers stand to gain nothing from this wrangling .
In the end , American workers will not escape restructuring and unemployment and European workers will not ward off the spectre of redundancies by running to the WTO .
What the USA and the ? U are doing their best to save are the profits of the steel industries .
But even if they manage to limit the fallout from the present crisis , another one will be along shortly .
This is typical of social systems which have long run out of anything to offer society , and capitalism is one such system .
The only way out is to overturn it , however difficult that may seem under present circumstances .
Crises like the steel crisis bring new opportunities for action by the working classes ; they can be used to rally the workers and they lay bare the ugly face of capitalism .
The European Parliament resolution only skims the surface of the problem and tries to deal with it within liberalist parameters .
It is interesting that the European Parliament resolution accuses the United States of failing to restructure the steel industry promptly , as the European Union did .
In other words , it accuses it of failing to close enough companies and make enough workers redundant unlike , for example , the Greek steel industry .
That is why the MEPs of the Communist Party of Europe voted against the resolution .
The attitude and decisions adopted by the US in order to shamefully protect its steel industry at the expense of European interests , perfectly illustrate that , beyond wonderful speeches and liberal statements , what now dominates the world is the law of the strongest . This is what George W. Bush is relying on in this case ; take another look at the fable of the Wolf and the Lamb by Jean de la Fontaine .
That is why Europe must take firm action using the legal means provided for within the framework of the WTO , but also using all the other available means of exerting pressure at a time when the United States continues to call on other shared aims in its fight against terrorism .
This situation is proof of the true nature of American-style globalisation .
It sums up the speeches on the benefits of free competition that is lacking in rules .
It reassures those who believe that we need a political Europe that is capable of existing and also to influence the management of world affairs .
- ( NL ) For years , the US has been the champion of free trade , insofar as this means that others have to open up their markets for American products without import restrictions .
There is a continuous threat of trade wars if American products are subjected to requirements in terms of the environment and consumer protection .
The EU has largely adopted this free trade ideology . However , it is becoming increasingly evident that this free trade too is subordinate to American self-interest and is only supported if it leads to the favouring of American companies .
The leading group in America considers its own country to be the best in the world .
Like the Soviet Union and China in the past , the US derive from this pretension the right to do everything they do not allow others to do .
Accordingly , international impunity is demanded for American war criminals , unilateral threats are made to use nuclear weapons and European steel is banned from the American market by means of an import levy .
One of the lessons the EU should draw from this is that free-trade ideology leads to accidents .
Europe should focus more on economic self-sufficiency , in other words autarchy , rather than on promoting imports , exports , globalisation and growing mutual dependence on the US and Japan .
This is the best way to steer clear of any trade wars and economic instability imported from outside Europe .
Transatlantic relations are currently in turmoil .
The root of the problem is the offensive of the US Government , which is using its military victory in Afghanistan to strengthen and consolidate its superpower .
However , America 's quest for global supremacy is also giving rise to clashes and tension amongst the ruling classes in countries at both the centre and the fringes of the globe .
The current conflict concerning the tax introduced by the United States on steel imports is an obvious manifestation of this .
American imperialism is willing to impose ' global deregulation ' , but does not rule out the use of protectionist measures when it feels its interests are threatened .
I did not , however , vote for this joint resolution .
The European Union 's opposition is merely a way of supporting European multinationals in a ruthless economic war .
Above all , we support workers throughout the world , including those in the United States .
We do not support the interests of multinationals against other interests .
The more the EU continues to ' combat ' the United States , the more of their policy it adopts .
Therefore , the ' Lisbon process ' , whose aim is to transform the EU into ' the most competitive economy in the world ' , seeks to erode , through liberalisation , privatisation and excessive commercialisation , the living conditions of the working population in Europe and in the Developing World .
I voted in favour of this report .
This recommendation is based on a realistic and modern vision of the European economy .
The economic slowdown in the United States is having repercussions within the European Union .
However , this fact alone cannot explain the weak results posted by a number of Member States .
There are , in fact , domestic problems that must be resolved , and structural reforms are expected .
All European consumers must be able to freely choose their service provider .
Furthermore , an innovative competition policy , resisting all the dominant positions , is emerging within the European Union .
This approach must be encouraged , particularly by involving all the parties concerned so that we can be more effective , both personally and collectively .
This does not mean reforming against the actors , but to make these sectors develop in conjunction with them .
It is also essential to take specific measures in the areas of education , training and research development if we wish to retain highly competent employees and ensure that our businesses are as competitive as possible .
This report also proposes to increase the retirement age for workers who wish to remain active .
Today 's widespread practice of compulsory retirement is an enormous waste of skills , talent and experience .
These experienced people can still fulfil worthwhile tasks in our businesses .
Lastly , analysts show that the current economic slowdown could have been much more serious were it not for Monetary Union .
Therefore , those who are now driven by concerns regarding their domestic policy and are advocating a return to the past , have got the wrong century , and are confusing personal interest with general interest .
. ( EL ) Yet again , faced with a Commission recommendation on the broad economic policy guidelines , the European Parliament report has endorsed the anti-grass roots policies of the European Union which demolish the rights acquired by the workers for the sake of monopoly interests .
Yet again , the workers are being called on to pay the price of the slump caused by antagonism between imperialist systems , the way in which the monopolies operate and act and the shameless goal of increasing the return on capital .
The report goes overboard about stability and convergence programmes and coordinating the Member States ' application of anti-grass roots policies " which take into account the complex nature of the world recession " .
Under pressure from the monopolies , taking political decisions which result in lower labour costs and national insurance contributions , circumventing collective agreements and working hours and introducing lower-paid , flexible forms of work are all applauded and re-tabled as proposals .
The ' problem of Europe 's aging population ' is being used as a pretext for reforming pension systems or extending people 's working lives by raising the retirement age and cutting pensions , that is , by phasing out the state 's social security obligations and encouraging privatisation of the health and welfare sector .
Dismantling the insurance system and arranging working times to suit employers by making part-time work and ' flexible ' working arrangements the rule will simply create a huge army of employable people with no rights or entitlements , enslaved to the unaccountability of big business .
Pressure to sell off the national silver is being stepped up , with the call for faster privatisation by liberalising the electricity , natural gas and transport sectors and privatising the utilities and liberalising services of general interest , never mind the impact on workers or consumers .
The MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece will be voting against this report , which secures a guaranteed level of poverty for the workers and maximum profits for big business , which is getting stronger and stronger and intends to demolish workers rights and make part-time work the rule .
The workers will condemn and oppose these barbaric and inhumane policies by fighting to try and calm the impending storm and we shall be by their side .
The report by the former trade unionist Mr Bruno Trentin begins with a guideline which has the merit of being perfectly clear at least : ' the priorities ? should involve reducing labour costs ' .
It continues with incoherent proposals whereby we could reduce taxes and social security contributions , while at the same time ensuring ' that pensions and health services are fully maintained ' .
Due to a lack of understanding of the reasons behind the economic recovery of 1997-2001 and the recent economic downturn , the report proposes solutions , such as the strict application of the inapplicable Stability and Growth Pact , which can do nothing more than to aggravate the current recession .
The report stresses efforts to promote training and R & D , as if , in the area of employment , spending on these could replace demands for salary increases and an overall reduction in working time .
It dares to mention ' social cohesion ' whilst the lower taxes and social security contributions that it recommends can lead to nothing more than the formation of inequalities .
I therefore had no reservations in voting against this mediocre and hypocritical report which should bring shame upon its authors .
From the outset , the title of this report clearly expresses its objective : to provide the EU with a harmonised taxation policy .
It is disconcerting , therefore , that the Della Vedova report begins by making a sort of semi-sincere confession that tax policy must remain within the exclusive competence of the Member States whilst the rest of the text goes on to advise how the Union can go about acquiring the same prerogative .
It is true that we have had a close shave .
The text that was voted for in committee was a vast improvement on the proposal of the rapporteur , who perceived a European tax to be an opportunity to reaffirm the federal principle of European integration .
The majority of Members of this House thought it was more prudent to delete this excess candour and replace it with a text which , in the end , hides behind a certain type of liberalism , recommending lower taxes before eventually demanding moving to the use of taxation policy instruments that are controlled by Community authorities , the Commission and Parliament itself .
By inching its way along as usual , the House is making progress , admittedly , but in much the same way as a crab .
And we have still only made half as much progress as we intended .
The proposals regarding VAT are not bold enough .
We should have , on the one hand , reaffirmed that each nation is sovereign in this area and , on the other hand , made broader proposals than those which aim to make NGOs exempt from paying VAT and to include , for example , all the cultural events staged by non profit-making associations .
A report that clearly stated that tax policy is a matter for each nation and which recommended improved coordination between the Member States in this area would have received my vote .
Unfortunately , the report contains nothing of this nature .
- ( NL ) Nobody likes to pay taxes but , without taxes , our lives would be in chaos , and only the fittest would survive .
Without taxes , there would be no universally available education , no health care , public transport or safety on the streets , and anyone suffering from long-term illness or unemployment would be condemned to a life of begging on the streets .
Unfortunately , the European Commission has other priorities , and the Italian radical Della Vedova is a faithful supporter .
He complains about the tax burden which , since 1970 , has risen , on average , from 35 % to 45 % and hopes that tax competition between the Member States will lead to a tax cut for companies .
Although he refers to the tax level as a domestic problem for every Member State , at the same time he pushes for companies to be able to choose their registered offices in a state where the tax burden is lowest .
He then goes on to focus on indirect taxes , such as VAT , and deems direct taxes , such as income tax , to be an unfair barrier to income from labour .
I agree with him that a tax on environmental pollution can be a viable alternative , but this will no longer be effective once the environment has become truly clean .
The emphasis on VAT , on the other hand , means that everyone pays the same amount for inevitable basic expenses and , as such , it widens the income gap between the rich and the poor .
This is why I reject his approach .
The Della Vedova report on the EU 's fiscal policy is an ill-assorted compilation of fiscal affirmations and claims .
Some of these requirements also blatantly contradict the Treaty , which provides for unanimity in fiscal matters .
For these reasons , I was forced to vote against the motion for a resolution .
. Paragraph 12 is inconsistent with the EPLP line that tobacco and alcohol excise duties should be harmonised upwards in order to achieve the social goal of reduced use and to indicate the strength of feeling held - that is , that you can tax for social reasons .
We voted in favour of the report as a whole because we believe that the EU should , for example , be able to accede to the European Convention on Human Rights , something that requires the EU to be given legal personality .
We believe that a change of this kind can , in itself , be made while retaining the existing decision-making models and institutional structure .
We do not therefore believe that the three pillars which at present constitute the EC and the EU should be combined in a single pillar .
The pillar structure reflects the political distinction made between supranational and intergovernmental areas of cooperation , and the fact that the pillar structure gives rise to a complicated legal situation is not a good enough reason for abolishing it .
If there had been doubt regarding the content of the Carnero González report - which calls on the European Union to acquire a legal personality - this was removed by yesterday 's debate .
The speakers attacked with federalist zeal , thus demolishing all the precautionary comments that the rapporteur had made to prove that his reform was perfectly innocent .
Mr Napolitano spoke of establishing a supranational entity .
Mr Duff mentioned the need for the Union to become a fully contracting party on the international stage .
Jo Leinen said that granting the Union a legal personality was essentially the final piece of the jigsaw of all the federalist proposals .
And lastly , the Commission declared that this was an ' essential ' reform , and that it would support the proposal .
It is clear , therefore , that the aim of granting a legal personality to the European Union , as well as the Communities , is to create a competent new actor on the international stage , which will use all the opportunities provided by Article 24 of the TEU ( particularly since its revision after the Nice Summit ) to gradually remove from Member States the autonomy of their foreign policy .
Europe would then have entered the era of the super-state , before the citizens have decided whether this is what they actually want .
We believe , on the contrary , as we explained in the minority opinion attached to the report , that the European Union must remain a unique organisation of major and responsible States - in other words , major and responsible national democracies - which are organised in a network .
It will be the work of the Convention coming together over the coming months to find the combination that best encourages voluntary synergy , without abolishing the freedom of choice of the people .
I cannot vote in favour of Mr Carnero González ' report for the following reason , among others :
I am in favour of intergovernmental cooperation , while the report is clearly supranational in character .
The rapporteur 's proposal that the EU be given legal personality is a threat to intergovernmental cooperation within the EU .
Transforming the EU into a legal person would be one more step towards a European federation , and that is something I cannot support .
. The overwhelming message of this report is that the European Commission has neglected the fish processing sector .
The sector is confronted with the impact of a whole host of EU legislation , from CFP management measures to hygiene and food safety , to the environment , and yet it is all too often ignored .
The waste water directive is a prime example where the concerns of the processing sector were overlooked .
I am therefore pleased that the Committee endorsed my amendments which emphasised that the impact of legislation should be fully assessed , and specifically , that the Commission should provide support for the development for water recycling systems , such as the one recently established by a processor in my own area in the north-east of Scotland .
Greater attention needs to be paid to structural support .
Processors have been hard hit by CFP management measures , from quota cuts to decommissioning , but received little or no assistance .
Structural support should be positive , not just reacting to management measures , but being proactive in supporting the sector , promoting new technologies and encouraging effective marketing .
That concludes voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 13.38 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
We shall begin with the joint debate on the following motions for resolution :
( B5-0146 / 2002 ) by Mrs Muscardini , on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , on Colombia ;
( B5-0149 / 2002 ) by Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , on Colombia ;
( B5-0159 / 2002 ) by Mr Gasòliba i Böhm and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , on the situation in Colombia ;
( B5-0160 / 2002 ) by Mr Lipietz and others , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , on the kidnapping of Ingrid Betancourt and the breaking off of the peace process in Colombia ;
( B5-0167 / 2002 ) by Mr Medina Ortega and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the breaking off of the peace process in Colombia ;
( B5-0168 / 2002 ) by Mr Marset Campos and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , on Colombia .
Mr President , we are all bound to regret the breakdown of the peace process that President Pastrana pushed forwards with so much political courage at the beginning of his mandate .
I must confess , Mr President , that having taken part , together with other Members of this House , in a meeting in Los Pozos with ' Tirofijo ' and the leadership of FARC , this decision comes as no surprise to me .
On that occasion we begged for the release of the European Union citizens kidnapped by FARC and also , at the request of his wife and daughter , of a Colombian senator who was ill .
Needless to say , we achieved nothing .
Today , Mr President , this Parliament must raise its voice once again to condemn all the murders , including the recent murder of senator Marta Catalina Daniels , all the violations of human rights in Colombia and to demand that FARC releases all the people it has kidnapped , including the Presidential candidate Ingrid Betancourt .
Our Parliament has always demonstrated its commitment to the way of peace and of dialogue to solve the conflict , but in the knowledge that dialogue must be sought by both parties and that a society cannot remain forever deaf , dumb and blind to violence .
Last Sunday , Colombian society demonstrated civil courage and democratic maturity .
This is why , Mr President , today more than ever and on the eve of the forthcoming Presidential elections , the international community and this Parliament and the European Union in general must continue to show solidarity and their support for Colombia 's legitimate government , for the entire spectrum of democratic forces and of civil society , with the demand , as always , that in order to overcome the serious problems affecting the country we must insist on the way of peace , harmony , reconciliation , justice and dialogue , and insist that the problems cannot be overcome by violence , because Colombian society is crying out for peace .

To conclude , Mr President , I feel that this Parliament should stand side by side with Colombia in this crucial exercise of the Presidential elections .
Mr President , once again we are talking about Colombia , a dearly loved country on the American continent but regrettably , once again , we are doing so because of the negative issues affecting it .
If we study recent events in Colombia , we generally see a discouraging and tragic picture , in which the human rights situation leaves much to be desired .
Nevertheless , we are optimists and must have faith and hope in the way of negotiation and of dialogue and in respect for tolerance , in order to achieve peace in Colombia once and for all .
Perhaps it would be appropriate on this occasion to mention an illustrious European , the German naturalist , Alexander von Humboldt , who , exactly 200 years ago , travelled to that part of the world and established the bases for cooperation between peoples and the defence of human rights .
Mr President , I can actually speak before Mrs Auroi , in order to give her time to arrive .
Various political groups tabled motions for resolutions and then we agreed on a joint motion for a resolution , that should now - I believe - have the support of most of the House .
As previous speakers have said , the situation in Colombia is a painful issue for all of us , because we had great hopes for the successful conclusion of the peace process .
President Pastrana has dedicated his mandate almost entirely to these efforts , with a series of very generous concessions to the guerrilla organisations : he has opened negotiations , both with FARC and the ELN and yet has achieved little .
In specific terms , he has given FARC a territory the size of Switzerland , an entire enclave in which they can travel with absolute freedom , and lastly , when it still looked as though negotiations might break down , President Pastrana even extended the agreements or negotiations , in an attempt to conclude an agreement .
During this extension phase , FARC launched a campaign of kidnappings and murders , which culminated in the murder of Senator Daniels and the kidnapping of a presidential candidate , Mrs Ingrid Betancourt .
At the same time , FARC is continuing its extortion activities , claiming a supposed right to impose taxes on drug-trafficking organisations , which I believe has completely stripped it of any legitimacy , because an organisation that takes part in acts of gratuitous violence and which , furthermore , tries to make money out of drugs trafficking , ultimately loses any basis for legitimacy .
At the moment , therefore , we are rather disillusioned and feel a degree of despair , although this does not mean that we are going to give up on the possibility that an agreement can be reached .
In other words , the first aspect is to state that FARC has failed to meet its commitments and has all but abandoned the peace process ; it has made it impossible for the government to negotiate , because you cannot negotiate with killers and kidnappers .
On the other hand , it is necessary to try to restart the peace process and to leave the door open for negotiations .
We in the European Union have always supported this process of negotiation , including practical proposals , designed to alleviate some of the specific social problems .
It has become clear that the definitive solution to the problem of Colombia does not simply involve an end to the violence , but that we must get to the root of the social and economic problems that are causing this .
In order to reach that point , however , peace must first be achieved on the ground .
I do not know at the moment whether it is possible to add a little trust and calm to the situation , but I would say that the European Union has - where the problem of Colombia is concerned - the advantage of distance and , furthermore , the willingness it has always shown to help Colombia with its exports , for example , in a range of key sectors .
Our resolution aims , therefore , on the one hand , to illustrate the responsibility of those who have caused the breakdown of the peace process and , on the other , to leave the door to negotiation open and to call on the European institutions to patiently continue with this lengthy and complicated task , by providing the aid necessary to make this process easier and , of course , by not giving in to despair , and instead by trusting that , ultimately , there will be a return to reason and to the negotiating table .
I believe that the European institutions can work together in this aspect , and we hope that the Commission can indeed help to resolve this deadly and longstanding conflict .
Mr President , I shall begin by reading a very short extract from the document that we were given today in the delegation to Central America , and I say ' read it ' , because I do not want anyone to believe that I am giving it my own interpretation .
The interventions I have heard so far strike me as somewhat lacking in balance .
I shall read the words of the non-governmental human rights organisation ' Human Rights Watch ' : ' The human rights situation clearly deteriorated in the course of last year .
In the first ten months of the year , the office of the Public Advocate recorded 92 massacres , which they defined as the killing of three or more people at the same place and at the same time .
Most were linked to paramilitary groups , followed by guerrillas .
The national epidemic of kidnappings , half of which were committed by guerrillas , gave no signs of abating . ?
The report also states that two million Colombians have been displaced and that this year , more people than ever before - 300 000 - have been displaced .
It also states that human rights workers , trade unionists , journalists , government investigators and community leaders continue to be murdered because of their work .
Mr President , we will be voting on a resolution today .
I prefer the resolution we voted for last year , which I felt was more balanced , because it noted and clearly condemned the ongoing fumigation of crops and the fact that alternative crops were not being promoted to prevent human disease and the constant attacks on biodiversity .
Last year 's resolution also stated that the European Union should adopt a different , non-militaristic position , which supports the defence of human rights , dialogue and peace .
We repeat this demand today and I agree with my fellow Members that this should be done .
This resolution also condemned the fact that , since 60 % of Colombians live on less than one dollar per day , it is very hard to achieve dialogue , agreements , or peace .
This is why , Mr President , I felt that some balance needed to be added to the previous interventions , although I agree with what most of my fellow Members have to say .
But it was necessary to mention other parties involved in the war in Colombia , who exert an enormous influence in the absence of peace .
Mr President , you will understand that , as a member of the Greens , it is particularly moving to be presenting this resolution as co-author , since Ingrid Bétancour is still currently being detained by members of the FARC , the violent paramilitary gang which has previously carried out assassinations of trade unionists or representatives of social movements from Colombian society .
My fellow Members have reiterated how much the Colombian people need peace and tranquillity , rather than this type of action .
Today , we still do not have any news regarding Mrs Bétancour 's situation which could put our minds at rest .
The governments involved and the Commission must therefore try to obtain some information and assist in Mrs Bétancour 's release .
But apart from this , as other speakers have said , we must welcome the statement by President Pastrana , who stated that he wanted to step up his fight against this type of action and provide effective guarantees for the security of the civil society in Colombia .
It is perfectly clear that , if President Pastrana leaves the door to negotiations open , then these negotiations must relate to the respect of human rights and restoring order in Colombia so that genuine democracy can finally be established in this country .
The European Union must therefore provide greater support for cooperation efforts , which will improve the human rights situation , and it must ensure that the European aid achieves its objective , in other words to assist civil society in Colombia .
Mr President , it is difficult for any of us in this House to comprehend why one human being should kill another , and yet in Colombia members of guerrilla and paramilitary groups kill each other and thousands of civilians without qualms , and in some cases with relish .
This resulted in over 400 massacres in 1999 .
Sadly , for those 400 massacres committed by the government , paramilitary groups and guerrilla groups , not one person was brought to trial .
The ordinary people of Colombia live and suffer in an environment of oppression caused not only by these paramilitary and guerrilla groups , but often at the hands of a government which is either unwilling or unable to protect them .
As a body that has consistently upheld fundamental human rights and social justice , we need to do what we can to contribute towards bringing peace to a country that has been living under the horrors of civil war for over four decades .
In our individual Member States , and collectively as the European Union , we must exert whatever pressure we can to bring the government and FARC back to the negotiating table , under a real ceasefire agreement genuinely observed by all parties to the conflict .
We must also support those groups working for peace within Colombia , which have provided a safe haven for civilians but have recently been under attack from the AUC and FARC .
Additionally we must persuade the United States to fund peace initiatives rather than simply giving more money to the Colombian Government for military and drug eradication purposes .
The people of Colombia are tired of the fighting .
We , as a democratically elected forum , must use our moral authority to help the people of Colombia in their struggle to bring to an end the conflict in their country .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the basic question is , are we going to stick to the peace process set up between the Colombian Government and the guerrillas or are we going to try and resolve the problem by some other means and , if we try to resolve it by some other means , exactly what means are we going to use ?
The only way forward we can accept is the peace process which , apart from anything else , is combined with changes urgently needed to Colombian society if it is to avoid going down the same road as Argentina .
The decision by President Pastrana is a decision to condone violence .
At the same time , apart from anything else , it legitimises action by the paramilitary groups which have murdered so many people in Colombia .
Unfortunately , the European Union , together with the United States , is supporting President Pastrana , meaning that it is supporting violence .
However , as you and I well know , ladies and gentlemen , violence begets violence , and more violence and yet more violence .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission shares Parliament 's concern about the current situation in Columbia and also shares the view expressed in the resolution , that negotiations are the only feasible way of helping to resolve the long-standing conflict in Columbia .
This position has been expressed in numerous statements .
The direct role which the individual Member States have played in this respect also deserves recognition here .
The Commission also welcomes the proposed support for the office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights in Bogota .
We have already helped here and we shall continue to offer our help in the future .
The Commission is also supporting the work of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees in Colombia .
The Commission is standing by its commitment to the peace process , hence Commissioner Patten and the Columbian foreign secretary recently signed an agreement on financing initial peace work .
We intend to continue supporting Columbian civil society in its efforts to establish peace through regional development and peace programmes .
The Commission is currently examining in which specific areas projects can be funded .
At the same time , we are offering the victims of the conflict our direct support in the form of humanitarian aid , which is being distributed by ECHO and non-governmental organisations .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Fischler .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolution :
( B5-0132 / 2002 ) by Mr Watson and others , on behalf of the Group of the European , Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , on the observer status of Taiwan in the WHO ;
( B5-0138 / 2002 ) by Mrs Frassoni and others , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , on the observer status of Taiwan at the May 2002 annual meeting of the World Health Organisation in Geneva ;
( B5-0147 / 2002 ) by Mr Collins , on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , on the observer status of Taiwan in the WHO ;
( B5-0150 / 2002 ) by Mrs Langenhagen and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , on the observer status of Taiwan at the May 2002 annual meeting of the World Health Organisation in Geneva .
Mr President , this debate is about Taiwan and the WHO , and all the political groups are agreed that we wish to give Taiwan the opportunity to participate as an observer at the Geneva Summit in a few weeks ' time .
Taiwan is a country with a very ambitious public health programme , and its people are among those with the longest average life span in Asia .
Infant mortality is low , and many of the diseases that a large number of countries in the world are still combating , such as cholera , chickenpox and malaria , have been eradicated .
A delegation from the Taiwanese health ministry visited us here in Strasbourg during the last part-session , and we had the opportunity then to hear a little about Taiwan 's experience .
Many valuable lessons have been learned in Taiwan , and there is a great willingness to be of help , both economically and in terms of sharing knowledge .
We know that the WHO is in great need of financial aid .
I also want to say something about Taiwan as a political entity .
My political group , the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , supports democratic developments in Taiwan .
We view what has been happening there with a very great deal of sympathy and support the Taiwanese people 's right to decide their own future .
A few months ago , we invited President Chen Shui-bian here to award him the Liberal International Freedom Prize , but the French authorities would not give him a visa .
We then tried to invite him to Belgium , and the Belgium authorities would not give him a visa either .
Instead , they referred to an EU agreement not to invite the President of Taiwan , because to do so would threaten relations with China .
Last week , we invited him to Sweden under a private arrangement , and he was not given a visa for my country either .
When I recently investigated what rules apply , I learned that there is no such agreement at EU level .
It would be illuminating to be told what really applies .
I think it is disgusting to grovel in this way to the Chinese dictatorship .
It should go without saying that a democratically elected leader should be given a visa when , for example , he receives an invitation from his Liberal colleagues .
Mr President , I concur with the previous speaker ; 23 million people live in a democracy in Taiwan , an established democracy , and Taiwan is by no means a country which causes us continual headaches .
Nonetheless , it is the topic of this urgent debate .
These 23 million people and their democratic society are excluded from international organisations .
This is not a country which is first and foremost an aid beneficiary ; it is a country which actively supports international organisations .
Taiwan has been actively involved in the WHO .
It would be a mistake if this country were unable to join the international community , which is why we could make a start by giving it observer status and letting it work with other international organisations in the future .
Perhaps there is some sort of half-way status which Taiwan could be granted .
My question to the Commission is , are you prepared to support Parliament here ?
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union is not just a political and economic success story ; we have also achieved health standards which many other countries can only dream of .
A good , healthy constitution is important to everyone here on earth , but it is only through access to information and medical care that public health can be improved .
And there is much that can only be done jointly and in synergy .
I am thinking , for example , of infectious diseases such as malaria , tuberculosis , AIDS and others .
The World Health Organisation and its current complement of 199 members have nailed their colours to the mast and are committed to improving health throughout the world .
Health is a valuable commodity which everyone has the right to enjoy , which is why I take the view that , in an area which affects everyone , no one who wants to help improve the welfare of people in their own and other countries should be excluded .
Taiwan has expressed a desire to help the WHO , both financially and technically , which is why I think there is not just good cause , it is imperative that Taiwan be granted observer status at the annual meeting of the World Health Assembly .
I have first hand experience of the political problems and tensions affecting Taiwan and , as in most cases , it is not just one side which is to blame .
But I am firmly convinced that we should not be led by political differences to stop a country joining international efforts in the health sector and I therefore call on the House to support this joint resolution .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission does , in principle , support Taiwanese efforts , and not just in the area under debate ; it supports all its efforts to become involved in the work of international agencies and organisations , provided that there are sufficient economic or other relevant grounds for such involvement .
However , its involvement must be compatible with the status of Taiwan and the EU one China policy .
We pushed for Taiwan 's membership of the WTO and , together with the United States , we helped oil the wheels of its accession .
We have also supported Taiwan 's involvement in several international organisations , including the OECD , its involvement in the Kyoto agreement on simplified , harmonised customs procedures and its involvement in several international fisheries organisations .
We are well aware of what Taiwan has achieved in the health sector and its increasing commitment in international aid and health operations , which is why we are in favour of extending contacts between Taiwan and the World Health Organisation , provided that the rules of the WHO so allow .
Unfortunately , however , it looks as if Taiwan does not meet the criteria set out in the WHO constitution for membership of the organisation , because only states can join .
There is some legal uncertainty as to whether the WHO rules would allow Taiwan observer status at the World Health Assembly .
We and the Member States shall be considering the legal situation in order to formulate a suitable position in the run-up to and at the forthcoming World Health Assembly in May .
We are also prepared , with the Member States , to re-examine the possibility of Taiwanese involvement in the work of the WHO in some other form , mainly through non-governmental channels , provided that any such involvement complies with the relevant WHO rules .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolution :
Zimbabwe
( B5-0139 / 2002 ) by Mrs Maes and others , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , on the situation in Zimbabwe ;
( B5-0158 / 2202 ) by Mr van den Bos and Baroness Nicholson of Winterbourne , on behalf of the Group of the European , Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , on the situation in Zimbabwe ;
( B5-0166 / 2002 ) by Mrs Junker and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on Zimbabwe ;
( B5-0169 / 2002 ) by Mrs Morgantini , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , on Zimbabwe ;
( B5-0173 / 2002 ) by Mr van Orden and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , on the situation in Zimbabwe ;
Moldova
( B5-0134 / 2002 ) by Mrs Thors and Baroness Nicholson of Winterbourne , on behalf of the Group of the European , Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , on the human rights situation in Moldova ;
( B5-0140 / 2002 ) by Mrs Schroedter and others , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , on the situation in Moldova ;
( B5-0145 / 2002 ) by Mr Belder , on behalf of the Group for a Europe of Democracies and Diversities , on the human rights situation in Moldova ;
( B5-0151 / 2002 ) by Mr Sacrédeus and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , on the rights of the parliamentary opposition in Moldova ;
( B5-0165 / 2002 ) by Mr Wiersma and Mr van den Berg , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the political situation in Moldova ;
( B5-0170 / 2002 ) by Mr di Lello Finuoli , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , on the situation in Moldova ;
Kyrgyzstan
( B5-0141 / 2002 ) by Mr Staes and others , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , and Mr Bowis and Mr Posselt , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , on the situation in Kyrgyzstan ;
( B5-0156 / 2002 ) by Mr Di Pietro and Baroness Nicholson of Winterbourne , on behalf of the Group of the European , Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , on the human rights situation in Kyrgyzstan ;
( B5-0164 / 2002 ) by Mr Sakellariou and Mr Koukiadis , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the situation in Kyrgyzstan ;
The case of Mr Hamma Hammami in Tunisia
( B5-0133 / 2002 ) by Baroness Nicholson of Winterbourne , on behalf of the Group of the European , Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , on Tunisia ;
( B5-0142 / 2002 ) by Mr Cohn-Bendit and Mrs Flautre , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , on the case of Mr Hamma Hammami ( Tunisia ) ;
( B5-0152 / 2002 ) by Mr Oostlander and Mr Morillon , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , on Tunisia ;
( B5-0161 / 2002 ) by Mr Pasqua , on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , on the case of Mr Hamma Hammami ( Tunisia ) ;
( B5-0162 / 2002 ) by Mrs Napoletano and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on Tunisia ;
( B5-0171 / 2002 ) by Mrs Boudjenah and Mrs Eriksson , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , on human rights in Tunisia and the case of Mr Hamma Hammami .
Zimbabwe
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , initial indications of the election result in Zimbabwe seem to point to a majority for President Mugabe . This was to be expected .
No effort has been spared to achieve this result , although the majority was smaller than anticipated .
Nevertheless , I see this as a moral victory for the opposition , which itself uses the term ' stolen elections ' .
Following the stolen elections in Chad and the rigged elections in Zambia , this is the third round of elections which , with the best will in the world , cannot be considered free and fair according to international standards , no matter how moderate a view some other African countries , for reasons probably known only to themselves , still take .
After all , the writing was on the wall : 4.5 million voters expected and 7.5 million ballots printed so as to be prepared for every eventuality ; too few polling stations to enable everyone to vote properly ; and the inevitable confusion about who had to vote where , since different elections needed to be held for different levels on the same day but at different locations .
These are only the technicalities which typify Mr Mugabe 's craftiness .
More important was the terror which preceded this , the obstructions put in place by the ruling elite in order to prevent the opposition from meeting , the monopoly of the state channels , the prevention of journalists from doing their job , the obstacles placed in the way of observers , the incidents of torture and the abductions , including even the abduction of important union leaders . The list goes on .
Even the ploy involving the distribution of corn , far away from the polling stations , was predicted by the opposition .
The performance about re-opening the polling stations was the icing on the cake , and yet we need to ask ourselves : what now ?
The elections were not conducted freely and fairly , but do we need to condemn them altogether ?
The elections in Zambia and Chad were not free and fair either .
However , we do need to maintain the sanctions .
I am not in favour of extending these , but they do need to be applied and monitored .
I do call for negotiations between the members of the majority and the opposition , for the country is anxious about a civil war .
Finally , I hope that a government of national unity , involving the opposition , will be set up .
The generation of independence fighters have belied their own nature .
The elections in Zimbabwe were an incredible farce , even by African standards .
Mr Mugabe made every effort to stay in power , using extremely brutal means .
Nothing was too extreme for the purpose of eliminating his opponents : violence , intimidation , murder , large-scale arrests and accusations of high treason .
Election laws were changed at the last minute .
There were selectively too few ballot stations , identity cards were seized , the media was not allowed to do its job and the observation of the elections was a joke .
Politically blind South African observers made absolute fools of themselves by declaring that the elections had been conducted fairly and freely .
Mugabe wants - by hook or by crook - to pursue his ill-fated policy which has led Zimbabwe to the brink of starvation , where 80 % of the population live beneath the poverty line and 60 % are unemployed .
Tougher sanctions must be used in order even further to isolate Mugabe internationally .
We should not punish the population for the wrong-doings of its leader .
What is the scope for tougher sanctions , according to the Commissioner ?
What will the Commission propose to the European Council in Barcelona ?
Unfortunately , democracy in Africa often leaves a great deal to be desired .
African solidarity with the dictator Mugabe is sadly a very bad omen .
This is why we must focus our political efforts not only on Zimbabwe , but also on the other countries in that region .
South Africa receives a great deal of aid from Europe but is unconcerned about the justified criticism levelled at its neighbour .
I pity Africa , I pity the population that has to suffer so much at the hands of incompetent , power-crazed and corrupt leaders .
When will we finally have a generation of democratic leaders in Africa ?
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it would certainly appear that Mugabe has won the elections .
I can still remember electoral victories claimed by presidents who were very soon overtaken , and were very soon presidents no more .
I do not wish to draw any direct parallels , but it seems to me that he should not be too quick to celebrate his victory over his opponents .
Especially as the elections were held under the worst possible conditions , with intimidation , police action against members and supporters of the opposition and so on .
What saddens me is not just the situation in Zimbabwe itself , but the fact that numerous African Heads of State and Government and President Mugabe are indirectly providing a shield , even as they acknowledge his election victory .
Perhaps this hides the fear of more neo-colonialism on the part of Europe or the United States of America and other countries .
That certain parties may be entertaining such thoughts is , of course , no concern of ours .
It may be the case , but it is not the policy of the European Union .
What concerns us is the people who are starving there , who are suffering repression there .
A few days ago , I was on a jury which awarded a prize to the Nobel prize-winner Amartya Sen. This man has stated time and again that democracy and development go hand in glove and cannot be separated .
Which is why I think that the European Union should do everything it can to create democracy and the conditions for economic development here too .
We , by which I mean everyone from the European Union due to attend the session of the ACP / EU joint parliamentary assembly in Cape Town , shall no doubt be addressing these concerns .
Most importantly , we must call on South Africa to do proper justice to its hugely important role in southern Africa .
Unfortunately , we shall also have to step up sanctions , despite the economic difficulties .
But , and I say it again , if his African neighbours were to work with the European Union in taking against this dictatorship , success would come quickly and we could really help the people in this sorely afflicted country .
Mr President , between 2000 and 2001 , this Parliament tabled and adopted more than six motions for resolutions on Zimbabwe and today , after last weekend 's elections , we are continuing to call for the rule of law and democracy to be re-established , for the process of land reform , which remains an unsettled issue , to be started and for the continuing land occupations to cease .
It was clear that , out of 15 000 independent observers , only some were given accreditation , that restrictions were imposed on the representative of the European Union and on the opposition and the European Union , therefore , considers that fraud clearly took place .
And as is so often the case , Mr President , it is the people that are suffering as a result of this situation , with more than 550 000 malnourished and more than 80 % living below the poverty line , with the health and education systems collapsing and with more than 2 000 people dying every week of AIDS .
This situation will only get worse unless we continue to put pressure on the Zimbabwean Government and sanctions are imposed and the only way we can contribute to democratic change is by helping the people , whilst at the same time exerting pressure on the government .
Mr President , in this seriously flawed presidential election , we have good grounds for believing that Mugabe in reality lost the vote , but merely contrived to win the count .
He will now be able to have his foot on the neck of the Zimbabwean people for another six years .
It represents a new low for democracy in Zimbabwe and a disaster not just for Zimbabwe , but for the whole of Southern Africa .
Mugabe personifies all the most negative strains in African development : corrupt and authoritarian power with state leaders lining their pockets at the expense of the people , racial division , the exploitation of envy , political violence and economic backwardness .
Zimbabwe is a beautiful and once prosperous country with the potential to be the bread basket for the region .
Instead , the economy is in chaos , with rampant inflation and unemployment and half a million of its people living on the edge of starvation , sustained only by world food aid .
Mugabe 's re-election will seriously exacerbate all of these problems .
I have to say that Mugabe realised that his game might be up some two years ago , ZANU-PF came close to losing the general election ; and that is why for the past two years - not just the past two weeks - he has been trying to fix the political system in his favour by a systematic campaign of terror and intimidation against anyone who opposed him .
This Parliament should pay tribute to Morgan Tsvangirai , the MDC activists and all those who have had the courage to stand up to Mugabe for all this time .
I have to say it is a pity that the international community took so long to wake up to the situation in Zimbabwe and that the European Union waited until the eleventh hour before imposing targeted sanctions .
At least we in this Parliament can hold our heads up . We have been active throughout the last two years .
The attitude of African countries has been particularly disappointing .
We always felt that South Africa , in particular , held the key to restoring genuine democracy and the rule of law in Zimbabwe .
However , South Africa 's leaders were found wanting .
They could not find it in their consciences to condemn what they perhaps saw as one of their liberation brothers .
What a pity for the people of Zimbabwe - all the people of Zimbabwe .
At least the Southern African Development Community election observer mission has felt able to recognise in its announcement yesterday that : ' the electoral process could not be said to adequately comply with the norms and standards for elections in the SADC region ' .
What they mean , I think , Mr President , is that the election was clearly rigged .
Certainly , that is the opinion of the few other international observers that remained .
How else do we explain , for instance , the bizarre declaration that turnout in the city areas loyal to Tsvangirai was low , while in the ZANU-PF rural strongholds , it was remarkably high ?
How else do we explain the missing ballot boxes which suddenly turn up stuffed up with Mugabe votes ?
The international community must maintain its resolve . It must not recognise the legitimacy of this election result .
There must be an intensification of the hunt for looted assets held overseas by Mugabe and his cronies .
There should be an extension of the EU blacklist , and we need to take further tough measures .
South Africa must begin to show leadership and demonstrate that it is committed to democratic principles in the region .
Our aim must be to help restore democracy , human rights and the rule of law to Zimbabwe and assist in the process of economic progress there .
Our tough resolution today is a contribution to this , and I hope the Council and the Commission will listen to us .
Mr President , the elections in Zimbabwe are a democratic joke .
The opposition 's election workers have been threatened , persecuted , imprisoned and killed .
Freedom of expression is non-existent .
Many Zimbabweans queued for hours and were still not allowed to vote .
Mr Mugabe has broken promise after promise and driven his country into the ground .
Under his leadership , Zimbabwe , a country with fantastic potential , has headed straight for the abyss .
It is worrying that so many African leaders have tried to explain away what has been happening in Zimbabwe and maintained that the elections were fair .
I assume that the Foreign Ministers and the Commission will discuss Zimbabwe in Barcelona and decide upon suitable , wider sanctions and a strategy to involve the whole region .
A lot of pressure must be exerted upon South Africa .
In no way can we recognise these elections as fair .
We waited far too long before taking action against Zimbabwe .
We hoped and believed .
Our former colleague , Mr Schori , had to be thrown out of the country before the sanctions were introduced .
We must not betray those who are fighting for democracy in Zimbabwe .
Mr President , as was to be expected , on 1 April , Zimbabwe 's current president , Robert Mugabe , will be sworn in as Head of State for another six years .
In my country , the Netherlands , 1 April is often associated with jokes .
If only that applied to the people of Zimbabwe .
In actual fact , the extension of Mugabe 's term of office is a bitter reality .
It is based on the official result of last weekend 's extended presidential elections , which was published yesterday .
The run-up to , as well as the course of , these elections is captured neatly in Zimbabwe as ' flee and fear elections ' .
In short , these Zimbabwean presidential elections were neither free nor fair .
The mere fact that many ballot stations are used as torture centres at night , where Mugabe 's uninhibited militia torture and humiliate political opponents , speaks volumes .
This abhorrent fact marks out the sinister context of Mugabe 's ruthless campaign to stay in power .
It is completely understandable why Mugabe 's main rival , opposition leader Morgan Tsvangirai , has rejected the election result as nothing but voter deception .
In this extremely difficult situation , what Tsvangirai 's party , the Movement for Democratic Change , needs most of all is level-headedness and wisdom .
He is reportedly looking for legal means to fight and revoke the official election result .
Tsvangirai and his men are certainly not seeking confrontation , according to their own sources .
Given the desolate political and socio-economic situation to which Mugabe 's thirst for power has led Zimbabwe , this attitude on the part of the Zimbabwean opposition deserves the support of the Council and the Commission . For an escalation into civil war will suck the country deeper into the quagmire .
Meanwhile , I would urge the Council and the Commission to join forces with the US administration in order to give Mugabe 's regime an even stronger international warning .
At the same time , we must consider how we can continue to bolster the constructive forces in Zimbabwe .
Those Western reactions to Mugabe 's disputable re-election which I have noted to date elicit this expectation .
This is so unlike some African opinions which claim the elections to be ' free and fair on the whole ' .
If this is truly the regional , political benchmark , then southern Africa is directly on course for instability .
Consequently , a European appeal to the South African authorities , in particular , is just as much called for .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , obstruction by the government notwithstanding , the European Union was able to follow the elections in Zimbabwe very closely and I should like to start by expressing my immense admiration of numerous people in Zimbabwe for their civil courage and for standing by their democratic convictions under such difficult circumstances .
The European Union has been observing events in Zimbabwe with growing concern .
Misgivings about the electoral process which the European Union voiced when Article 96 still applied have proven to be wholly justified .
I expect the Heads of Government will discuss this issue in Barcelona and that the European Union will be quick to make a statement on this .
Most of the election observers have come to the conclusion that the elections did not reflect the will of people of Zimbabwe and list a whole range of shortcomings in the election process .
However , we can emphasise that , however disappointing the outcome of these elections , the main point is that the international community has turned its attention to Zimbabwe and is doing everything it can to contain the crisis there .
A broad show of force would have serious , mainly regional repercussions .
In the short term , South Africa would face a refugee crisis and , in the long term , any such crisis might jeopardise regional prospects for economic growth and sustainable development , all against a backdrop of a serious food shortage .
The Commission , together with other partners , will be giving humanitarian requirements a high priority .
It is also extremely important for us to work with the SADC governments and the ACP countries in order to find a common basis for overcoming the crisis in Zimbabwe .
The European Union is planning to send a high-level troika in the near future , to discuss our misgivings about Zimbabwe with our SADC partners on the basis of our common commitment to the rule of law and democracy .
I trust that the European Parliament will be able to play an important role here .
( Applause )
Mr President , as a neighbouring state , Moldavia is a sort of foster child to us .
We have long hoped that , even with a Communist regime , this country would stick to economic development and the road towards the European Union .
That hope has now been dashed and the Communist government knew that it was playing with fire when it introduced the Russian language and made it compulsory to teach a Stalinist slant on history .
Language and culture have already sparked one military conflict in this country , which was only quelled within a few days thanks to a broad social compromise , with stability being established in the country through long-term action by the OSCE .
The government has now destroyed all that , and in one of the poorest countries in Europe .
I think it is wrong that the government is now trying to keep dragging out excuses .
We have seen this over the last few days , with the government maintaining that others are responsible for the political crisis .
It is responsible because it has tried to revoke this compromise , in one of the poorest countries in Europe .
If this country now falls into political crisis , just when it is on the verge of becoming a neighbouring country , it will also affect us , which is why I think the government urgently needs to give in , reverse these decisions and do something about creating economic and political stability in this country .
Mr President , firstly I should like to apologise for not participating in the debate earlier on account of some sad events with my stagiaire .
I am satisfied that we are finally taking the initiative and discussing Moldova .
The Liberal Group tried to do this back in January .
Everything that Mrs Schröder said is true .
We have before us a very difficult situation which could lead to developments similar to those in Belarus .
We must be clear-sighted and see that it is Vladimir Voranin who has stopped economic reforms .
These events have led to a suspension of funding from the international institutions .
We know the means used to turn Moldova eastwards and to create problems with Romania .
For instance the Moldovan Government refused to allow the people to set up an Orthodox community attached to the Romanian Orthodox Church .
This has been condemned as contrary to the European Convention on Human Rights .
Transdniestria does not need mentioning further ; we know about it and the present attitude of the government is not helping to solve the problem there .
The Christian Democrat party has been mentioned .
What has been said over the last few days in the Russian Duma , which has accused Romania of interference , is worrying . What has been said in the Russian Duma is not accurate .
We now have a situation where a Romanian diplomat has been declared persona non grata . This is creating a good deal of tension .
Parliament and the Commission need to focus much more on Moldova for the reasons mentioned by Mrs Schröder .
We must avoid being confronted with a new Belarus .
We need intelligent sanctions , intelligent measures , because it is such a poor country .
Those of you who have been to that country know that the children in Moldova are the worst off in Europe .
Mr President , I agree with the two previous speakers , Mrs Schroedter and Mrs Thors .
It is time that the European Parliament took an active interest in Europe 's poorest country .
The people of Moldavia have , for a long time , suffered not only poverty but also exploitation .
For example , tens of thousands of women have suffered degradation within the so-called sex industry in Western Europe .
I am personally acquainted with Iurie Rosca , Party Chairman of the Christian Democratic Party , the largest opposition party in Moldavia , as well as with the deputy chairman , Vlad Cubreacov .
In common with the party 's general secretary , Stefan Secareanu , who is mentioned in our resolution today , they are exposed to attacks whereby the Communist government headed by President Veronin is attempting to revoke their political immunity .
I wish to protest against the fact that , not long ago , the Justice Minister , who is also from the dominant Communist Party in Moldavia , suspended the political and financial activities of the Christian Democrats , who at present are in practice the only real opposition party in the country .
Those who are standing up for a multiparty system and for democracy in Moldavia deserve our esteem and encouragement .
The Christian Democrats have taken fundamental issues as their basic themes , including language , culture , schooling and the country 's Western democratic leanings , something which has aroused the anger of the Communists .
I also wish to protest against the fact that the Bessarabian Orthodox Church in Moldavia is not allowed to operate freely .
Moldavia is a poor country in material terms .
We do not want it also to become poor in terms of democracy .
We have a big responsibility for Moldavia .
When , after the elections a year ago , a Communist government took up office in Moldavia , it was , of course , only a matter of time before that country was the subject of discussion in this Parliament , and that day has now come .
I would have preferred us to use our direct contacts with the parliament in order to raise a few issues which would possibly be the topics of debate at a later date , but I understand that some groups want to discuss this today .
It seems like a good idea to me .
It is important for the European Union to devote more attention to what is already considered Europe 's poorest country .
A country riddled with problems , not only political problems , but also major social problems including those involving poverty , health care and the care of seriously disadvantaged children .
Precisely in a situation of this kind , it is , of course , very frustrating that it is the government that should be encouraging these contradictions in a country that is , in fact , disoriented , that is unable to choose between the East and the West , a country that is rather divided .
What struck me was that the recent protests were not only against the government but also mainly in favour of Europe , and this shows how the contradictions are evolving in that country .
In my view , the government has made a huge mistake by presenting controversial proposals which , precisely in the areas of language and the teaching of history , have caused a great stir .
Fortunately , the government has since realised that things are not that simple and has retracted a number of these measures , partly under pressure from the loud protest from outside Moldavia .
Today , too , we must stress that the government should realise that it should stop interfering with , and sabotaging , the opposition .
A warning has been issued about lifting the immunity of certain politicians . This is not acceptable , in my view .
The opposition must be left alone , reflecting the dignified manner in which the opposition protested against the government measures .
What should be avoided at all costs in that country is a situation in which one group tries to force the other in a certain direction , either the direction of Russia or that of Europe .
This is something on which the people themselves must be able to decide in their own time and in a democratic climate .
I already mentioned that this debate is also an opportunity to say that the European Union should do more .
I have understood that the Commission is looking into the possibility of granting more direct aid to the people in the country itself . By aid , I mean health care , social development and such like .
In my view , we can , above all , ask the government and all the people in Moldavia to create a situation in that country in which the international community can operate more effectively , for we are often very hampered in what we want to do there .
Finally , it is important in my opinion to urge the countries in that region to contribute to Moldova 's stability and to help find a solution to the problem involving Transdniestria , for that is also a heavy burden resting on Moldova . It is an issue on which Romania and Russia should exercise restraint , in my view , but to which the European Union in particular , together with the OSCE , should look to find a solution .
Mr President , Moldavia is a wretchedly poor country , it is true ; but culturally it is a rich , beautiful country to the east of central Europe , linking the crisis-stricken region of the Balkans with the crisis-stricken region on the Black Sea and in the Caucasus .
That alone shows just how important this tiny country is for us in the European Union , quite apart from the fact , as Mrs Schroedter rightly pointed out , that it will border on the European Union once Romania accedes and , hopefully , will itself one day become part of the European Union .
Nor should we forget why Moldavia went down the terrible road which it has had to endure over the last few decades .
Moldavia was the victim of the Hitler / Stalin pact and , for decades afterwards , it was plundered as a European outpost of the Soviet Union .
With such a history , Moldavia does not have the strength to get back on its own feet and , as one speaker rightly said , what we have here is a very dangerous crisis waiting to happen .
On one side , Russia is directly involved via Transdniestria or the so-called Dniester Republic which , from Russia 's point of view , is a sort of advance guard of nationalistic and militaristic circles in Europe while , on the other side , it has cultural and historic links with Romania , and it will become a dangerous bone of contention between an EU candidate country on one side and the European Union 's most powerful neighbour on the other , unless we do everything we can to stabilise this country , by which I mean we must stand up for human rights , for the rights of our Christian democrat and other counterparts in the Moldavian Parliament who are under attack , we must stand up against neo-colonialist efforts to bring this country under control through language and by rewriting history and we must stand up for democracy and the rule of law .
I also think , Commissioner , that we should be more active than we have been in the past in helping with institution building , with establishing democratic institutions in this country .
It is in our interest to exert a stabilising influence here .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission is seriously concerned about political and economic developments in the Republic of Moldavia , as my colleague Mr Patten made clear at his meeting with the Moldavian foreign secretary , Mr Dudeu , last month .
We therefore welcome this resolution by the European Union .
Moldavia is the poorest country in Europe and is still no closer to resolving its conflict with the rebel region of Transdnistria .
The Moldavian Government has refused to meet representatives of Transdnistria since last summer and a bitter fight is waging over border controls in which Ukraine has also been caught up .
An uneasy air of confrontation has recently arisen between the Communist Government of the Republic of Moldavia and the Romanian-speaking nationalists .
The reform process is suffering from constant setbacks and the IMF has refused to grant any more loans .
In the meantime , there are also worrying indications that the government is looking to Russia to resolve its problems .
The main reasons for the country 's poverty are of a political nature .
The failure to resolve the Transdnistrian conflict is having a particularly serious impact .
The European Union is currently examining how it can support OSCE efforts to improve the situation .
We have set up a relatively generous aid programme .
A provisional sum of around EUR 40 million has been set aside to support this country over the next two years with technical assistance , food aid and special macro-economic financial aid .
However , we need a guarantee that Moldavia will also make an effort to put its finances on a more viable basis .
It is true that ECHO has pulled out of Moldavia because ECHO 's job is to provide emergency aid , not resolve structural problems .
But even if ECHO 's work can be continued using other instruments , such as TACIS , we must not forget that aid alone will not resolve political problems .
In any event , the Commission is willing and able to see what measures can be taken with the means available to help resolve the Transdnistrian conflict .
Kyrgyzstan is not yet a democracy .
There is no division of powers , and no independent judiciary power .
Human rights , freedom of the press , freedom of expression , etc. are continuously violated .
There is an enormous abuse of power by the government , and people are thrown into prison at random under false accusations to eliminate political opponents .
There is repression against independent journalists , and the press is the government 's monopoly .
What can we then expect as democrats ?
Despite this , there are people who , with great courage , try to uphold democracy in their country , despite major personal risks , as Mr Beknazarov found out .
Democratically elected people , journalists and citizens who uphold the rule of law are oppressed and even subjected to torture .
But they should know that the European Union is on their side on this .
We must apply pressure on the government .
We have , in the framework of the partnership and the cooperation agreement , the chance to pressurise the government into engaging in dialogue with the opposition , ending the torture and ensuring that the country is on track to becoming one in which the rule of law applies .
Mr President , too often we have to come to this Chamber on a Thursday afternoon to make speeches we would rather not have to make .
That is certainly true today .
I have been to Kyrgyzstan several times in recent years , as it emerged from those dark days of the Soviet empire and set the pace for the region in terms of political , economic and health reforms .
I paid tribute then , as I have done since , to those periods of progress .
But in the last couple of years we have become worried about progress in that country .
President Akayev , who came from a background of the Academy of Sciences , was elected in a free vote in 1991 and re-elected in 1995 , has subsequently become more of an oppressive president than a democratic one . Both parliamentary and presidential elections in 2000 sadly highlighted the flawed nature of the electoral process .
We were concerned about candidates being banned on technicalities not least because of their knowledge of the Kyrgyz language ; about the press being suppressed and repressed ; about community groups being prevented from playing their part in the process .
Symbolic of all this has been the arrest of Azimbek Beknazarov , chairman of the parliamentary committee on judicial and legal reforms .
He was arrested in January and brought to trial in February .
The trial was then postponed until this month .
This is a country with many problems within its borders , including a lack of natural resources , racial tensions and incursions from abroad .
Eighty-eight per cent of its population lives on an income of under USD 4 a day .
It does not need the opprobrium that will come from world opinion if it makes a mess of its democratic processes , its independent judiciary and its freedom of speech .
That is why we move this motion today , asking them to listen . We will be watching for results .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , what we are discussing today is violation of human rights in Kyrgyzstan , a country supported by us through the central Asian delegation to which I belong .
Time is short , so I shall address what seem to me to be two particularly important points .
First , when I visited the region , I saw clearly for myself that the people were raring to go and move towards our values .
Unlike all the countries which have since joined and will soon join the EU , the countries of central Asia are basically making their own way towards democracy , without the huge amounts in aid being received by other countries .
The only aid is TACIS .
The European Union is providing Kyrgyzstan with financial and technical assistance in setting up ministries in the agricultural and social sectors .
If you just stop to consider the different mentality , the cultural differences , religious differences and their completely different historical development , then you will begin to understand the huge difference between our and the central Asian understanding of democracy .
What I mean to say here is that we must be careful not to be too harsh on other countries in our demands for democracy and human rights .
Secondly , as partners and friends of central Asia , it is our duty to point out serious scandals in due and proper form , especially as Kyrgyzstan is in receipt of a certain amount of aid from us under the TACIS programme .
This European Parliament resolution takes account of the dilemma to which I referred .
As I said , on the one hand , a recognition of what are surely difficult circumstances and , on the other , the difficulty in establishing a working democracy which guarantees the involvement of all sections and groups of the population .
I should like to make a point of acknowledging what has been achieved so far .
However , when it comes to human rights , as Mr Bowis very impressively pointed out , there appears to be more retrogression than progression and I must express my very serious concern here .
Human rights and human dignity are the basis of a modern society and a stable democracy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission services are monitoring the human rights situation in Kyrgyzstan daily , including the cases of Felix Kulov and Topchubek Turgunaliev and now the more recent case of Beknazarov and his associates .
Of course , the Commission does not want to interfere in the legal affairs of a sovereign state , but the overkill on the part of the Kyrgyz authorities in the Beknazarov case is particularly worrying .
It includes isolation and possibly maltreatment of Mr Beknazarov on grounds which appear to boil down to professional misjudgment on his part or perhaps to professional misconduct seven years ago .
In addition , the proceedings against Mr Beknazarov have unleashed general disapproval among the people and could seriously undermine the credibility of the government and , in the end , the stability of the country .
The Commission is also alarmed by the fact that the Beknazarov case appears to be just one in an increasingly long line of judicial proceedings against the government 's political opponents .
The Commission agrees with Parliament that Kyrgyzstan has put its good reputation on the line over the last two years .
The Commission has never failed , nor will it fail this time to stress just how much importance it attaches to Article 2 of the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement requiring contracting parties to promise to respect democracy , the principles of international law and human rights .
Mr President , Commissioner , Tunisia is a country in which there are major infringements of human rights .
Sometimes the infringements appear to pass unnoticed .
The opposition is persecuted , there are at least a thousand political prisoners in jail , freedom of expression is minimal and freedom of assembly is restricted .
Journalists and workers for democracy are harassed , and lawyers are not permitted to work .
A number of Tunisian human rights campaigners have been nominated for the Sacharov Prize , and we have criticised Tunisia on several occasions in this House .
Now , there is cause to do so again .
The Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party is very concerned about the proceedings against Hamma Hammami and his colleagues in the banned Communist Party .
Their trial is a farce , and the way it is being conducted completely unacceptable .
There have been protests from all around the world .
Even in my own country , where Tunisia is rarely mentioned , there have been a number of indignant press articles in the last few days about the way in which the members of the Tunisian Communist Party are being treated .
Mr Hammami , Mr Madouri and Mr Taamallah decided of their own accord to come forward and stand trial .
Subsequent developments have been alarming and very far from being in accordance with the principles of a constitutional state .
The three have been maltreated , they are not allowed to see their lawyers , and the trial itself is one big legal farce .
We are agreed that they are prisoners of conscience who must be treated decently and in a manner appropriate to a constitutional state .
The trial is to begin again on 30 March and , until then , they should be set free .
Because they themselves have given themselves up , that is only right .
We must send a message to Tunisia to the effect that we are keeping an eye on the country and watching the trial , which we shall be following extremely closely .
The EU must address the issues of Tunisia and of human rights in the Association Agreements and in the context of cooperation .
We have been silent for too long about these issues .
We make tough demands on ourselves and on the candidate countries , but almost no such demands upon Tunisia .
That must not continue .
Human rights issues must be highlighted in our continued contacts with Tunisia .
We must stop grovelling to Ben Ali .
Above all , attention must be given to this case .
Mr President , Tunisia made a commitment to respect human rights and it is a key element of the EU-Tunisia Association Agreement .
We now believe , however , that these undertakings , which were reiterated at the Association Council session of 29 January , have been flouted by the way in which Hamma Hammami and his co-defendants are being treated by the Tunisian Government .
The defendants , who voluntarily came out of hiding , a state in which they were forced to live following their infamous trials in 1997 and 1998 , were again convicted on 2 February before the Court of First Instance and their sentence was confirmed in a farcical judicial hearing which , unfortunately , confirms the serious defects in the rule of law that has been in force in Tunisia for several years .
Two hundred lawyers gathered in support of the defence .
They were set upon by the police and the prisoners were violently assaulted .
Hamma Hammami began a hunger strike on 26 February to protest against the conditions in which he is being detained .
He was moved to the area in Tunis prison that is reserved for those sentenced to death , despite the fact that he is a political prisoner .
This situation is in breach of the Treaties , particularly Article 2 of the Association Agreement with the European Union on the respect of human rights .
It is now crucial that , a few weeks before the start of the Conference on Foreign Affairs ( Barcelona V ) , which is being held in Valencia on 22 and 23 April , we , as Members of the European Parliament , call upon the Tunisian authorities to release Hamma Hammami and his co-defendants .
This is a first step which is essential for the respect of the rule of law in Tunisia .
We also call on the Commission to demand that the Tunis authorities comply with international law and to instruct its parliamentary delegation to raise this subject more firmly with the Tunisian Government .
In 1999 , Mr Hamma Hammami and three other leaders of the Tunisian Communist Party were convicted in absentia for dissident activity .
Last month , after the defendants surrendered to the authorities , those sentences were confirmed in less than one minute without a presentation of evidence by the prosecution or defence or an examination of the witnesses .
There are also accusations of widespread abuses by the government against other dissident groups .
Democracy and the rule of law are attributes enjoyed until recently by few countries even in Europe .
They take time to evolve and can appear fragile in the face of threats .
In states such as Tunisia , it may seem an achievement merely to resist the kind of radical socialism or Islamicism that has blighted the lives of so many in the Arab world in recent decades .
We ourselves have to be careful , when we urge greater pluralism and respect for democratic norms around the world , that we do not undermine governments which , however imperfect , are moving in that direction .
I believe , however , that the EU has an important role to play in helping to provide an example for countries which want to move away from a spiral of poverty , extremism and repression .
Nor can we entirely isolate ourselves from the problems experienced by neighbouring countries such as Tunisia .
By encouraging economic and political reform together with foreign direct investment , and with respect for good government , democracy and human rights , we help others and we also help ourselves , by reducing not only the resentment often felt against the West in the Arab world , but also the migratory pressures that are generating serious problems in our own societies and which themselves require urgent solutions .
For that reason , it is right for the French Government to highlight the importance of giving aid to the Maghreb countries , many of whose citizens are settled in London , which I represent , as migrants or refugees .
It is also right to begin to open EU markets , including our agricultural markets , to poorer countries that wish to trade with us , in ways that benefit them more directly and prevent future migratory pressures by the long-term stabilisation of their own economies .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , convicted in absentia in 1999 to nine years and three months in prison for membership of an illegal association , incitement to civil disobedience , distribution of pamphlets inciting violence and dishonestly spreading false information liable to disrupt public order , Hamma Hammami came out of hiding in order to challenge this judgment on 2 February 2002 .
At the end of an eventful trial punctuated with incidents , the Court of First Instance in Tunis confirmed the original verdict and ordered the accused Hamma Hammami to be imprisoned .
The appeal trial began on Saturday 9 March before a number of foreign observers , including journalists , Western diplomats posted to Tunis , barristers from France , Switzerland and Belgium , as well as delegates from human rights organisations .
A dozen lawyers appealed , one after the other , to the bar to request to be given time to read through the dossier that they had been unable to access and to deplore the fact that they had been prevented from visiting their client as under normal circumstances .
After some deliberation , the Court of Appeal postponed the trial until 30 March and refused the request to release the accused men .
These are the facts .
The European Union has expressed to the Tunisian authorities its concern regarding the human rights violations , but has merely hinted at the fact that these violations may compromise its Association Agreement with Tunisia , which was the first bilateral pact between the European Union and a Mediterranean country and which was signed three years ago .
Last January , Mr Romano Prodi , the President of the European Commission , met with the Tunisian authorities in Tunis whilst on an official visit to North Africa .
In a speech that he gave on that occasion , Mr Prodi stated that the negotiations related to trade and cooperation .
Instead of taking this opportunity , whilst speaking publicly , to raise the issue of human rights , Mr Prodi welcomed the economic reforms undertaken in Tunisia .
He stressed that the European Union respects the political sovereignty of Tunisia and does not wish to interfere in Tunisia 's internal affairs .
However , at a meeting held in June in Tunis with President Ben Ali and the Prime Minister , Mohammed Ganouch , the European Commissioner , Mr Chris Patten , paid more attention to the issue of human rights .
On 14 December 2000 , the European Parliament adopted a resolution engaging the European institutions to use all the means provided for by the EU-Tunisia Association Agreement to secure respect for democratic freedoms and human rights and , whereas the EU-Tunisia Association Agreement lays down the promotion of human rights as a key element , it regrets the fact that this frank and open dialogue had not sufficed to encourage the Tunisian authorities to advance along the path of democracy and human rights .
Mr President , I ask you to ensure that this resolution be forwarded to the Council and to the Commission and to the Tunisian Government and parliament for its information , and that we stress that we will follow events closely in the run-up to 30 March .
Mr President , once again , the House is due to vote on human rights violations in Tunisia and today we are dealing with the conviction of three activists from the Communist Workers ' Party of Tunisia .
After four years of living in hiding , the three activists decided to appear freely before the court in order to challenge their sentence in a court of law .
The trial of 2 February , as other Members have said , was a sham .
The defendants were seized from their seats , taken away by the police during the court proceedings , and swiftly condemned to harsh prison sentences - Hamma Hammami was sentenced to nine years and three months .
These men were not given the chance to defend themselves and were not given access to their lawyers .
All this happened before a number of Tunisian and foreign observers and protesters .
They are being detained in a civilian prison in disgraceful conditions .
This trial is a real parody of justice .
In response to this situation , the Tunisian Lawyers Council declared a strike .
Hamma Hammami and Abdel Jabarmadouri decided to go on hunger strike in protest at their conditions of detention and to demand that their lawyers be given the right of visit .
These events are part of a continuing campaign of intimidation and repression , which targets political opponents , human rights protesters , journalists , trade unionists , students , lawyers and magistrates .
We note that the EU-Tunisia Association Agreement , stipulating that relations between the two parties are based on the respect of democratic principles and human rights , has once again been flouted .
We ask for an exceptional meeting of the EU-Tunisia Association Council to be organised as soon as possible to tackle the issue of human rights .
Parliament must demand the release of Hamma Hammami and his co-defendants , and that Article 2 of the Agreement be respected .
The Council and the Commission must use all the means provided for by the agreement in order to secure respect for democratic freedoms and human rights in Tunisia .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , large numbers of Europeans from my country like to holiday in Tunisia , where they find beautiful beaches , a beautiful landscape and a different culture and where , thanks to the security precautions taken in Tunisia , they feel safe .
Nonetheless , we cannot overlook and we are deeply saddened by the repeated violation of human rights in Tunisia , the most recent case being the sentence passed on Hamma Hammami and his colleagues .
These human rights violations were really not necessary , not in a country like Tunisia .
The type of trial , the procedures surrounding the trial and the argument which Tunisia keeps on using , that democracy is being established , that slow progress is being made is , more is the pity , just not true .
Or the steps , the progress being made , is so small as to be indiscernible .
I therefore take the view that the current agreement should also be used for dialogue on this issue .
I do not see this sort of agreement as a futile endeavour ; on the contrary , agreements such as these with countries such as Tunisia give us the opportunity to ensure that the human rights issue is a subject of serious dialogue .
I also take the view that human rights organisations , non-governmental organisations , should be more closely involved in the European Union 's support instruments , especially as far as the MEDA Democracy programme is concerned .
I have said before both on several occasions in this House and in conversation with Tunisian colleagues , and I shall say it again : the important and legitimate fight against fundamentalism and , more importantly , against potential terrorism , cannot be fought , let alone won if it is paid for by violating human rights .
Human rights violations will not give the country greater security ; on the contrary , all they will do is jeopardise the security of the country in the long term , and that is something which neither we nor Tunisia wants .
I therefore call once again on Tunisia to start practising its professed faith in human rights at long last .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union in general and the Commission in particular condemn human rights violations in Tunisia and are monitoring the trial against Hamma Hammami and two other members of the Communist party very closely .
On 9 March this year , a representative of the EU presidency attended the court hearing as an observer .
The Foreign Ministry was notified of his attendance in advance .
We welcome the postponement of the trial to 30 March to give the defence more time to prepare its case .
The Commission shall continue to follow developments at the trial very closely through its delegation in Tunis .
The EU is taking every opportunity to strengthen the human rights dialogue with Tunisia .
At the most recent meeting of the association council on 29 January this year it expressly urged the Tunisian authorities to step up their efforts towards pluralism , democracy and the rule of law .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
( B5-0143 / 2002 ) by Mr Messner and Mrs Lambert , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on the ceasefire agreement in Sri Lanka ;
( B5-0148 / 2002 ) by Mr Collins , on behalf of the UEN Group , on the ceasefire agreement in Sri Lanka ;
( B5-0153 / 2002 ) by Mr Cushnahan , Mr Van Orden , Mr Deva , Mr Atkins and Mr Posselt , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on the ceasefire agreement in Sri Lanka ;
( B5-0157 / 2002 ) by Mrs Lynne and Baroness Nicholson of Winterbourne , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the situation in Sri Lanka ;
( B5-0163 / 2002 ) by Mrs Carrilho , Mr Evans , Mrs Erika Mann , Mr Fruteau and Mr van den Berg , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the political situation in Sri Lanka ;
( B5-0172 / 2002 ) by Mr Vinci and Mrs Frahm , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the situation in Sri Lanka .
Mr President , I am very glad to have the opportunity to address Parliament on this most important of issues .
The motion calls for justice and reparations for the Muslim and Tamil communities being persecuted in Sri Lanka .
If 60 000 people were killed in the developed world - that is the magnitude of the atrocities we are looking at now in Sri Lanka - then every possible means would be deployed to address the matter and bring those responsible before the courts and establish the rule of law .
There is serious and flagrant discrimination and economic underdevelopment in the areas of the country where the majority of the Tamil population lives .
This is an area where the European Union could play a meaningful role , through funding programmes to address the imbalance and further the cause of peace and reconciliation .
We must act concertedly here or more innocent Sri Lankans will join the half a million people who have already fled the country .
The use of child soldiers and sexual assaults on Sri Lankan women is endemic .
To turn our backs on this matter would deliver a serious blow to the important causes we often champion here of democracy , freedom and social justice .
Our attendance at the donors ' meeting in Sri Lanka , scheduled for May , is vital .
I also call on the presidency to ensure forthwith that this resolution is conveyed to the Council , the Commission and the Government of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka .
Mr President , as the European Union 's Chief Election Observer during the 2000 and 2001 elections , I witnessed at first hand the terrible consequences of violence in Sri Lanka .
I was therefore particularly pleased to be there on the historic occasion of the signing of the ceasefire agreement , which hopefully will herald a new dawn of peace and prosperity underpinned by the strengthening of human rights .
I acknowledge the courage shown by those who are signatories to this agreement and the role that the Norwegian Government and its Ambassador to Sri Lanka played in bringing it about .
I also recognise that the silencing of guns , though welcome , is not peace , but merely the first tentative step on the road to peace .
It is only realistic to expect that many problems will lie ahead - some will be minor , others more serious .
However , if good-will and determination exist on all sides , and the LTTE recognises that the only way forward is exclusively through peaceful dialogue , nothing will be allowed to derail the peace process .
It is much better to be guarantors of a peaceful future than prisoners of the past .
The prime minister and the leader of the Tamil Tigers , together with their supporters , have indeed taken huge risks for peace .
Their efforts deserve to be rewarded by the international community , including the European Union . As well as providing important political and moral support the international community should provide substantial funding to underwrite the peace process .
If the people of Sri Lanka , especially the doubters , were able to see that there is a peace dividend , this would underpin the agreement and encourage support for it .
It is much better for the international community to invest in peace now rather than having to spend money later picking up the pieces caused by continued conflict and violence .
I wish Sri Lanka well and I would urge all the political leaders on the island and its citizens to support this peace process and cherish the hope that it will bring permanent peace to their country .
Mr President , a surge of violence is destroying the tropical island in the Indian Ocean .
Will the armistice hold at long last ?
When will the government and the Tamil Tigers realise that there are no winners in this civil war , and when will long-term peace be established ?
Now that there is a new government , we should strike while the iron is hot .
It is of the utmost importance for all parties to agree on the basic principle of lasting peace .
The President and Prime Minister must at long last sing from the same hymn sheet ; otherwise , they will be playing into the hands of the Tigers .
In the past , the Tamil Tigers have repeatedly violated armistices .
Seven years ago , the last peace negotiations were unexpectedly broken off by attacks by the Tigers . And they continue to recruit soldiers , including children , even to this day .
The politicians should remain vigilant , at an international level too .
The monitoring by 30 observers seems very meagre indeed .
Are they capable of doing a proper job ?
And what , I ask , can the European Union do to ensure that the weapons are put under lock and key for good and that the violent storm on this paradise-like island at long last subsides ?
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , a year ago the SAARC delegation of the European Parliament visited Sri Lanka .
I was there in my capacity as vice-president and was able to visit both the north and the south of the island .
In the vicinity of Jaffna , the army had just managed to reclaim large tracts of land formerly occupied by the Tamil Tigers .
We saw villages razed to the ground , land laid waste and a demonstration by fishermen and farmers wanting to return home but prevented from doing so for security reasons .
Back in Colombo , foreign observers and the local non-governmental organisations told us the war in Sri Lanka had become an institution .
At all the talks we backed the Norwegian intermediaries who have been trying to set up bilateral negotiations for years now .
Only a few of us believed then in an end to a civil war which had lasted nearly twenty years and claimed over 60 000 lives .
Since the elections , which were won by the United National Front on a manifesto which included a peaceful resolution to the conflict , the situation has changed .
Economic sanctions have been lifted , fishing restrictions reduced , the transport embargo relaxed and sea and air links established .
Following the ceasefire , which hopefully will hold up , prisoners of war have been exchanged and Norway has again asked for assistance .
Commissioner Fischler , I am pleased to say that the European Union has not been sitting on its hands .
Our main help has been humanitarian .
Since 1993 , some EUR 13 million have been collected through ECHO .
EUR 1 million was recently provided to improve the food and health situation , for medical care and medication and to pave the way for better hygiene and cleaner water .
The European Union should not only take financial action at the donor conference in Sri Lanka in May .
More importantly , it should exercise political pressure so that the ceasefire and the initial peace talks , which are just tender shoots , are not just a flash in the pan , as has been the case so often in previous years , and actually come to something this time round .
We must hope for a lasting peace process for this country and its people .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , with the ceasefire between the Sri Lanka Government and the LTTE signed on 24 February , we hope that both sides will now be able to return to the negotiating table and broker a comprehensive peace agreement .
This would give momentum to the reconciliation process and pave the way for reconstruction measures .
I should like here to express my recognition of the Norwegian Government , which has worked tirelessly in the wings brokering the peace process .
The Commission has assured the Government of Sri Lanka that it is prepared to join in international efforts to support a reconstruction programme if the peace process shows real progress .
In the meantime , the Commission has taken a whole host of measures .
EUR 2.7 million will be provided for humanitarian aid programmes this year in order to help displaced people , following on from the EUR 3.3 million provided for this purpose last year .
EUR 4 million are to be provided for this programme next year and again in 2004 .
Experts from ECHO are already on site assessing the emergency humanitarian aid requirement for this year .
In April , missions will be sent to Sri Lanka to work out proposals for programmes and projects , for which development aid of EUR 10 million and economic aid of up to EUR 5 million will be provided in the years 2002 to 2006 .
The EC / Sri Lanka development aid working party is due to meet in Colombo next week to discuss how the Commission 's rapid reaction mechanism can be used to boost confidence building and conflict prevention .
The working party is also due to meet in June , following the World Bank 's development forum , in order to discuss development aid and economic cooperation .
The Commission has deliberately built a great deal of flexibility into its programming of humanitarian aid , so that , if the ceasefire is successful , measures can be taken to move and resettle people , to promote education and economic recovery , and to restore incomes .
A comprehensive peace agreement would allow us to launch a broad reconstruction programme together with other partners .
Thank you very much , Mr Fischler .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
( B5-0135 / 2002 ) by Mrs Rodríguez Ramos , Mrs Sornosa Martínez and Mr Berenguer Fuster , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the United States ' boycott of imports of clementines from Spain ;
( B5-0136 / 2002 ) by Mr Jové Peres , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the United States ' trade ban on Community clementines ;
( B5-0144 / 2002 ) by Mr Bautista Ojeda , Mr Mayol i Raynal and Mrs Auroi , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on clementines ;
( B5-0154 / 2002 ) by Mr García-Margallo y Marfil , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on clementines .
Mr President , I am delighted to be speaking to Parliament and to be addressing you in the presence of Commissioner Fischler on the issue of clementines , which falls within his jurisdiction .
Ladies and gentlemen , the border closure that the United States is unilaterally imposing on our clementines sector is an unjustifiable trade action , which this Parliament must condemn .
The debate we are holding today must result in a resolution that urges the Commission , the Council and the Spanish Government to do their job and to do it well .
Our objective is simply to protect something that we have been working on for the Community agricultural sector .
The Commission must , therefore , act rapidly to put an end to this trade ban whose only purpose is to serve the interests of the United States ' own production .
We ask the Commission , in contrast to what the current Spanish Government has been doing , to set aside the philosophy of contentedly pursuing bilateral dialogue .
We cannot enter into dialogue as if nothing had happened , with a party that is doing so much harm to the Community citrus fruit sector .
The Commission must deal with the conflict without losing sight of the fact that the United States has acted unilaterally , reneging on the agreement on health and plant-health measures and on the provisions of the World Trade Organisation in general .
To put it another way , the Commission must take over the half-hearted action of the Spanish Government which has , to date , only obtained one proposal from the Americans , made with veiled threats and which consists of making changes to the protocol regulating our citrus fruit exports .
Lastly , it is crucial that the President-in-Office of the Council plays an active role in this dispute .
The President of the Council of Agriculture Ministers must , without fail , appear before this House to explain the initiatives he proposes to achieve this return to normality of citrus fruit exports and how he intends to compensate producers , since they have already been seriously affected by this situation .
This is what we are asking of you , Mr Fischler , and I hope that you will be able to meet our expectations .
Mr President , I should like to make a few comments on the joint resolution that we too have signed .
First of all , there has been a range of considerations and requests in relation to the unilateral decision of the United States to suspend imports of Spanish clementines into the US .
For this reason , the resolution states that the unilateral decision of the United States is in breach of World Trade Organisation agreements because , as stated in the resolution , restrictions to trade must be proportional to the risks , non-discriminatory , and must not be imposed without scientific proof .
Everything suggests , therefore , that the United States ' ban on Community clementines is simply an excuse for a trade barrier to prevent Community clementines from entering the United States ' market and , therefore , to prevent the introduction of non-Community citrus fruits into the United States .
This is unacceptable and I wish to point out that , in the resolution , parallels are made with the issue of steel products , because the United States is breaching WTO rules .
Secondly , there is a series of problems or consequences that the resolution analyses in relation to the major losses suffered by producers and exporters in the current citrus fruit season and , as stated in the text of the resolution , an indication is also given of the delay that occurred in the Community 's taking action .
I also wish to quote some dates given in the resolution : on 30 November , the United States suspended imports of clementines and definitively ratified this decision on 5 December and , on 14 February 2002 , the Spanish Government asked the Commission for its help in this dispute and to use its power to intervene .
To conclude , there is a range of actions that the Commission has been asked to undertake : to rapidly put forward proposals to compensate those affected ; secondly , to seek to resolve the dispute with the United States as quickly as possible , because we cannot start the next season with this problem unsolved since that would have extremely serious consequences ; and , thirdly , in the event that a solution is not found , the United States must be called to account before the WTO .
I wish to conclude by thanking the Commission for the way in which it has acted to date , because it attended very promptly when the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development asked it to .
The Commission gave a commitment to inform us rapidly and , since they have done so , I think it is only fair that we thank the Commission for everything it has done so far .
Mr President , Commissioner , due to a complaint from a customer in Maryland , who found Mediterranean fruit fly larvae in clementines , the United States took harsh unilateral measures with regard to Spain .
In fact , as you know , it is not a plant health problem but a trade barrier that the United States has now established .
It is true , as Mr Jové Peres stressed , that the Spanish Government lost time by failing to inform the Commission immediately and instead waited until 14 February to do so , despite the fact that the problem came to light in November 2001 .
But the problem exists and Morocco is also currently experiencing the same problem for the same reasons .
The fly that bit the American Government , if I can put it like that , is more of an electioneering insect rather than a citrus fruit parasite from the Mediterranean .
The attitude of the United States towards clementines is the same as it is towards steel products , as my fellow Members have already said .
It marks a return to protectionist ways and to unilateralism with complete disregard for WTO obligations .
The United States cannot carry on closing their borders when faced with the urgency of the elections or ignore the WTO agreements when the European Union poses them problems .
Therefore , as recommended by the resolution , I call on the Commission to instigate proceedings at the WTO against the United States if an immediate solution to the situation is not found .
Next , the Commission must present proposals to compensate the people affected , until the conflict is resolved .
Lastly , the Council should inform us , through its President-in-Office of the Council , of the latest initiatives that it is taking to resolve this conflict .
Mr President , I wish to express my personal pleasure at the fact that we have achieved a unanimous resolution on this issue and congratulate my fellow Members on this achievement .
The issue of clementines is not an isolated incident , but is one link in a chain of tensions that exists in trade relations between the United States and the European Union .
I shall not waste time listing them all , but I shall refer - as I did yesterday , in the debate on transatlantic dialogue - to the problem of hormone-treated meat , to the banana war , to aid for North American airlines , which has led to our own airlines becoming less competitive , and to massive export subsidies , which have been deemed illegal .
The most serious aspect is not that this should have happened but that , apparently , we are entering a new era of protectionism , which has become evident on the steel issue , which we discussed yesterday , and also on the issue of clementines .
I also wish to emphasise that the issue of clementines is , if possible , more serious than the issue of steel .
Steel will have entry conditions imposed on it that will make imports more expensive ; on the issue of the clementines , the borders have simply been closed .
This is why I said yesterday that I shall be demanding the same rigour and the same energy on the issue of clementines as on the issue of steel , if we wish to maintain credibility and be able to hold our heads high in the World Trade Organisation .

I wish to correct Mr Jové Peres , who has fallen into the temptation , in passing , of making the Spanish Government out to be the villain of the piece .
The Commission has long been aware of this issue and , if it had followed proceedings more closely , it would have seen an answer from Mr Lamy in which he told me that , as early as December , the United States trade representative , Mr Zoellick , had a meeting with the representative of the Commission , who was fully informed of the situation , through the Government and because I had tabled a question on 12 December .
But , when all is said and done , this is a piece of cheek that I can tolerate and understand , since you are a member of the opposition .
With regard to the request that has been made , I agree with what the speakers have said .
What needs to be done , first of all , is to compensate those who have suffered losses ; secondly , to pursue dialogue with the United States because , as we know , a poor deal is better than no deal at all , especially when a good deal could take years to conclude and ruin our production and , thirdly , to initiate , as soon as possible , proceedings in the 133 Committee .
I must emphasise that this is more as a means of exerting pressure and imposing negotiation in order to bring the United States to the dialogue table than in order to initiate proceedings that could drag on forever .
I would emphasise that the Spanish Government - whether Mr Jové Peres likes it or not - started this issue in December , as Mr Lamy has shown .

Therefore , look elsewhere for the villain and let us all work together to protect Spanish clementines , which is my only objective at the moment , as I am sure is true for the President , who - in his enthusiasm - has generously given me more speaking time than I was due .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by clarifying exactly who is responsible here .
It is true , as Mrs Martinez said , that I am responsible for clementines , but the primary issue here is the Mediterranean fruit fly , and that is my colleague David Byrne 's area .
And if a WTO problem arises as a result , that will be Pascal Lamy 's responsibility .
That is all , just to clarify matters . But one thing is right and that is , whichever way you look at it , the Commission is responsible .
For over 15 years , Spain has exported clementines to the USA under the terms of a bilateral protocol agreed with the USA on the risk of introducing the Mediterranean fruit fly .
Problems have already cropped up here and there in the meantime , but have always been very quickly resolved .
Now a few fruit fry larvae have been found under somewhat questionable circumstances and the USA 's unreasonable reaction has been to issue a complete ban on imports of clementines .
Spain takes the view that the best and quickest solution would be to conduct bilateral talks with the USA and change the protocol , with the new protocol to be accepted by the USA in time for the next season 's deliveries starting in October .
That may sound optimistic , but we shall know by next month , by April at the latest , if this