Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session adjourned on Tuesday , 18 December 2007 .
Statements by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , this is the first of our meetings to be held in the new year 2008 .
May I wish every one of you health and happiness and hope that together we are successful in the tasks that have been entrusted to us , namely to take the European Union forward to a positive future .
Allow me to make a few remarks about the work we have to do .
On the day the European Parliament held its last sitting here in Strasbourg , namely 13 December 2007 , the Reform Treaty was signed in Lisbon .
In a short speech that I made - in the presence of the President of the European Council , José Socrates , and EC President , José Manuel Barroso - I expressed the will of the great majority of the European Parliament that the Reform Treaty should become a legal , and hence a political , reality by 1 January 2009 .
This objective remains the priority of priorities for the year 2008 .
On 21 December border restrictions were lifted for those nine countries that joined the European Union on 1 May 2004 .
These were indeed moving events .
For hundreds of years soldiers had forced their way across the national borders of our continent to inflict war , misery and suffering on others .
The removal of the barriers between our nations means this : our neighbours welcome us .
We are all common citizens of the European Union , and as it says in the Berlin Declaration of 25 March 2007 : ' We are united for the better ' .
( Applause )
Malta and Cyprus joined the European Monetary Union on 1 January .
Our common currency , the Euro , is therefore the official means of payment in both these countries .
We extend our warmest welcome to Malta and Cyprus .
( Applause )
The European Year of Intercultural Dialogue was celebrated in Ljubljana on 9 January at an impressive ceremony attended by members of the European Council , Commission and Parliament .
The Intercultural Dialogue will be a key feature of our work during the coming year and will remain so .
I would ask you all to be present tomorrow for the statement by the Grand Mufti of Syria , Sheikh Ahmad Badr Al-Din Hassoun .
Let me now move on to two final items : our legislative work this year will be significantly influenced by climate and environmental issues .
As legislators we owe much responsibility to climate and environmental protection , on the one hand , and to the protection of European competitiveness and to the safeguarding of jobs , on the other .
Together we have to strike the right balance between the economy and the ecology .
The European Union is based on values , rights and responsibilities .
On 12 December 2007 the Presidents of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission signed the Charter of Fundamental Rights here in this very Chamber .
This marked a significant event for the citizens of the European Union and for the European Parliament too .
During the signing a number of members interrupted the proceedings with loud heckling and attempted to prevent the speakers from being heard .
Nothing can justify such behaviour .
( Applause )
Free speech is the basis of democracy and of parliamentarianism .
Every Member of the European Parliament is entitled freely to express his or her opinion in any of the designated debates .
It is our common duty to protect this right at all times .
What is more , to prevent speakers from addressing the European Parliament , and especially when they are guests in this House , offends against the basic rights of freedom , democracy and parliamentarianism .
( Applause )
This also means that it contravenes our Rules of Procedure , which cannot be accepted under any circumstances .
I therefore intend to take action , as provided for in the Rules of Procedure , against those Members who continued in their attempt to interrupt the proceedings , despite repeated requests from the Chair to desist .
( Applause )
The same applies to those Members who behaved in an unseemly way towards our ushers , who were only carrying out their proper duties .
( Applause )
The new year will pose great challenges for us .
However , I am convinced that we will overcome these by showing respect and consideration for each other .
It is very much with this in mind that I would again wish you all the very best for 2008 .
( Applause )
Approval of the minutes
The Minutes for the sitting of Tuesday , 18 December 2007 have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , before we get to the agenda , I would like a little clarification on an item on the agenda for tomorrow morning , which you have already mentioned : the address by the Grand Mufti of Syria .
His will be the first of a series of speeches by religious leaders before the plenary of this House in the context of the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue .
I would like to know why the Conference of Presidents has chosen to interpret intercultural dialogue exclusively as an interreligious monologue and whether it feels a part-session is an appropriate platform for religious messages .
( Applause )
Finally , I would like to know whether the Conference of Presidents is willing to consider widening the list of guest speakers and making it more representative by including women and non-religious organisations .
The ALDE Group has suggested that Ms Jahangir , the UN Special Rapporteur on freedom of religion or belief , should be invited to address the plenary as well .
I hope you can enlighten me .
( Applause )
Thank you , Mrs in ' t Veld .
If I recall correctly , this was in fact a unanimous decision taken by the Conference of Presidents .
Mr Cohn-Bendit has doubts about this , so we shall check it out .
In any case , it was a decision taken by a very big majority , wherein we also said that the list did not have to be conclusive and that we would also be calling on the various committees of the European Parliament , in particular , to propose further activities on which we could then vote .
Mrs in ' t Veld , you can be assured that in this case the discussion was as broad as possible and that we also remain open to further proposals , though of course these will have to be decided on by the Conference of Presidents or by Parliament .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I just wanted to point out that my Group did not agree .
I would just point out once more that your Group was evidently not in agreement .
We shall check this again in the Minutes , not because we question what you have said but to ensure that the Minutes are also accurate .
In any case , the decision was taken by a majority of the kind rarely seen in the Conference of Presidents .
Mr President , I would just like to add to the point made by Ms in ' t Veld .
As I said in an email addressed to you and copied to other Members this morning , another regrettable fact is that it seems that you have made the Grand Mufti comparable to the Pope and the UK Chief Rabbi as a European representative of his particular religion .
I think that sends a very bad signal to Muslims who are European .
The visit tomorrow demands every courtesy - although one would like an exchange of views about human rights abuses in Syria .
I hope , however , that in your future list of invitees this year you will make sure that a European representative of Islam is invited and not somebody from outside the EU who might be taken to represent Muslims in Europe - which he does not .
Mrs Ludford , even with all goodwill and understanding for one another it will surely never be possible to reach a hundred per cent agreement on matters of this kind .
Even so , I can tell you that the Group chairmen reached their decision by a large majority . With goodwill it will also be possible to balance this out through the activities of our various committees so that everyone feels included in the result .
I would now really like to ask that you treat our guests , when they arrive , with consideration and respect . After all , we want to promote dialogue not prevent it .
This is essentially my plea to everyone .
( The Minutes were approved . )
Membership of Parliament : see Minutes
Membership of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Signature of acts adopted under codecision : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( tabling ) : see Minutes
Lapsed written declarations : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Order of business
The final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday , 10 January 2008 , pursuant to Rules 130 and 131 of the Rules of Procedure , has been distributed .
The following amendments have been proposed :
Monday :
No amendments .
Tuesday :

The PPE-DE Group has proposed that the two Demetriou and Cashman reports on the control of persons at the EU 's external borders be postponed to a subsequent sitting .

- ( EL ) Mr President , this report seems to have the Council 's full approval in substance , but there is a procedural issue , since Coreper has not yet met - I think it is to meet tomorrow or the day after . Furthermore , the Slovenian Presidency has asked , for procedural and official reasons , for the meeting to be postponed until the next plenary part-session in Belgium .
There is no objection to this postponement .
( Parliament adopted the motion . )
Wednesday :
The Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe moved that the debate on the statements of the Council and Commission on the situation in Pakistan following the assassination of Benazir Bhutto be concluded with the submission of motions for a resolution .
Mr President , we have over the holiday break seen a number of very worrying developments in Pakistan , not least , of course , the assassination of Benazir Bhutto .
We have the opportunity to discuss this matter this week .
It is the view of my group that we should close our debate with a resolution , in particular since we should take a position sending a message to the Pakistani authorities in advance of the visit of Mr Musharaff to the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House .
Does anyone else wish to speak in support of the motion ?
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think that it is very poor practice indeed for important debates to be concluded without a resolution .
This Parliament is here to take clear positions and not just to be a talking shop for group chairmen and other group spokespersons without the adoption of resolutions .
Mr Musharraf will be coming here and he should know what this Parliament thinks about the situation in his country , so that we can argue the matter out with him .
I believe we should be bold enough to put an end to the old habit of postponing the adoption of decisions for fear of acting on our own courage , by voting for a resolution .
( Parliament rejected the motion . )
In view of the shortage of speaking time for the Wednesday afternoon sitting , the Socialist Group has moved that the debates be extended to 6 p.m.
With the agreement of the Council , Question Time can be extended until 7.30 p.m.
( DE ) Mr President , you have said everything there is to say as far as the explanatory statement is concerned .
It is a good thing that Council Question Time has not been shortened as a result .
I just wanted to bring this to your attention .
( Parliament adopted the motion . )
( The agenda was therefore adopted . )
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
The next item is the one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
- ( MT ) May I express my thanks for your good wishes to my country , Malta , which together with Cyprus joined the Euro area two weeks ago , bringing the number of countries using the Euro as their currency to 15 .
This means that the majority of EU Member States now use the same currency .
During the celebrations held in Malta two days ago the Presidents of the Council and the Commission and also Mario Mauro , Vice-President of the European Parliament , all congratulated Malta on the rapid progress it had made in the three years since it joined the European Union and on its transition to the Euro , which is going well and without any problems .
In fact , despite the fact that the dual circulation period runs until the end of this month , I can state that after just two weeks almost all transactions are already being carried out in euros .
The people of Malta and Gozo are proud to embrace the Euro and to have made another great step forward in the process of European union .
( FR ) Mr President , in December the European Court of Justice handed down a long-awaited judgment that has very worrying implications for the protection of posted workers in Europe .
It sends a negative signal to our citizens , who are concerned about the risks of social dumping .
What does the Court say in this so-called ' Laval ' ruling ?
It says that the Swedish trade unions were wrong to try to force a Latvian undertaking to sign their collective agreement , in particular with regard to the minimum wage .
Under the 1996 Directive , however , posted workers have to observe a nucleus of mandatory rules for minimum protection in the host Member State .
The Court rules that the Swedish system of collective bargaining was not applicable and that such rules could only be imposed by the law .
The European message is thus no longer clear : on the one hand , the Commission prioritises flexicurity and the system of collective bargaining as a model ; on the other hand , the Court of Justice discredits this model .
Parliament and the Council must therefore clarify this issue .
Otherwise , it would be like throwing the Bolkestein Directive out the front door only to allow it to sneak in the back , which would be entirely unacceptable .
Mr President , I rise on a matter which refers particularly to one Member State but , I believe , has wider European implications .
This year is the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue .
One institution which does much to promote intercultural dialogue is the British Council .
It is therefore of particular concern that Russia seeks to close the offices of the British Council in St Petersburg and Yekaterinburg .
The work of the British Council in Russia is perfectly legal .
It is regulated by a 1994 cultural agreement between London and Moscow .
I therefore request that the matter be raised by colleagues with Russia in the context of our interparliamentary dialogue and that you , Mr President , use any opportunity which presents itself to express concern to the Russian authorities that a cultural matter , regulated by a perfectly normal agreement between two countries , is being trodden upon in an attempt by the Russian authorities to stifle political debate .
( PL ) Mr President , the House has debated the problems associated with the demographic shortfall threatening Europe on many occasions , that is to say , we have discussed the consequent social problems .
At the same time , VAT on children 's goods in the European Union is charged at the basic rate , in other words , at the highest possible rate .
Children 's goods were subject to a special lower rate in Poland before my country joined the Union .
One of the legal implications of Poland 's entry into the Union unfortunately involved raising the VAT rate on children 's goods , which ran counter to the family-orientated policy adopted by Poland .
I call on the European Commission to consider amending the relevant provisions for the benefit of all Member States of the Union , and in particular for the benefit of the poorest families bringing up children .
This would help us all to implement the Lisbon Strategy .
( ES ) Mr President , the Commission 's Work Programme for 2008 states that the citizen is and should be the core of the European project .
Extrapolating on this idea , I believe that the European Union is not approaching the Kosovo process in the correct manner .
We cannot continue to debate whether this or that international situation is appropriate for recognising Kosovo 's independence .
One question must take precedence over all the others : what do the people of Kosovo want ?
They are the most important of all . The key to resolving the conflicts lies in two elements : respect for human rights and recognition of their right as a people to decide freely on their future .
I believe that the European Union should use these words as a reference for situations that arise both within and outside its borders .
- ( CS ) I would like to talk about an awkward issue , which is the widespread campaign against smoking and smokers in the European Union , a campaign which is also based on legal acts passed by the European Parliament .
There is no doubt that the motivation for the campaign is a noble one , as it relates to citizens ' health .
However , in my opinion it is also highlighting issues which are not dignified and which discriminate against a large section of society , which has practically been criminalised due to its dependence on smoking .
The heavy financial losses of pub-type establishments in the countries that introduced a ban on smoking in restaurants cannot be overlooked either .
I presume that the attention that is given to smokers should also appropriately be given to the tobacco industry .
It is not a secret that for decades some ingredients have been added to tobacco , such as nitrosamines , which are nitrogen compounds that cause cancer and an increased absorption of nicotine .
In most cases the damage to a human being is caused not by nicotine but by these very admixtures .
In my opinion , tobacco production and the composition of tobacco products should also be subject to regulation .
Mr President , three years ago this month , Robert McCartney was brutally murdered by IRA members in Belfast .
Abhorrence at that murder reached this House when the McCartney sisters brought here and put their case for justice in respect of that .
Three years on , justice still evades them .
Why ?
Primarily because the party which could help the most - Sinn Fein - is still more interested in protecting their own than seeing the killers brought to justice .
Indeed , the situation has worsened , because pressure on Sinn Fein has been eased by their admission to government , with the result that , for the sake of maintaining that government , those like my former party the DUP are prepared to let Sinn Fein off the hook .
Tragically , justice for Robert McCartney is secondary to maintaining the ' chuckle coalition ' at Stormont .
Likewise with the more recent murder of Paul Quinn , undoubtedly by the military wing of Sinn Fein - it , too , will be shamefully whitewashed and swept under the carpet .
That is what happens when you treat with the forces of terrorism .
( EL ) Mr President , in our first part-session of the New Year , I would like to talk about the political crisis , which continues to beset Lebanon be mired and the role that our Parliament should play .
Together with the complex economic and political problems faced by this friendly nation , there is still an institutional vacuum , because since 23 November 2007 it has not been possible for its parliament to elect a president ; this election has been postponed 12 times . Thus parliament remains closed and there is no possibility of discussing problems and prospects , or of putting to good use all the parliament 's constitutional powers to elect a president .
I am aware of your sensitivity and the messages that you have sent to try to achieve this aim , Mr President , but I want to stress once again that we must express our deep unease concerning the consequences of this crisis for the suffering people of Lebanon , as well as for peace and stability in the region .
Our democratic duties oblige us to do this , as do our obligations within the partnership .
The association agreement with Lebanon provides for a stable political dialogue between the European Parliament and the Lebanese Parliament ; we must make good use of this opportunity and send an effective message .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Slovenia , the only country of the former Yugoslavia to have joined the European Union , has now taken over the Presidency of the Union .
On the occasion of this historic event we would like to wish it every success with its Presidency .
Nonetheless , there has never been a more pressing need to resolve the Yugoslavian crisis once and for all , be it the Kosovo issue or speeding up the accession of its Balkan neighbours .
The only solution for the countries that were part of the former Yugoslavia is swift accession to the Union , in accordance with the established criteria .
Peace requires an ambitious vision and , in particular , the will to move beyond the Balkans ' history and look towards a European future .
To date , the Kosovo issue has not been resolved because the international community has been unable to come to an agreement .
The European Union has also been a victim of this deadlock , this syndrome .
Between the countries that are fearful of the effects of independence and those who dream only of validating their independence as soon as possible for various diplomatic reasons , Slovenia will initially have to ensure the cohesion of the Union by seeking first and foremost an internal compromise , if the EU 's foreign policy as laid down in the Treaty of Lisbon is not to be trivialised or even ridiculed .
We know , nevertheless , that Mount Triglav in Slovenia symbolises determination and accomplishment .
Let us hope therefore that it will be the symbol of 2008 !
( SL ) Croatia announced an environmental / fishing zone in the Adriatic in October 2003 .
Slovenia and Italy objected to it .
This led a year later to the signing of an agreement between Slovenia , Italy , the European Union and Croatia .
According to that agreement the zone does not affect the Member States .
In spite of that , the Croatian Assembly decided unilaterally last year that the environmental / fishing zone would affect the Member States as well from 1 January of this year at the latest .
The Assembly thereby made the lives of people living around the Adriatic difficult .
This unilateral decision by Croatia presented problems for fishermen , for example , because it reduced their fishing territory and the port of Koper lost its access to international waters .
The Assembly 's decision that the environmental / fishing zone should affect the Member States from 1 January of this year is contrary to the international obligation accepted by Croatia and gives reason to doubt its credibility .
Obligations adopted by a country should not be violated in modern , democratic , legal states .
It totally contradicts the political culture of the European Union .
I therefore wonder if Croatia truly wishes to become a member of the European Union .
If it does , it must act immediately and start complying with the agreement on the environmental / fishing zone as well as with all other agreements reached thus far .
( HU ) The Szigetköz , lying partly in Austria and Slovakia and the Hungarian stretch of the Danube , is one of the most beautiful areas in Europe .
It is an island of biodiversity with its natural features , the wealth of its fauna and flora , its water habitats and the traditional way of life of the people who live there .
Unfortunately the flow rate of the river nourishing this region has dropped to danger level over the past decades due to hydrological interference .
It is not just in the interests of the area affected but in the interests of Hungary and the entire Union that this unique natural asset is not lost to future generations .
We already have good laws , such as the Water Framework Directive , which should in principle protect the region .
However for these to be successful they need to be enforced at national and Union level .
It would be desirable for Slovakia , regardless of the Nagy-Duna matter , to cooperate with Hungary in stabilising the water supply to this area .
I would like to invite you on a tour in this romantic landscape in the Spring , but unfortunately we cannot do it without water , and so we need every possible assistance .

( FR ) Mr President , I would like to draw the attention of this House to the fate of two French journalists , Pierre Creisson and Thomas Dandois , who are currently in prison in Niger .
They are accused of undermining state security , which carries a possible death sentence in Niger .
There is no doubt that the two journalists and their driver , Al-Hassane , broke Niger laws by entering a prohibited area .
In my opinion , however , it was for sound journalistic reasons because their aim was to report on the Tuareg rebellion , and they also intended to return to the capital to question the Niger authorities so that they would have as broad a view as possible .
I therefore believe that it is essential for us to take action to help these two journalists : firstly , because they risk being sentenced to death , a punishment that is out of all proportion with their actions , and secondly , because Niger is considered to be a friend of ours and a country that we help a great deal .
It would not deserve the reputation that this attitude could generate .
I believe , Mr President , that you and my fellow Members could be of great assistance if you participate in this request for reflection , for clemency from President Tandja , so that these two journalists can be released .
Even though they did break Niger laws , their actions do not warrant such a long imprisonment .
We shall monitor all this very carefully .
( PL ) Mr President , I take the floor today as a member of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , and also as a citizen of a country that has been forced to fight for its independence and freedom on many occasions .
I should like to draw the attention of the House to the lack of respect for human rights and denial of freedom of expression in the People 's Republic of China , as this affects the inhabitants of Tibet .
The latest example of the regime 's policy towards Tibet is the repression of the monks who expressed their delight at the award of the Congressional Gold Medal to the Dalai Lama .
The Dalai Lama has also received the Nobel Prize and has been fighting for respect for human rights over several decades .
We cannot allow Tibet or any other 21st century nation to be extinguished by a dictatorship , a tyranny , or by the sadistic desire to exert political dominance . The House must say ' stop ' .
It must say ' stop ' to attacks on a culture that is deemed to be the most peaceful culture on earth .
As free people committed to the fundamental values of the European Union , we should do all in our power to ensure that the people of Tibet can also come to understand the true meaning of the word freedom .
( DE ) Mr President , we are very shocked at the Russian Government 's closure of all the regional offices of the British Council .
These regional offices have been sacrificed as a result of the worsening relations between Russia and the United Kingdom .
Can civil society in Russia expect nothing more than this kind of provocation ?
The murder of Alexander Litvinenko has still not been solved and Russia refuses to cooperate in the matter .
The chief suspect , Andrei Lugovoi , has been a member of the Duma since the end of 2007 .
The circumstances surrounding the death of Anna Politkovskaya have also still not been explained .
Is criticism being stifled under a mantle of secrecy or is it simply being eradicated ?
The EU must call on Russia to respect human rights and the rule of law .
We can set an example by naming our press office after Anna Politkovskaya .
( PT ) Mr President , following on from the third round of negotiations between the Polisario Front , the only legitimate representative of the Sahrawi people , and the Kingdom of Morocco , which took place under the auspices of the United Nations on 8 and 9 January , I must stress the current necessity and importance of demanding full respect for the inalienable right of the Sahrawi people to self-determination .
This is the only fair and lasting solution to this dispute and is also in accordance with international law and the UN resolutions .
The Moroccan authorities must be told to end their dilatory manoeuvring , which is aimed at delaying and , if possible , boycotting the current negotiation process .
The Moroccan authorities must also be told to end the repression and colonisation of the occupied territories of the Western Sahara .

Mr President , Mr Hu Jia , an AIDS campaigner , a human rights activist and nominee of this Parliament for the Sakharov Prize in 2007 was arrested in Beijing on 27 December 2007 by the Chinese authorities and charged with subversion .
I am an admirer of the progress made in recent decades in China ; however , the arrest of Mr Hu Jia by the Chinese sends out completely the wrong message , one that is very difficult for us to understand .
Are the Chinese going to ignore the commitment they made to the international community when they promised to improve the human rights situation in China in return for the Beijing Olympics ?
We as a parliament need to respond very firmly to protect this man who is now incarcerated , most probably for cooperating with the European Parliament when he gave testimony to the Subcommittee on Human Rights in November 2007 .
We also need to lend support to those campaigners in China seeking his release .
Since diplomatic language alone would only be regarded as acquiescence in Chinese culture , I believe we need a strong parliamentary resolution - hopefully this week - to protect Mr Hu Jia .


I urge you , Mr President , to raise the case of Mr Hu Jia with the Chinese authorities : it is imperative they hear the views of this Parliament .
Mr President , I rise to raise what may seem , on the face of it , a rather mundane issue : the implementation of the European Water Framework Directive of 2000 in Ireland .
The sad fact is that this Directive is being implemented in Ireland by the Irish Government by charging schools for water usage .
Because most schools in Ireland are funded to a large extent by voluntary fundraising , this essentially means that parents must raise the money to pay for the water .
That would be bad enough , but the Irish Government has decided to blame Europe for this decision , when of course it is entirely a matter for the Irish Government as to what policy it implements in relation to implementing the Water Directive .
The sensitivity of the issue arises because we are having a referendum in Ireland to make a political decision , and a cowardly political tactic to blame Europe for the Government 's decision runs the risk of alienating all the parents in Ireland against Europe .
This is , in my view , a serious matter and I would urge the President of Parliament and the Vice-President of the Commission , who is here today , to make it clear to the Irish Government and to make a public statement to the effect that they are free to charge or not to charge schools for water and that they should not be taking risks with the future of Europe with cowardly political tactics .
Mr President , in some of our Member States it is possible for people to walk in off the street and receive training in the use of guns , and indeed Magnum guns , without any identification whatsoever , or without having a gun licence .
I raise this here because there is evidence to suggest that organised criminals in Ireland are coming to parts of the European Union for such training and then returning to Ireland and murdering people through gangland murders .
Often innocent bystanders are murdered as well .
I raise this because , in November , Parliament approved a new directive , and that directive is now with the Council .
I urge the Council to approve this directive this month so that it will pass at first reading .
Secondly , I want to ask the Commission not to wait until this is transposed into national law in 27 Member States - that could take up to two years - but to start implementing some of the provisions , one of which is to set up a contact group of the 27 Member States with the Commission to start working to counteract the illegal use of weapons .
I urge that this be done without further delay .
( ET ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen .
We have been keeping an eye on Georgia for some time now .
The Presidential elections are over and finally the result is clear .
Revolution , it is said , devours its own children .
President Saakashvili was probably somewhat overcome by his fear of it .
The exercise of physical power by a country is the sign not of the country 's might but of its weakness .
Objectively , we should note that following the suppression of demonstrations there , Georgia at least tried to hold democratic elections .
Democracy , however , is not a thing .
It is a way of thinking and cannot be removed one day or transplanted from one country to another .
Considerable opposition has emerged in Georgia .
In the name of democratic progress we should help government circles to understand the nature of the essential ingredients of democracy .
Georgia must find the strength within itself to step back from crisis .
Parliamentary elections are in the offing .
The country needs democratic reforms to continue and the people are expecting nothing less .
It would be wrong of us in the European Union to stake things on one individual .
What we should do is support institutions , provide expert assistance , and honestly and openly point to any aspects which are incompatible with democracy .
Finally I would like to say that what is happening in Georgia is perhaps also the key for Armenia .
Presidential elections are also in the offing there .

( PL ) Mr President , for the period 2008-2012 the European Commission has allocated Poland the right to emit only 208 million tonnes of carbon dioxide . That is almost 30 % less than the amount the Polish Government applied for .
Poland has appealed against this decision to the European Court of Justice , but unfortunately it is not known when in the future the Court will rule on the matter . The Polish economy therefore has to adjust to the low limit set .
Cement works , steel works and other undertakings have to cut their production . Most importantly , there will be a marked rise in the cost of electricity .
It is estimated that prices will rise by approximately 10 % this year and by 20 % over four years , because the emission limits have also significantly affected the electricity-generating industry .
Imposing emission limits in this way , and sharing the burden involved unfairly , will not only slow down the development of new Member States such as Poland , but it will also impact significantly on the cost of living for their citizens .
I wish to register a strong protest against this .
( FR ) Mr President , on Friday , 11 January I was refused access to the Lille-Lesquin Detention Centre for foreigners .
My visit was part of the European Action Week against the detention of foreigners in Europe .
Mr President , in July 2003 , following , in fact , a request by the then President of our Parliament and Vice-President Onesta , the French authorities were obliged to stipulate that the rules that apply to visits by Members of the French Parliament and Senators also apply to Members of the European Parliament .
I would therefore ask you , Mr President , to speak to the French authorities once again to ensure that the commitments they made at that time are fully respected and , in particular , that Members of the European Parliament are treated in the same way as Members of the French Parliament .
This is all the more pertinent as the Members of this Parliament are currently examining a proposal for a directive on the return of third-country nationals , which could have very serious consequences for the detention of foreigners .
I would add that unannounced visits to detention centres are aimed at preventing ill-treatment , which generally goes unpunished in France , as indicated in the most recent report by the Committee for the Prevention of Torture .
( RO ) I am speaking today to bring to your attention the position of Romanian farmers one year after Romania 's accession .
In Romania , agriculture is still inefficient or not efficient enough , and yet it is a vital occupation for most of the population .
Farmers make up a significant proportion of the working population , but there is also a significant number of elderly farmers .
In this context , I welcome the Commission 's decision not to activate the safeguard clause in this field ; however , this is not enough .
In 2008 , European disbursements will amount to 25 % of the European average ; only in 9 years ' time will Romania be able to reach that average .
Over the last few years , Romania has been quick to transpose the acquis in the qualitative , health and phytosanitary fields .
Adjustment costs can be a major obstacle to Romanian farmers taking advantage of the common agricultural policy .
Romania is the second largest agricultural producer in Central Europe , after Poland , and it is only by capitalizing on European funding that this potential can be intelligently exploited and put to good use .
( SK ) The December session of the European Parliament was incorrectly informed that radio broadcasting for minorities in Slovakia is about to end and that the public service is closing down the Rádio Patria broadcasting in minority languages .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Slovak broadcasting service is not preparing any restrictions concerning Rádio Patria .
On the contrary , since January 2007 Rádio Patria has , for the first time in its history , an independent broadcasting radius , which covers 100 % of the Slovak Republic .
It broadcasts daily 8-10 hours of high-quality programming that consists of news , journalism and culture .
That is more than ever before .
No other European public service offers a similar range of broadcasting services for national minorities .
Mr Chairman , it is sad when a Member of the European Parliament imagines that in a democracy one can say anything without having verified whether it is correct .
Such attacks result in tension and they are detrimental to the good name of the country .
( SL ) Slovenia has taken over the Presidency of the European Union , and the Prime Minister of its government , who is also the President of the Council of the European Union , has already made two assessments of the extremely dramatic situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina , which differ from the earlier assessments of the situation in that country .
He said that the situation was so dramatic as to be worse than in Kosovo .
This provoked very heated reactions in Bosnia and Herzegovina , in the institutions of the Federation and in those of Republika Srpska , as well as among the population as a whole .
Even the High Representative , Mr Lajčák himself , had not given such a bleak assessment so far .
It seems to me , therefore , that the assessment is unrealistic , incorrect and unprofessional and does not provide the motivation for institutions or citizens of that country to be more successful in getting closer to the European Union .
It seems to me that , at this point in time , with issues as sensitive as Bosnia and Herzegovina , we need more harmonisation among the institutions of the European Union .
( PL ) In September 2006 the European Parliament appealed for an end to trade in seal products .
A record number of Members supported that declaration .
Unfortunately , however , despite such strong support and Parliament 's subsequent adoption of the so-called Action Plan on the Protection and Welfare of Animals , calling for a total ban on trade in seal products on the territory of the European Union , no positive outcome has been achieved .
The ban has proved ineffective and has not put an end to trade in seal fur within the Union , which remains one of the largest markets for such fur .
Young seals just a few days above the age protected under the ban are hunted for commercial purposes and sold legally .
The hunting methods fail to comply with even the most elementary principles . The animals are skinned whilst still alive and their bodies then dumped in the water .
This slaughter will continue as long as the European Commission does not impose a total ban on trade in all seal products .
Mr President , we have two million drug addicts in the European Union .
We have a drug epidemic , which has to be tackled head-on .
Fifteen years ago in Ireland , drug addiction was confined to Dublin .
Now it is in every city , town and village : heroin , cannabis , cocaine .
People are dying every day in Ireland and within the EU from drug addiction .
I welcome the current eight-year EU drug strategy .
But we have to ask ourselves realistically : is it working ?
We need to tackle the drug problem on all fronts .
First of all , we need to cut off supply .
Secondly , we need to try and persuade users to stop using drugs and to try and persuade people never to start using them , by means of high-profile advertising campaigns to simply frighten people .
Last but by no means least , we need more and better international cooperation .
( RO ) 2008 is the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue .
This is an opportunity for all 27 Member States to promote their culture , history , language and traditions .
The Union 's motto is ” Unity in diversity ” , and 2008 should make a real contribution to strengthening cohesion within the Union , using intercultural dialogue as a basis .
Over the centuries , Romania has been under various influences - Byzantine , Russian , Austro-Hungarian , and Ottoman .
86 % of the Romanian population are Eastern Orthodox , and Romania is the only Romance-speaking country where Eastern Orthodoxy is dominant .
I would like to emphasize that 18 denominations enjoy official recognition in Romania .
However , intercultural dialogue should include interdenominational dialogue .
I would like to ask the 34 delegations of the European Parliament to enhance their promotion of European values on other continents in the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue , and to facilitate the knowledge of other cultures and traditions .
It is my hope that the intercultural dialogue of 2008 will make an effective contribution to fostering peace , one of the European Union 's fundamental values .
( DE ) Mr President , the matter I wish to raise follows directly on from what Mrs Ţicău has just said : the 2008 Year of Intercultural Dialogue .
I agree with this and respect the fact that the Conference of Presidents has taken certain decisions , but I note with some regret that the religious representatives that are to speak here , with the exception of the Pope , all come from outside Europe .
Do we not have enough religious leaders here in Europe who can be invited to address this House ?
I therefore believe that it would make sense , and indeed you have just touched on this , Romania being a large Orthodox country , to invite as speakers to this House not only the Pope and Protestant church leaders - for there is also an intercultural dialogue between Christians - but Orthodox representatives too .
I would therefore request that you also consider extending an invitation to Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomaios as part of this Year of Intercultural Dialogue .
( ES ) Mr President , with this new year two new countries have joined the Euro zone and adopted our single currency .
This brings to the forefront once again a demand that should already be a reality in an advanced , modern and progressive Union : gender equality on new coins .
This has been a constant theme in history : women have scarcely ever been portrayed on newly minted coins .
Female figures , contributions and work have never been given any symbolic recognition , not only in this respect .
Gender equality is one of the values on which we are building the European Union and in that context equality should extend to all areas .
It is important to recognise and support the action of so many women in different spheres - science , culture , education , politics - whose work , lives and names should be recognised , studied and remembered .
In some countries , such as my own , Spain , the Parliament has approved a proposal to this end .
This Parliament and the Commission should take the necessary initiatives and recommend to all the Member States that they take the appropriate measures to ensure that when Euro coins are being minted , equal consideration be given to references and images of both men and women .
Mr President , one of my colleagues has suggested that a mundane matter has been brought up in this House , and that is the implementation of the Water Framework Directive in Ireland .
I think it is anything but mundane .
If it is mundane , we need to have more debates on it , because the Irish Government has got itself into hot water by blaming Europe for forcing it to charge schools for water , when in fact the issue is how it is underfunding schools and how badly it is communicating and implementing this important piece of legislation .
What is at risk is the view the Irish have of the European Union , because we constantly blame Europe for decisions that we are unhappy with , even though the government is party to the process of decision-making .
At a time when we are facing a referendum on the Reform Treaty , not only are parents looking at the EU with a side glance and believing it is the problem , but farmers and other lobby groups are also certainly not happy with the European Union at the moment .
Therefore , the Irish Government needs to explain fully how it is implementing this Directive ; it needs to fund the schools properly and it needs to answer the question of if and when domestic rates will be levied on Irish people .
That is what we need to know at this stage .
That concludes the item .
CARS 21 : A Competitive Automotive Regulatory Framework ( debate )
The next item is the report by Jorgo Chatzimarkakis , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on CARS 21 : A Competitive Automotive Regulatory Framework .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner Verheugen , the report that we are discussing is in fact only a report on a report , namely that which was drawn up by the Commission on the motor car of the future .
However , on 19 December the European Commission adopted a proposal relating to future permitted CO2 emissions from passenger cars .
The public is therefore naturally interested to see how the European Parliament will react to this proposal and the extent to which the decisions taken by Parliament are consistent with others that have been adopted more recently .
We have just been debating and voting on the report presented by my colleague Chris Davies and it is therefore important that we should also be consistent .
I would like to say something about this at a later point , for the CARS 21 report also covers many aspects that have nothing whatsoever to do with CO2 emissions .
It is very important that we should concern ourselves in this House with the subject of motor vehicles . Why ?
Because we have been discussing the Lisbon agenda for years now , and because all this while we have been debating the competitiveness of European industry .
Here we have a sector where we really are competitive . In the premium market , for example , Europe has been setting the standard at international level .
More than 80 % of the world 's top-of-the-range motor cars come from Europe .
The industry is one of the cornerstones of Europe 's economy and is also a key factor for European competitiveness .
CARS 21 stands for Competitive Automotive Regulatory System for the 21st Century .
This is a Communication from the Commission , which in 2005 set up the CARS 21 High Level Group in order to draw up proposals for a future regulatory framework for the EU automotive industry .
The aim of this exercise was to identify the adjustments that would have to be made to the automotive industry in order to keep this sector competitive in the years ahead .
It is not possible , at this point , to go into all the proposals that were made . However , the members of the European Parliament 's Committee on Industry , Research and Energy have drawn up a list of 89 of these .
I cannot deal with them all here , but they relate to issues such as road safety , environmental protection , the internal market , global trade , research and innovation , and many other things besides .
Let me just single out a few of the aspects involved .
We need to complete the internal market for car tuning parts and spares , for example .
It is unfair that German automotive tuning companies , for instance , are not allowed to sell products such as wheels in Italy because that country bans after-market tuning parts , while Italian manufacturers on the other hand can export to any country they choose , including Germany .
Here Europe needs a proper internal market for tuning and spare parts and we also need equal safety standards for the automotive tuning sector .
In addition , we need to introduce an EU-wide type-approval system , for there are blatant discrepancies in this area at the present time .
Here is something else too : we need a more simplified system for regulating type-approval procedures for used vehicles acquired within the EU and elsewhere .
Some national states have set high obstacles and built up a massive bureaucracy that makes it very difficult for dealers and private buyers of used vehicles .
Europe needs a common regulatory system in this area .
This will also be an important tool when it comes to fleet renewal .
We are developing a climate-protection policy in many other areas and we need it here too , which means we need to adjust and adapt .
Another important issue concerns research funding .
The automobile industry needs more research money from the Member States .
The growing number of mandatory targets , such as legislation on CO2 emissions , requires continuous adaptation on the part of the car industry .
If Europe is to strengthen its position in this market , both the Member States and the European Union will have to invest far more in vehicle research , and not just in developing alternative drive systems but in other areas too , such as energy storage .
We are already five to ten years behind our Asian competitors when it comes to research into storage battery technology .
Now to the subject of CO2 : in coordination with Chris Davies , the rapporteur for the Committee on Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , we have once again set out a number of central parameters .
These are based on the concept of penalties instead of bans , with vehicle weight being a key parameter , but they are also centred on a realistic assessment of when the CO2 legislation can take effect .
Parliament has decided that the target date should be 2015 .
We have also voted for the figure of 125 grams as the basic emission target .
If I could now just make one comment to the Commission : the penalty that you have specified in your proposal is 15 times higher than that imposed on CO2 emissions from chimneys .
This makes CO2 from vehicle exhausts 15 times more expensive than that which is emitted from chimneys .
For this reason we require a realistic rating .
What we have at present is too ambitious .
I should like to express my thanks to those colleagues who helped put this report together .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the significance of CARS 21 extends far beyond the automotive sector .
It is also the model for Europe 's future industrial policy .
Here for the first time , and by working closely with all the parties involved , we are attempting to reach joint agreement on a long-term , stable framework for the development of one of Europe 's key industries .
I am very proud to say that we have been successful in this .
This is all based on a quite clear division of responsibilities .
We told the European car manufacturers that they could not expect us to introduce protectionist measures in order to safeguard them from the growing competition coming from other parts of the world .
We also said to them , however , that they could count on having a set of stable , reliable and predictable framework conditions and , more importantly , sufficient time - which is something Mr Chatzimarkakis just mentioned - in order to prepare themselves for the mandatory requirements to come .
I should at this point just like to say something about the position of the European car industry : this is one of the very few market sectors in which Europe continues to be the undisputed global leader .
It is a key industry for Europe , for technological development , for growth and , last but not least , for employment .
I put up a vigorous defence against those voices in Europe who give the impression that there is something immoral , even criminal , in building , purchasing and driving motor cars .
The car is part of our European way of life and it must be affordable , it must be safe , it must be reliable and it must be clean .
This is precisely what CARS 21 is all about .
The European car industry is not opposed to the ambitious environmental targets that the European Commission has put forward in its proposal .
I should at this point also like to make something else quite clear : I am not against them either .
The next stage in limiting CO2 emissions from private motor cars - with no ifs , ands or buts - will be to set a European average of 120 grams per kilometre .
This is not inconsistent with the 125 grams mentioned by Mr Chatzimarkakis , because 5 grams of this is to be achieved through the use of bio-fuels .
There is absolutely no disputing the fact that this will be our next target .
I am also confident that the European car industry will benefit from such a legislator-driven innovation surge in that the sector will not only be producing the safest and best-quality vehicles but also the most environmentally-friendly cars in the world .
I have not the slightest doubt that this will happen .
In the course of the debate there were some suggestions made that I did not like at all , namely - and I will not put too fine a point on this - the attempt to pit manufacturers of large cars against those who build smaller vehicles , or to play off drivers of larger cars , those who can afford and wish to own such vehicles , against those who can only afford or prefer to drive smaller ones , the motto being : big car bad , small car good .
The French President , Nicolas Sarkozy , introduced a noteworthy argument into the debate when he wrote to the Commission President that the ability to spend a lot of money on a car - in other words to buy a big and expensive vehicle - did not entitle you to produce more pollution .
This is certainly an argument worth reflecting on .
I do not live in France but I know that in France there are people who live in large castles and who need a lot of energy to heat these buildings .
I also know that in France there are people who live under the arches of bridges and who generate no heating costs whatsoever .
Where is the difference ?
If it is immoral to drive a large car and therefore to cause more pollution than someone who drives a small vehicle , then it is also immoral to live in a detached house and to generate more heating costs than someone who lives in a one-room apartment .
I would just like to draw attention to the fact that while this argument may seem quite convincing at first glance , on closer inspection it would mean that the CO2 issue would , in a roundabout way , lead us down the road to pervasive lifestyle regulations in Europe .
That is something we certainly do not want and the Commission does not want it either .
We want to retain the entire range of models being produced by the European automotive industry and there is no reason why this should not be possible .
I believe that in the consultation process that is about to commence we shall have to weigh up very carefully exactly what we can and want to ask of manufacturers , consumers and other road users .
Ladies and gentlemen , I have to say to you that we are expecting a very great deal of them .
Everything that we have already agreed on by way of the Euro 5 and Euro 6 standards , which have already come into force , will make European motor cars much more expensive .
The regulations that we will be introducing to give pedestrians better protection , in other words those measures directed towards vehicle design that will protect pedestrians more effectively in the event of their being involved in an accident , will also cost a great deal of money .
The compulsory introduction of electronic stability control systems on European cars will be very expensive too , and on top of this there is the cost of CO2 reduction .
We are doing this against the backdrop of a situation in which there is one particular sector of Europe 's automotive industry that is under attack from international competitors , a sector that is already earning the least revenue , where export opportunities are declining and where imports are exceeding exports , namely the small and medium-sized vehicle market .
I am quite concerned for the future of a large number of European manufacturers .
I am fully convinced that it is absolutely vital for all industrial products , and this includes the motor car , to be taken to the maximum level of eco-friendly development that is technically feasible .
However , I am not of the opinion that we should do this in such a way - and this applies to all industrial products , not just cars - that we compromise the international competitiveness of our industries .
We have to be quite clear about one thing : if by our policies - and I say this with next week 's debate very much in mind - we cause industries to abandon their European facilities and to set up production sites elsewhere in the world , the effect on the environment will certainly not be a positive one , for in these other places they will be then be producing their goods under much worse environmental conditions .
If the steel manufacturers were to move out of Europe to Kazakhstan , believe me , in that country the rules are far less strict than here in Europe .
The result would be an increase in emissions and at the same time tens of thousands , if not hundreds of thousands , of jobs would be lost .
I would appreciate it if these points were not forgotten in the course of the impassioned debate to come .
A modern European industrial policy and a modern European environmental policy can demonstrate that economy and ecology are not natural opposites , and that it is possible to solve the ecological challenges of the future by way of a rational economic approach combined with modern technology .
This was the subject discussed by all those involved in CARS 21 , which is being debated here today , and this was the ultimate outcome .
I believe the result is one that deserves the broad support of the European public at large .
( Applause )

draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on International Trade . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Chatzimarkakis , I was responsible for drafting the relevant report for the INTA Committee .
Here we essentially focused on three key aspects .
First of all , we called on the Commission to ensure as a matter of urgency , and with due care and diligence , that all recommendations are examined to determine to what extent they impact on the multilateral stage - the so-called Doha Round - and on the bilateral agreements . These bilateral agreements were of special interest to us , as here in the case of Korea .
However , we also focused attention on other countries such as India and the ASEAN states .
It is important to ensure that market access is only opened up provided that we are also able to have appropriate guarantees from the other side .
This relates especially to the so-called non-tariff trade barriers .
Secondly , we wish to see greater coordination when it comes to setting international agreements and international standards .
Thirdly , we would urgently recommend that when examining internal competition we do not lose sight of international competitive conditions , which have changed considerably in recent years .
We now recognise that we have many more international competitors to deal with .
Mr President , the automotive sector , which provides the European economy with a significant number of jobs , needs an ambitious framework that provides for coherent , integrated measures , in accordance with the Lisbon Strategy , to cope with the new challenges .
Our industry is the world 's largest producer of cars and second largest producer of lorries , and it has good after-sales services . As such , it needs to assert its position and ensure that it is capable of meeting the mobility and transport requirements , increasing productivity , improving safety and benefiting the environment .
To achieve this , economic efficiency is crucial .
It is what is going to allow us to meet all of the objectives and guarantee affordable prices for fleet renewal , i.e. purchasing vehicles , and for maintaining them during their useful life .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has highlighted this aspect and expressed its support for efforts to improve competition and the protection of intellectual property rights , and to improve the tax treatment of the sector .
These points are to a large extent incorporated in the report and I therefore congratulate the rapporteur .
reporter of the opinion of the Employment and Social Committee . ?
( LT ) I congratulate Mr Jorgo Chatzimarkakis for preparing this report .
The car industry really is one of the most important ones .
2.3 million people work directly in it and another 10-12 million in auxiliary sectors .
This makes 7 percent of all the people working in the industrial sector of the Community .
Members of the Community must take care of those people who could lose their jobs due to structural changes in advance and prepare for this appropriately .
Currently , problems are solved only when they occur .
We have to ensure that Community funds allocated for enterprises undergoing reconstruction directly reach the employees .
Most especially , it is necessary to support those who want to start their own business - I have in mind the Globalisation Fund .
Humanity is the most important when various changes take place and our responsibility is to take care of the Community 's citizens , protect them from unemployment and effectively use social guarantees .
Only this can help to gain the confidence of people .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety . - ( DE ) Mr President , I would like to add to the debate by introducing two figures , so that we all know what we are talking about .
There are now 700 million cars in the world at a time when oil prices are at 100 dollars .
Last week Tata Motors brought out a cut-price motor car that averages five litres per hundred kilometres , but five litres is still a lot for such a small car .
This all goes to show that in the years to come hundreds of millions of private cars will appear on the roads of the emergent nations - China , India , other Asian countries , South America and the African states .
In the light of such a scenario , we are surely not planning to protect those European manufacturers who believe that they have to market two-tonne limousines with fuel consumption rates of seven , eight , ten litres or more , simply because we have a so-called competitive advantage in this area .
I find the current debate to be nothing more than a fiasco .
Mr Ferber of the CSU recently threatened Commission President Barroso that his CDU / CSU Group would not support a second mandate if Mr Barroso continued to back Mr Dimas in opposing the German automobile industry .

Mr Verheugen , if you pardon my saying so , you surely cannot be cross with Mr Sarkozy .

Why are you cross ?
Because he and Mr Prodi wrote a letter that sought to ensure that the Commission would not set the growth curve at 80 , as the German car industry wanted , but that a compromise would be found .
I find what Mr Prodi and Mr Sarkozy did in relation to this debate to be absolutely and completely legitimate .
Nor am I surprised that here again an FDP politician has naturally fallen into line behind the German car lobby .

If I may say so , Mr Chatzimarkakis , your report falls behind what Chris Davies produced , because instead of footprint you are now giving priority to vehicle weight , and because instead of 125 grams based on vehicle technology you are now calling for an integrated target of 125 grams .
This means that today Parliament has backtracked somewhat .
As for the argument about a timeline , what are we doing there ?
By setting the date 2012 we are only trying to bring more quickly to market technology that already exists .
The most important element is missing : where is the target for 2020 ?
Mr Verheugen , you are calling for a solid framework .
How should I , as a car-industry manager , know which direction to go in when Europe 's policy-makers fail to set any terms of reference specifying how energy efficient I should be by 2020 .
There is no mention of this either in the Commission 's proposal or in yours .
If this Parliament is to do anything when it comes to the report on the legislation then it should produce a proposal on where we need to be by 2020 .
That is what we need : stable , long-term planning .
Draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection . - Mr President , I want to start my speech by agreeing for once with Mr Turmes .
This report is all about giving a crucial industry a stable framework within which to meet the societal demands that we are placing on it - whether they concern environment or safety .
Whether Mr Dimas has achieved that and done a proper impact assessment in comparison with what is in the CARS 21 report , I beg to differ .
One of the things I would like to ask Commissioner Verheugen to do is to take a message to Mr Dimas and ask him to explain how the process that he is currently using to develop this regulation is in any way compatible with what is in the CARS 21 proposal .
I declare an interest in this because I was a member - a working member - of the High Level Group .
This is the third report .
The High Level Group made its report , the Commission made a very good response accepting most of the recommendations of the stakeholders and now this Parliament , thanks to the good work of Mr Chatzimarkakis , is going to convincingly endorse those conclusions .
But there is one other group that characteristically is conspicuously missing from this debate , and that is the Member States .
One of the most important recommendations of CARS 21 is an integrated approach .
Member States have a major stake in this , so why are they not here this evening ?
They are the ones who behave idiosyncratically in their national regulations and undermine the achievement of that stable framework , that internal market , that achievement of the environmental and safety goals that we want to achieve , those targets of reducing road deaths - where we have very ambitious targets and where they can make big investments in infrastructure and driver training .
Why are they not here ?
We need to send a clear message to them .
One of the things that we ask from the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection is for this Parliament to take an initiative in getting other national parliamentarians together in this House to talk in the framework of CARS 21 about how they , as national and local politicians , are going to contribute to these overall goals of achieving a competitive car industry with the highest possible technology and preserving and developing jobs and employment , while achieving the goals that we all want to meet in terms of science , safety and environmental improvements .
( Applause )
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Transport and Tourism . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wanted to include a few suggestions in the opinion on A Competitive Automotive Regulatory Framework in the 21st Century , given its high strategic value for growth and jobs in the Union , but also in view of the need to do more , by adapting vehicles and infrastructure and applying technological innovation , to make European roads safer .
I believe that all of this can indeed be done by reducing emissions , but an integrated approach should have been pursued to this end , as proposed by the CARS 21 Group ; I do rather get the impression that the Commission has somewhat disregarded this approach .
I particularly deplore the failure to emphasise the policies needed to attain the accepted cost-benefit principle .
Furthermore , I note that , in order to achieve the aim of increasing the use of biofuels , it is vital to promote the necessary locally-based facility network enabling citizens to obtain supplies .
Otherwise this aim will not be achieved .
I will conclude by saying that I had hoped - and still hope - that judicious approaches will be taken to ensure that the cost of technological adaptation can be met on a level playing field guaranteeing free competition and genuine competitiveness within the EU .
As a matter of fact , I have also drawn the attention of my fellow Members and the Commission to the importance of maintenance , but with little success .
Draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs . - Mr President , the Committee on Legal Affairs supports the CARS 21 initiative , which we believe was an exemplary example of stakeholder involvement .
We say yes to the integrated approach , which we believe is fundamental to the success of this initiative .
But , like Mr Harbour , I would raise the question about Member States ' commitment , given their unilateral desire on occasion to legislate or implement fiscal regimes which undermine the integrated approach .
Yes to simplification , replacing 38 directives with UN regulations - as long as we are not seen as abdicating our right to legislate should we need to - and yes to the development of technologically driven solutions such as ECOR .
But I would hope that the Commission could take more action , as Ms Mann has suggested , on intellectual property rights , particularly in relation to China .
We would like to see a proper implementation of the Regulation on Motor Vehicle Distribution in the EU and we believe it is fundamental to address non-harmonised implementation , the End-of-Life Vehicles Directive .
We have to improve cross-border inspections of vehicles and cross-border enforcement of traffic rules in other Member States , because otherwise the whole situation becomes very disparate .
But , like Mr Turmes , I believe that what we should be looking for is a framework which extends to 2020 and beyond .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate Commissioner Verheugen on having taken the initiative to create a high-level group , CARS 21 , to examine the European automotive industry .
In 2003 several Ministers for Industry , including myself , were in favour of this new method , which involves examining a given industrial sector in detail in order to find the appropriate solutions for it .
You will recall that this method was successfully applied to the textiles sector , for example . It enables us to involve the stakeholders and to achieve an integrated approach .
I have just one wish for the future : representation that gives greater consideration to the diversity of professions covered by the sector and even greater involvement of the European Parliament .
That being said , I would like to mention three of the proposals put forward in the excellent report by Jorgo Chatzimarkakis .
The first is the importance of stressing that the automotive sector is a source of jobs , competitiveness , growth and innovation and thus calling for greater investment in research and development , particularly in the areas of hydrogen motors , fuel cells or hybrids .
The message is clear and research into vehicle technologies will certainly have to be one of the priorities of the European Institute of Innovation and Technology .
Secondly , as regards the contribution of the automotive industry to the fight against global warming , the targets for the reduction of CO2 emissions are in line with the Davies report we adopted in October .
We must give the industrial sectors time to prepare .
As a result , I believe that it would not be wise to bring forward the 2015 deadline .
Nonetheless , the fight against greenhouse gas emissions must also involve tax measures that act as an incentive for fleet renewal .
Finally , I am pleased that our rapporteur calls for the creation of an internal market for custom and tuning parts and for greater efforts to combat the import of counterfeit spare parts .
The safety of the citizens and the survival of thousands of European SMEs are at stake .
In conclusion , ladies and gentlemen , I would just like to point out that it is essential to take into account the pressure on the European automotive industry and the ever-increasing competition .
I would like to thank Mr Chatzimarkakis for his excellent collaboration with the shadow rapporteurs and congratulate him on having achieved this very dynamic result , which augurs well for this important sector of our economy .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , setting up the CARS 21 High Level Group was exactly the right thing to do .
The results speak for themselves .
We had two representatives of Parliament in this Group - Malcolm Harbour and Garrelt Duin - and they produced some very good work .
As the shadow rapporteur for this report in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , I only wish to deal with the environmental issues .
However , as a member of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy too , I am firmly convinced that preserving and increasing the competitiveness of the European automotive industry is closely tied to the question of how eco-friendly and environmentally sustainable vehicles stamped ' made in Europe ' will be in the future .
I therefore welcome the fact that we were quick in implementing the Euro 5 and Euro 6 standards for motor cars and that the Commission proposal for a Euro 6 standard for goods vehicles has now been put forward .
This source-based legislation will enable us to help the towns , cities and communities of Europe to meet the particulate emission targets that have been set and in this way to provide a better air quality .
However , it remains a mystery to me that when it comes to emissions reduction people are always trying to postpone the 2012 deadline set for the introduction of the CO2 legislation and move it back to 2015 .
That is not right .
We have had the Bali Climate Conference , where Europe put forward a very assertive front .
However , when it comes to the actual legislation we always take a nifty step backwards .
Car manufacturers have known since 1995 that something had to be done in the area of research and development to produce environment-friendly models .
I think that a set-up time of 12 years would be sufficient to achieve the 120 g / km target by 2012 , and this includes any complementary measures .
That is something quite important .
Climate change will certainly not wait for us , which means that we have to act now .
It is also important to ensure that CO2 output will have peaked by the year 2015 so that we can then set about reducing these emissions .
Here every industry will have to play its part , including the vehicle manufacturers .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , the car industry should have reduced its emissions by a great deal more than it has , but we are where we are and it takes time to achieve change economically , so I welcome the rapporteur 's proposal to set a target of 125 g by 2015 , to bring it in line with the vote of this Parliament last October .
I think it is ambitious , but it is achievable . And , to a significant degree , it now reflects the Commission 's proposals for only a very gradual phase-in of penalties after 2012 .
But I am sorry that the rapporteur has proposed that the target values should be based on weight , because this removes an incentive to reduce the weight of cars and it goes counter to the vote we had in October .
So , please , let us be consistent .
In its proposals , the Commission has recognised that footprint may have great merit ; it simply says that we have not got the data to establish the credentials for that yet , so let us get the data as fast as we can and keep the options open .
We do not want to fight our business leaders and our entrepreneurs .
On the contrary , if we are to combat climate change and reduce the threat that now hangs over the survival of billions of people in the poorest parts of this planet , we have to get them to accept responsibility for their actions .
I was wrong in November when I claimed here that Michael O 'Leary , the boss of Ryanair , had said that he did not give a toss for the environment so long as he could stuff his pockets and those of his airline full of gold .
That may be the impression his scorn for environmentalists sometimes creates , but I apologise and withdraw the claim , and look forward to taking up his offer of a debate .
But if we are to tackle the problem of climate change , we need people like Mr O 'Leary and his counterparts in the car industry on side , working with us , pushing the boundaries of innovation and leading from the front .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Mr Chairman , ladies and gentlemen , I am convinced that in this case the rapporteur has done a great deal of work and demonstrated considerable skill in how to negotiate and how to compromise .
This concerns in particular the matter of emissions reduction in the automotive industry . We must be realistic and keep in mind that the industry belongs among the top industries in Europe and at the same time is one of the key employers .
As mentioned earlier , the industry provides more than two and a quarter million jobs and millions more in related fields .
In my opinion , reducing emissions in this industry will be a very difficult task .
In my view , the result here is a respectable and realistic document .
It is important , too , for it to support the endeavour to simplify significantly the legislation affecting the automotive industry : there are more than 200 regulations in existence today .
In this vein , I have tried , in my role as shadow rapporteur , to support the report with my amendments .
Their main objectives were to prevent the ambitious plans from tripping up the development of the field in Europe and our ability to compete in the world .

( SK ) Please allow me as an introduction to thank the rapporteur , Mr Chatzimarkakis , for his excellent report , which takes into consideration and pragmatically addresses all aspects of the regulatory framework , which are so important to the future of the automotive industry .
When we talk in this report about the European automotive industry 's ability to compete under the conditions of global development , we have to take into consideration , above all , those aspects that could significantly limit this ability .
I thought originally that it was not necessary to remind the European Commission of the significance of this industry to the economic and social development of the European Union , but since the Commission came up with the proposal of setting emission standards for new private cars , I am no longer so sure .
If that is correct , then the Commission would obviously pay more respect to the majority view of the European Parliament , as well as to the views of the expert groups who are advocating a more integrated approach .
The European Parliament is also critically considering the time within which the European automotive industry is able to meet the technologically ambitious emissions targets such in a way that would have the minimum impact on the European industry 's ability to compete .
The European Parliament expressed this clearly in the report by Mr Davies and in this very report : by majority vote the committee expressed its belief that the car companies could reach the CO2 level of 125 g / km by 2015 .
If we really hope to reduce emissions throughout the automotive sector , we must have a more comprehensive understanding of these issues .
The proposed step would definitely lead to a slowdown in the exchange of old cars , besides other negative impacts , such as the inability of less wealthy citizens to purchase new cars .
This aspect would be most likely to prevail in the new Member States where the level of exchanging old cars for new is , for economic reasons , low .
This certainly would not contribute to the reduction of CO2 , quite the contrary .
( NL ) Mr President , transport emissions are responsible for a fifth of greenhouse gas emissions .
The number of cars per thousand inhabitants is increasing fast all over the world , so cars really must become sustainable .
However , this is a message that is scarcely to be heard in the response of the Commission to the CARS 21 report and in the report itself .
The document speaks about making cars cleaner and the competitiveness of the automotive industry but it makes no connection between these two things , while it is obvious that sustainable and economical cars are the future .
Indian and Chinese car manufacturers are sweeping the world with small , economical , clean and cheap cars .
The European automotive industry meanwhile is fighting a rearguard action to be allowed to emit even more CO2 .
That is unfortunate for the environment but it is also unfortunate for employment in the European Union .
The CARS 21 High Level Group was a missed opportunity to put in place a vision of a sustainable automotive industry , a vision that provides an answer to the real challenges .
Innovation is the key word here .
In the United States a hydrogen highway is being laid and the market is being prepared for electric vehicles .
Where are the European initiatives ?
Some car manufacturers have the prototypes ready , but there are still no hydrogen vehicles on the road .
It is time for governments and industry to unite and work together in order to make rapid progress .
Research alone is not enough .
The setting-up of high level groups is an excellent idea in theory , but unfortunately CARS 21 was dominated by a conservative branch of industry .
It is really important that the composition of high level groups does justice to the challenges we are facing .
Millions of new cars are going to come on to the market over the next few years and it would really help if they were clean and economical .
( DE ) Mr President , car manufacturing is one of Europe 's key industries .
It employs some 12 million people , it represents innovation and growth and it produces something designed to provide individual mobility .
It must therefore be our aim to see that the European car industry maintains its global leadership and its competitiveness .
At the same time , however , we need to remember that in today 's global economy there is a very fine line between incentives for innovation and penalties for economic actions , and that , at the end of the day , we are still exporting the best products in the world and not just outsourcing our production locations .
I essentially want to focus on the CO2 issue , which is without doubt one of the most important aspects of the subject we are discussing here .
Lifestyle criticism , which Mr Verheugen mentioned , has long been an unpleasant aspect of the European climate debate .
It is very ' in ' to criticise individual lifestyles .
Claude Turmes has just done as much .
The thing is , if we were to withdraw all the two-tonne limousines from the market , as he would dearly like to do , the CO2 reductions would scarcely be measurable , but the damage to the national economy would be enormous .
Let me now comment on the proposed CO2 regulation that is currently on the table .
Mr Verheugen has said quite clearly in this respect that he has no wish to introduce legislation that would constitute a lifestyle criticism .
However , when I look at the penalty payments now being proposed for minimal deviations from the prescribed limits , I tend to be of the view that this is precisely what the Commission has done .
In actual fact , the regulation that we are discussing and approving here today is hostile to innovation , for the money that the car manufacturers will have to pay out is needed for innovation and research .
Mr President , the car of today is , in some ways , very much the same as that of 100 years ago but , at the same time , it is extremely different regarding security , efficiency and its effect on the environment .
This proves one thing : the strength of competition develops technology at a pace we cannot imagine .
It also underlines the need for Europe to have a competitive car industry if we are to contribute to the global agenda and to better standards for the environment in the global economy , because , if we do not , we will not be able to influence that development .
Those who call for a policy that would decrease the competitiveness of the European car industry do not contribute to a better environment - it is important to state that .
It is also important to state that the target of 125 g , as stated in the report , is acceptable and a step forward .
But the important thing is not to discuss emissions from individual cars - big or small - because we need big cars and we will need small cars : they play a different role in different parts of our Union , in our countries .
What we need is an overall development that decreases emissions in all sorts of cars .
Therefore , it is important to support new cars , because they are better , to support better road systems , better transport systems , better fuels and better engines .
That can only be done by a competitive European car industry and that can only be achieved if we have the right policies to balance the environment and competitiveness , and this report makes a good contribution towards that .
( RO ) First of all , I would like to extend my congratulations to the Rapporteur for the work done on this report .
I consider this to be an extremely important debate .
The European Union can have the most dynamic knowledge-based economy only if it invests enough in research and especially if the results can be integrated into industrial production .
Climate change is one of the major challenges of the century .
In major urban areas , traffic and pollution constitute a problem for 66 % of European citizens , and 70 % of the citizens expect the Union to show active involvement in dealing with these problems .
The automotive industry should be capable of delivering less polluting products ; however , the industry needs support in its research activities and it is especially important that any constraint should take into account the time required to develop new types of cars , from concept to design , manufacturing , testing and marketing .
We should also take into consideration market demand and in particular the citizens ' buying power .
In this context , I believe that Member States should be encouraged to devise tax incentives for end-users , so as to encourage them to invest in greener cars .
Such a system was introduced in Romania as early as 2003 , with very good results .
The development of the European automotive industry will lead to the preservation and creation of a significant number of jobs .
( SV ) Mr President , I thank the rapporteur for a good piece of work on an important and sensitive matter .
We all know how important the car industry is in the EU .
Our car industry , not least in my home country , is a leading contender in the fields of development , research , performance , the environment and safety .
A successful car industry is important to the Union .
We are talking about jobs and growth , but also about responsibility for our environment , for the global climate .
The Commission proposes far-reaching legislation focused on compulsory reductions in carbon dioxide emissions from engine exhausts , improved vehicle technology and use of biofuels .
The rapporteur has misgivings about targets which are so difficult for industry to attain that they can jeopardise the competitiveness of companies , but we have heard that before in this debate .
I have also heard such arguments back home .
I can understand and share those misgivings , but I believe that it would be unfortunate in this situation if Parliament were to lower the level of ambition .
I am quite confident that the EU car industry can cope with targets set at high levels through research and development .
It has demonstrated its ability to do so in the past .
The people of our countries do not want to pay too much for their cars , but they also know that we must get to grips with climate change and that we need to act quickly .
- ( DA ) Mr President , I should like to join the many Members who have thanked the rapporteur for the excellent report we are discussing here .
It is clear that , given so many cars , the increasing mobility and an increasing desire to give even more people the opportunity to drive , the issue of emissions is a key problem that we shall have to address .
Carbon dioxide is not toxic to humans in itself , and a little more CO2 in the atmosphere would actually make plants grow slightly faster .
It is , however , ruinous to the climate , and so it is important that we do what we can to reduce CO2 emissions .
In my opinion , we must place greater reliance on research , to enable us to develop engines that run at a significantly higher temperature than is currently the case - possibly using ceramic or other materials , and especially by means of a much more widespread use of software for control purposes .
I believe that the objectives laid down will be easy to achieve .
There is no reason to believe that , given a concentrated , targeted effort and substantial research resources , Europe should not be able to achieve the objectives it has set itself , and make itself the leading industry within the automotive sector that it already is .

( ES ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr Chatzimarkakis on his report as it urges the Commission to set ambitious yet realistic targets .
It also follows some of the CARS 21 recommendations , such as the integrated approach to the reduction of CO2 emissions , the need to ensure appropriate lead-times and the protection of the internal and external competitiveness of the European industry .
I would like to highlight a number of issues .
The first of these is the fact that the road safety objectives are a key element and here , too , we need an integrated approach that incorporates vehicle technology improvements , infrastructure measures , and education and information .
As regards trade , and in particular the negotiations with Korea , it is important to ensure that Korea abolishes the existing non-tariff barriers and does not create new ones .
It is also essential to emphasis the crucial role played by the better regulation principles , i.e. proper impact assessments , the cost-effectiveness principle or appropriate lead-times , in creating a competitive regulatory framework for the automotive industry .
In this respect , the roadmap is an integral part of the final CARS 21 report and should be respected .
There are clearly some structural problems and , of course , it is necessary to establish general conditions to make the automotive industry in the EU sustainable .
The only way to do that is to enable our industry to remain in the forefront of technological , ecological and social innovation with the support of a highly skilled labour force .
Consequently , one very important aspect is the commitment to education and training for workers in the car industry .
Community environmental , road safety , and energy efficiency legislation requires proper training for workers to enable them to adapt more easily to changes , both of a technical nature and as regards regulation , and to enjoy the same or better job prospects .
In addition , in order to guarantee the future of the European automotive industry , it is crucial to strengthen in the Union the rights of workers and their trade unions to information and consultation .
One example that illustrates this is the recent agreement between Ford and the General Workers ' Union in the Valencia factory , which will allow new investment for modernisation and for the production of new models .
Participation strengthens the sector , and in cases where restructuring is necessary can mitigate its negative effects .
As a result , it is essential to emphasise the need to reinforce , with the corresponding revision , the Directive on the European Works Council .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner Verheugen , ladies and gentlemen , rapporteur , tomorrow in Brussels the 86th car showroom will open its doors and the environmentally-friendly car will take centre stage .
It is clear that both the car manufacturers and consumers have finally been convinced of the urgent need for a change of course .
It is also clear that a change of course and change of mentality will only be possible , will only be achievable , through compulsory measures , and this will require measures in a number of different areas .
Anyone who is still thinking defensively is wrong , in my opinion .
A significant number of European and other medium-sized cars already meet the new standard of 120 grams of CO2 per kilometre .
Even German cars , Mr Verheugen : the new Golf TDI 1900 is already on 115 grams per kilometre , so it really is possible in Germany too , and I think that we have to vigorously pursue that route further .
Environmentally-friendly technology : that is what it is about .
It is a sector that has huge potential for growth and offers huge opportunities .
It is good , therefore , that the Commission is forcing the issue .
We need to invest now , as you have already said , Commissioner , in order to lead the world in this field .
I have checked the figures : the Seventh Framework Programme contains over EUR 4 billion of loans for the transport sector .
That is a great deal of money but in the view of Parliament - it is in Mr Chatzimarkakis 's report - not enough to fulfil our high ambitions .
That is why we are asking for more loans to be earmarked for research into new technologies at the budget review .
In conclusion , ladies and gentlemen , it is also high time that the Council moved more swiftly , especially in the tax field .
There is a proposal before the Commission to couple vehicle tax to the emission of harmful substances .
What are the national governments waiting for ?
They are not represented here , unfortunately , but I hope that the message will get through to them .
Why are the governments waiting to take action on this proposal ?
It is the only way to really get the environmentally-friendly car adopted in the short term .

( PL ) Mr President , we are all fully aware that the European Union 's car industry is one of the most important sectors of its economy , producing 19 million vehicles a year . Most importantly , it also accounts for 2.3 million jobs .
A further 10 million jobs in associated sectors are indirectly dependent on this industry . It is worth noting that it is not only the quantity but probably essentially the quality of the jobs provided that accounts for the key role the car industry plays in the economic life of the European Union .
The best way of illustrating this success is by reference to the EUR 35 billion annual export trade surplus and the high level of innovation .
Despite all this optimistic data , the European car industry is facing some very serious challenges .
I fully support the final report of the CARS 21 High Level Group and the European Commission 's communication on the subject .
Nonetheless , I should like to call for further action aimed at creating a genuine single internal market in cars .
Individual Member States are still applying different tax regimes concerning cars , either by charging duty or through other registration charges , perpetuating the inequalities between consumers .
I welcomed the compromise achieved in the European Parliament concerning the so-called ' repair clause ' , because it most certainly represents a step towards unifying provisions in this area , thus contributing to better law-making .
The car industry should be relieved of unnecessary bureaucratic burdens , especially as regards increasing the number of international provisions already in existence .
Pursuant to the principles of better law-making , a proper impact assessment and the principle of optimising costs and benefits should always be taken into account when creating a competitive legal environment for the car industry .
In view of the ongoing technological development in this sector , I support the Commission 's action introducing a review and revision mechanism to ensure that legal provisions do not slow down the technical advances that are constantly being achieved .
The European car industry is one of the most competitive of its kind in the world . Nonetheless , its position may be threatened if its competitors resort to unfair trading practices or fail to respect intellectual property rights .
I should like to call on the Commission to take more consistent and effective action to ensure respect for intellectual property rights and their implementation in all parts of the world , notably China .
The importance of the strategic partnership with China is beyond dispute , but European intellectual property has to be protected . This is absolutely vital .
( NL ) Mr President , I think that the frantic attempts of the auto lobby to get absolutely essential environmental measures postponed have been successful .
Time after time members of this Chamber appear to be susceptible to this lobby : first Mr Davies and now Mr Chatzimarkakis .


Waiting until 2015 to substantially reduce CO2 emissions from vehicles is highly irresponsible .
What is more , it is technically possible to achieve 120 grams per kilometre by 2012 , and the automotive industry itself is solely to blame for the present situation .
After all , attempts to reduce emissions voluntarily have failed miserably .
It turns out that only setting compulsory standards will work .
We expect the citizens of Europe to make sacrifices to save our climate .
Why should we not demand as much of the automotive industry ?
Thus there must be a maximum 120 grams of CO2 emissions per kilometre by 2012 .
( DE ) Mr President , I wanted to direct a further question to Mr Verheugen .
Mr Verheugen , in your speech you said that the rules that we are now laying down for the car industry would as good as mean the relocation of European industry .
You repeatedly referred to the pressure being applied to the European automotive industry .
Could you perhaps subsequently make it clear in your presentation that the regulations that we are introducing will of course apply equally to all motor manufacturers worldwide ?
This naturally means that the Japanese car industry will also have to comply with these rules .
Moreover , in this respect let me just add a further comment : last week you presented us with the ' lead market initiatives ' .
Does this not then mean that in the car manufacturing sector in particular we are positioning Europe as the market that now has the most demanding legislation and that we are therefore specifically creating a lead market for efficient motor cars , even allowing for environmental constraints and oil supply problems ?
Member of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mr President , I would like to respond immediately to the question from Mr Turmes .
My comment had nothing whatsoever to do with the car industry but was one of principle on the connection between industrial policy and environmental policy , between economy and ecology .
You will of course be aware of my viewpoint : we in Europe have to set the highest standards .
However , it makes no sense to run so far ahead of things that industry migrates away and we begin to export pollution and , as a result , import unemployment .
These remarks were not related in any way to the car industry .
There I fully share your view that we not only have the opportunity , but also the obligation , to establish Europe permanently as the lead market for environmentally-friendly cars .
As I now have the floor I would like to point something out to Mrs Corbey : it is not correct to assert that the Chinese are building cars that are more environmentally friendly than those made in Europe and that these are now flooding the European market in their millions .
The few hundred Chinese cars that are currently to be found in Europe are of extremely dubious quality , not exclusively but also from an environmental viewpoint .
The same can be said for the people 's car , the Tata , that is now being manufactured in India .
If you relate the weight of these vehicles to their fuel consumption you will see that their performance is significantly worse than that of the cars currently being built in Europe .
The same applies to the US : it is now quite unrealistic to make the accusation that American cars are more environmentally friendly than European ones .
If you think about it for just a moment you will soon come to the conclusion that this cannot be true .
When it comes to modern technology , the only working hydrogen-powered cars in the world are to be found in Europe .
Nobody else is spending more on research in this area than we are .
I would like to close with a thought that will perhaps unite us all : I am able to remain quite composed throughout this entire debate for I really do believe that we are on the right road , because I know that the European car manufacturers and , more importantly , the European automotive suppliers - for they really are the driving force behind European industry - have not been asleep in recent years but have been working on a whole series of technological breakthroughs that will enable us to achieve our objectives .

Mr Turmes , you are perfectly correct and I would have been happy to support such a proposal : the industry would be delighted - and so would I as the Commissioner responsible for industry - if we could now say what the next stage in the process should be .
This is precisely what we have set out in CARS 21 , namely a long-term , stable and predictable regulatory framework .
This can be as ambitious as possible provided that it is long term and provided it is stable .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking my fellow Members for this truly fair and open debate .
It has been conducted on a high level and has covered the issues of climate protection , innovation and - as we have been aware of at all times , especially when it comes to our fellow Members from the GUE / NGL - job security .
These are three areas where we all have to find common agreement .
I should also like to express my thanks to Claude Turmes for his various clarifications and suggestions .
However , I would like to say quite openly that I consider the remarks made by Mrs Liotard to be unfair .
It is not all about running after some lobby group or other . It is about fighting fervently for a policy that represents a key market for us in Europe .
Here I am fully behind the Commissioner and I am also fully behind you too , Claude .
I would maintain that you have been unfair here , Mrs Liotard .
It is not right that you should call this lobbyism .
I would at this point just like to quote from the great German sociologist Max Weber , who said that politicians must have passion - and I am actually trying to show some of this now - but at the same time they must have a sense of responsibility and a sense of proportion .
The latter sometimes seems to get lost in debates of this kind with all the hysteria about climate change .
Keeping a sense of proportion means ensuring that the great objectives that we want to achieve are also feasible .
I would now just like to mention my colleague Chris Davies , for I am just a little proud of him .
There is no one in the ALDE Group who is greener or more ecologically minded than Chris Davies .
Nonetheless , he has had the sense of proportion in his report to call for practical limits and deadlines .
That is what all this is about : we should not be giving the people of Europe the run-around , but should be doing things that are really achievable .
I am pleased to see that the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety adopted the report by a large majority .
I also want to thank the members of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy for having adopted this report by a fairly large majority and I hope that tomorrow many of the Members will vote for it here in this House .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing - ( HU ) As People 's Party shadow rapporteur on the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , I would like to emphasise that the report does not deal with the car of the twenty first century but regulations for a competitive automotive industry in the twenty first century .
By now motor traffic has become the second largest CO2 emitting sector and is responsible for 12 % of all the CO2 emissions throughout the Union .
The rate of increase is alarming , for this sector increased 26 % between 1990 and 2004 , making it 26.5 % of the Union 's total energy consumption .
The car manufacturers ' voluntary agreements on emissions reduction are not working , and the Union 's regulations are powerless , since they can only bring the vehicle sector into the Emissions Trading Scheme after 2013 , if at all .
The only ' success ' is that the average consumption by cars was 12.4 % less in 2004 than in 1995 .
This is entirely due to technological innovation as cars have been continuously increasing in size and power .
Both the Member States and car buyers have to make further efforts .
There have to be , on the one hand , tax incentives for fuel-efficient and low CO2 emission vehicles to gain a market presence and support for manufacturers for targeted development .
On the other hand , we have to improve the information available to purchasers , update and extend the labelling system for light trucks , harmonise energy efficiency classes and propose annual running costs .
Finally , we have to sell the idea of eco-driving and training , run attention-grabbing campaigns and adopt regulations for obtaining a driving licence .
Tax treatment of losses in cross-border situations ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Kauppi , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the tax treatment of losses in cross-border situations .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I would like to start by emphasising what my report , which is being debated today , is essentially about .
While the report is nominally about taxation , the real issue at stake here is the proper functioning of the internal market of the EU .
The global economy is developing in a way that puts an increasing amount of pressure on Europe to maintain its competitiveness , a fact that has been underlined and widely agreed upon in various instances , notably in the Lisbon Strategy and its revisions .
We must be proactive in rising to the challenge and I believe that a fully-functioning single market is the first priority in achieving this .
In addition to the freedom of movement of goods , people and services , this implies , crucially , a level playing field for European companies to establish business in any location in Europe as if it were a single country , a home market - a genuine home market - where decisions are based according to a real economic advantage , not a distorted one created by red tape .
Obstacles to this freedom do not only lead to suboptimal economic choices but also prevent European businesses from expanding .
The fact that some such obstacles still remain is regrettable , as a Europe-wide home market is a stepping stone to growth for European businesses and a precondition for creating more European world leaders .
Cross-border consolidation of losses - the subject of this report - is a step towards such a working home market .
Currently , in this respect , the tax treatment of a group operating within a single Member State is heavily preferential compared to a cross-border situation .
Within a single Member State a company can usually offset losses incurred by its branches and subsidiaries in the taxation of the parent company .
However , in the case of branches and subsidiaries in other Member States , the national legislation varies considerably .
In most cases , if consolidation of losses for tax purposes within the same group is possible , it is nevertheless granted with considerable and varying delays .
This discrepancy has grave consequences for the proper functioning of the internal market .
It distorts investment decisions , constituting a barrier to entering some markets while tending to unfairly favour the large markets where losses can more easily be absorbed .
It particularly hampers the SMEs ' capacity to expand , as they frequently incur start-up losses that they cannot immediately absorb - even the time factor is very relevant to SMEs .
The existence of differing Member State legislation obviously also increases compliance costs , ill afforded by SMEs and conducive to tax engineering with larger companies .
Finally , delays in loss relief are understandably costly and burdensome to all European companies .
There is a considerable cost burden involved when capital that is legitimately recoverable is tied up , often for years , because the current national loss relief legislation will not allow consolidation without delays .
The report promotes a remedy to this by promoting the possibility to offset losses in the same tax year , which would transfer the unreasonable time burden away from the company and to the public sector .
It would also level the playing field , at the same time lowering companies ' compliance costs .
It would also mean that the tax domain is one where there is still work to be done to make the most of the internal market .
This does not imply harmonising tax rates , rather that tax competition is a healthy feature of the European economy .
However , it does mean legislating to facilitate cross-border business , to establish a level playing field where investments are based on undistorted economic benefits .
I therefore welcome the Commission 's activities in this area in promoting cross-border loss relief measures .
I would like to see Parliament support this urgently needed legislation , and I am grateful for the messages of support we have received during the process .
I think that Parliament 's opinion on the question will also be very timely because the European Court of Justice has called for political guidance on the issue as well .
I would further like to encourage the Commission to push ahead with the CCTB as a longer-term solution , which I hope will also be supported by this House in this report .
However , the CCTB is a long-term project , the realisation of which lies far in the future .
In the mean time , cross-border laws , relief and consolidation of losses are urgently needed as an intermediate remedy to some serious problems encountered within the functioning of the internal market .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , some weeks ago , as you remember , we discussed the contribution of taxation and customs policies to the Lisbon Strategy of growth , jobs and competitiveness .
Cross-border loss relief is one key element for establishing a competitive internal market without obstacles and thus contributing to growth and employment .
Let me explain the importance of granting cross-border loss relief for the internal market .
Imagine a small or medium-sized enterprise which is operating successfully in its domestic market .
Once it plans to expand its operation to other Member States , to the internal market , it will not only run into problems regarding additional compliance costs .
Thus , in many cases , this SME will not be able to set off any start-up losses against profits which it may continue to generate in its Member State of residence .
The non-consideration of foreign losses results in double taxation and discourages many SMEs from investing in other Member States .
With the new initiative on cross-border loss relief , large enterprises - but also SMEs in particular - could more easily extend their activities abroad and enjoy the full benefits of the internal market .
The initiative on cross-border loss relief constitutes a targeted solution in the short to medium term and represents an intermediary step .
But please note that this initiative could in the future be complementary to the common consolidated corporate tax base ( CCTB ) , notably for companies that are not covered by the CCTB .
The initiative on cross-border loss relief is more limited in scope than the consolidation of the tax base under the CCTB would be , as this provides automatic and comprehensive off-setting of all profits and losses within a group of companies .
I highly appreciate the strong support expressed in Ms Kauppi 's report for the Commission 's initiative in the field of cross-border loss relief , for the coordination approach and of course also for our work on the CCTB .
Like you , I am persuaded that we should continue our efforts to dismantle tax barriers in the internal market .
on behalf of the PPE-DE group - ( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
I would like to thank the Commissioner and Mrs Kauppi for this report .
They have dealt with an important issue eliciting sensitive and contrasting emotions .
Two comments .
On the one hand , I feel it is important that from the standpoint of the internal market there should be no danger that a parent company and a subsidiary are at a disadvantage simply because they are operating in two different Member States , compared with companies operating in only one Member State .
So I urge that double taxation is ruled out , as the Commissioner has said , perhaps through the mechanism of electronic cooperation .
Given time factors , we could encourage efficient cross-border activity by the economic players and employ credit and exemption methods .
At the same time I feel we must be concerned when a subsidiary makes a profit and a parent company makes a loss .
Mrs Kauppi , in the new Member States , for example , this is of more interest from our point of view .
My second point about scrapping double taxation concerns the common consolidated tax base .
We still have to debate this but I have reservations .
I do not want to champion tax sovereignty but I cannot yet see clearly the effect of the common consolidated tax base .
I am also fearful that there will be a lot of political pressure for a minimum level , just as with VAT or income tax .
The proposals suggested by the Socialist and Communist , and perhaps the left-wing representatives too , demonstrate this , although the Maastricht criteria , I believe , put a stop to this .
But my fear here is that I do not know what the effect will be on the new capital-poor eastern European Members in the light of the flow of capital in the internal market .
Where will the administration be ?
And will it be possible to keep individual tax concessions to counterbalance a disadvantageous infrastructure situation ?
For these reasons I will abstain from these sections but I wish to thank the Commissioner and the rapporteur again . Thank you , Mr President .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the motion for a resolution that we are to vote on tomorrow is symptomatic of the need for a fiscal policy at EU level .
This does not mean emasculating or curbing national tax policies ; no one doubts the competence of individual Member States in this field .
It does however mean flanking and coordinating them , especially when , as in the case of corporate losses in cross-border situations , merger and relocation decisions taken by companies within and outside of Europe transcend national borders .
Clearly , not only national regulations but also bilateral agreements are insufficient , given that in this age of globalised financial markets and globalised production such phenomena occur in large numbers and exceed the confines of individual countries .
The content of the motion is the result of a consensus on many points and I shall just recall the main ones , with heartfelt thanks to the rapporteur for her constant willingness to cooperate .
Twenty-seven different tax systems hamper the smooth operation of the internal market and constitute an obstacle for businesses , especially small ones , as Commissioner Kovács has said .
The first assertion made in the text is self-evident , expressing the gravest concern over the negative impact that the different treatment of cross-border losses by Member States has on the functioning of the internal market .
The proposed solution is still transitional and temporary because the only perfect solution is a Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base ( CCCTB ) .
That is why we support the Commission communication as an important step in addressing the situation , while calling for adequate coordination among Member States as regards timing and solutions : I am quoting from paragraph 4 .
It is important to have recalled the existence of common European institutions such as the ' European company ' and the ' European cooperative society ' , as well as EU procedures concerning Community-scale groups of undertakings .
These must be built upon , because they enable us not only to evoke the link with industrial relations , and hence the effects on employment , but also to acknowledge the formation of Community-scale groups of undertakings that are stable .
After all , what we aim to foster is the development and implantation of a system of production with Europe , and not the individual Member State , at its heart , a system of production that does not follow the siren voices and decide tactically to diversify into other countries on the grounds of tax advantages , offsetting charges and losses wherever convenient .
The production system must be able to rely on equal treatment and avoid differential accounting according to whether the controlling undertaking is based in just one country or has a presence in various countries .
This result cannot be achieved without appropriate rules and uniform conditions .
Acknowledging that profitable tax competition would fundamentally undermine the content of this proposal does not amount to waving an ideological flag in opposition to it .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( SV ) Thanks to Piia-Noora Kauppi for a good report .
She gives a balanced account of the problems and difficulties which arise on the internal market when we have 27 different tax systems .
Globalisation , which has been mentioned , has after all increased still further the need for a common approach to tax matters in the EU so that obstacles to competition can be avoided .
Different rules and bureaucracy also mean a loss of economic strength to companies and a loss of jobs in the EU .
We need clearer rules and an approach which favours enterprise , such as Mrs Kauppi proposes .
Perhaps some of us also need to remove the blinkers from our eyes .
Taxes , as we know , are a very sensitive subject .
The keywords here are tax competition and freedom of countries to determine their tax rates .
The long-term goal of the Commission is to achieve a consolidated corporate tax base .
As this is not attainable , targeted measures should be pursued within those areas which are conducive to effectiveness in the internal market .
The report reviews various possibilities for action and shows how individual countries have chosen different approaches , which is good but not enough .
It is in principle also reasonable for businesses to offset losses across frontiers within a company or between companies in a consortium .
In order to facilitate such an arrangement a common approach is needed to what has to be taxed , in other words a consolidated corporate tax base .
We in the ALDE Group think that this is the right way to go .
Introduction of the common CCTB will not in itself prevent tax competition , rather the contrary .
The tax base will be common , and transparency will be better .
This new system will improve the possibilities for small and medium-sized enterprises in particular to offset their losses .
Worried finance ministers - and there are many - can rest assured .
Your power to tax will stay in place .
Regarding Amendment 1 , our Group would like a split vote the first part of which can deal with excise duties separately .
As regards the rest , we are inclined to abstain in the vote on Donata Gottardi 's amendment to recitals E and F in order to facilitate a broad consensus and broad support in the House for this excellent report .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the rapporteur deserves credit for her work , but this is a controversial report .
We shall be voting against it and I shall now explain why .
This is an attempt to unify tax regimes within the Union , and to impose tax solutions on the Member States .
Furthermore , it also amounts to favouring cross-border companies over SMEs , and that would in turn oblige many domestic companies to set up branches and subsidiaries in other countries with no economic justification , simply to benefit from the provisions applying to cross-border companies .
I would just like to point out that for many years cross-border companies took advantage of the lack of qualifications and corruption of officials in the post-Communist countries , resorting to tax and accounting fiddles to declare losses and avoid paying tax .
The Union condoned this .
The new provision would allow such behaviour to continue and put it on a legal footing .
I am particularly surprised because there would be negative consequences for the countries of the old Union , as their taxes would be reduced .
I believe it is necessary first to resolve the problem of tax and accounting fiddles by cross-border firms within the Union and improve the fiscal apparatus , especially in the new Member States .
This would assist in the prevention and detection of tax offences .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we can to some extent agree on one thing : the present situation in the EU , where there are 27 different tax systems operating alongside one another in an integrated single market with completely free movement of capital , is fatally flawed .
This is where unity really comes to an end .
Tax competition is tax dumping for the rich and the powerful and only imposes a greater tax burden on the shoulders of normal earners and consumers .
It is hardly surprising that this situation is particularly pleasing to the property owners and big companies .
What is really astonishing and alarming , however , is that this reality is still being talked up here in this House , which should really be representing the interests of more than just the elite few .
In spite of all its nuances and nuanced assessments , the Kauppi report is still just a typical piece of spin .
That goes for the position being adopted on the alleged positive impact of tax competition just as much as for the manner in which it deals with the actual subject matter , namely the tax treatment of losses in cross-border situations .
It is an open secret that companies regularly use cross-border loss relief to reduce their tax bill by moving their profits to low-tax zones and low-tax countries .
They are very successful in doing this , as the statistics show : such virtual loss offsetting has in fact meant that over the last 20 years the amount of tax paid on the profits made by the multinationals has fallen continuously .
The rulings of the European Court of Justice have only served to make this tax arrangement easier and have therefore intruded massively into the fiscal sovereignty of the Member States .
All this simply fuels the race to dump corporate tax .
Those who support this development clearly want to see a Europe in which untold wealth is able to accumulate at the top of the pile , while down at the bottom poverty levels increase and the former middle classes have to survive on incomes that are falling in real terms .
We want to see a different Europe and we want a socially just taxation policy .
For this reason our Group will be rejecting the present report .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , the rapporteur claims that this initiative will encourage small and medium-sized enterprises to expand their cross-border business .
But I have little doubt that it has been heavily promoted by the large multinationals , because it is they that stand to benefit most .
In my country , in Britain , the vast majority of businesses are small , and they provide for some 70 % of employment .
Only a tiny proportion of these have any interest in foreign operations .
But my main objection is that it is more meddling by the European Union in taxation matters .
Judging by the EU 's record of value added tax , there will be endless changes to the law .
We have had eight directives on VAT so far , and it is still a mess and prone to fraud .
Businesses operate best when there are simple , well understood rules , as Mr Schmidt has just said .
The EU knows how to do only one thing , and it does it to perfection . And that is to make things complicated .
So , contrary to the views of other Members , a much better plan would be to encourage tax competition .
Then those nations that have the lightest and simplest taxes will attract the most businesses .
( PT ) Mr President , the different treatment of losses by the various Member States distorts competition in the internal market , is unfair and encourages poor fiscal practice .
We therefore welcome the Commission 's initiative to propose a minimum level of harmonisation of these rules and hope that the Council will agree with this proposal .
This is an area in which better regulation is essential , particularly to eliminate the associated legal uncertainty , which has resulted in repeated recourse to the Court of Justice of the European Communities and which has contributed to increased uncertainty in economic relations , thereby harming companies and SMEs .
It is absolutely essential to ensure that the various fiscal practices are compatible with the effective functioning of the internal market .
The quality of the report prepared by the rapporteur , Mrs Kauppi , has enabled a broad consensus to be reached among the main political groups on its fundamental elements .
However , certain non-essential aspects of the report , in its initial version , may hinder this agreement .
In particular , in the Socialist Group 's opinion , this process is not compatible with the open defence of tax competition practices .
These practices encourage artificial movements of companies , capital and persons .
Such movements frequently result in signs of breakdown both socially and environmentally and in the productive fabric .
Furthermore , in some economies , tax competition causes severe problems for the macroeconomic balance with varying consequences , particularly in terms of the level of quality and quantity of public property made available by these countries to their citizens .
The Socialist Group in the European Parliament believes that , on a subject of such strategic importance , it would be highly advantageous to present to the Commission and Council a European Parliament position with a broad basis of support .
In the area of this initiative , the European Union still has a long way to go , particularly in terms of creating the oft-mentioned CCCTB or Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base .
We must create the political conditions for this future work .
Agreement on this report is within our reach .
We hope that , when it comes to the final vote , the spirit of compromise among the main political groups will enable the consensus reached on its main messages to be maintained so that there is broad final approval .
Those secondary aspects that divide us politically to an extent that is not insurmountable must not be allowed to prevent this approval .
We welcome the active involvement in this process of various members of the PPE-DE Group in particular , including its rapporteur , their spirit of compromise and their spirit of openness , which have enabled a consensus to be reached on the fundamental issues of this report . Thank you , Mr President .
( LT ) I would like to draw your attention to something that we talk very much about , the various shortcomings of the internal market , and emphasize the fact that the development of the internal market gives us many advantages .
This document is important from the aspect of giving advantages to improve the labour productivity of enterprises working in the single market .
However another aspect should not be forgotten .
I represent a country where the majority of enterprises belong to European multinationals ; they are not national .
Therefore , sometimes it is very difficult for us to control our economy in the macroeconomic sense as corporate strategies put the aims of the national economy , such as the fiscal balance , etc . , into the shade .
We need to find an appropriate compromise between the advantages of the development of the internal market and macroeconomic stability .
I would like to draw the commissioner 's attention to the need to coordinate politics with economic issues and with Mr Almunia once again .
( PL ) Mr President , as I take the floor in this debate on tax treatment of losses in cross-border disputes , I should like to highlight the following issues .
Firstly , direct taxation , such as corporate tax , does not fall within the competence of the European Commission .
As a matter of principle , therefore , the Commission should not concern itself with it .
Secondly , I am surprised to see that the report contains statements disapproving of the reductions in corporate income tax rates introduced in certain Member States , notably new ones .
Thirdly , I am worried by the Commission 's call for work on the introduction of a consolidated corporate tax base within the European Union to be speeded up .
The nature of such a tax , its rate and setting the tax base are some of the very few instruments that still remain within the remit of the Member States and can be used to accelerate the economic development of less developed countries .
Fourthly , a study of the Commission 's proposals for a consolidated corporate tax base suggests that the aim is to ensure all Member States develop at a rate involving at most a 2 % rise in GDP per annum . In such a scenario , how would the new Member States that are 20 or 30 years behind the more developed ones ever manage to catch up ?
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the issue of taxation and the possibility of transferring losses for cross-border business groups within the European Union cannot be tackled purely and simply on the basis of facilitating the cross-border operation of businesses .
This objective is , of course , important for the smooth operation of the internal market , but when it is a matter of taxing a business , as mentioned in Mrs Kauppi 's report , which we are considering today , then it should be placed within the wider context of the debate about greater harmonisation of taxation within the European Union .
Provided that taxation competition does not exist on equal terms and there is no minimum requisite agreement on a common , unified tax base for companies so as to put in place uniform , transparent rules for measuring the tax base , the provision of opportunities such as this regarding tax relief for losses of a cross-border nature at present demands that we adopt a cautious approach . This is because it involves the serious risk of distorting the Member States ' taxation and revenue systems , as well as the very operation of the internal market and of competition between businesses .
Mr President , with this new form of debate I could of course use this minute to ask the Commissioner what the current state of play is concerning CCCTB in the Council , because we know that some Ministers of Finance are not very happy .
Could you please , Mr Commissioner , tell us how the debate is going on within the Council and what the 27 Member States are proposing today ?
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I have followed the debate with great interest , and it has confirmed my conviction that the introduction of cross-border loss relief is an important factor for the deepening of the internal market .
I fully share the views of Ms Kauppi that on the surface it is about taxation , but in reality it is about the proper functioning of the internal market .
I am particularly grateful for your support with facilitating , in particular , the cross-border economic activities of the SMEs , which is very close to my heart .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , Ms Kauppi , for the very encouraging report , as well as the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and the Committee on Legal Affairs for their support .
The Commission can agree with most of the conclusions .
The support of Parliament is welcome as a factor which may have a positive impact on the subsequent discussion in the Council .
As suggested in the report , I can assure you that we are continuing efforts on the CCCTB and on the coordination of Member States ' direct tax systems .
The CCCTB is also very close to my heart , and the reason is that I am absolutely certain that it would be of greater relative benefit to the small and medium-sized enterprises than the big multinationals .
However , I understand the concerns , and to respond to the question at the end of the debate , I want to tell you that in the Council it is on the table , but not as a concrete proposal .
For the time being it is on the table as a concept , and as far as the concept is concerned , some two thirds of Member States expressed their support and less than one third expressed either doubts or opposition .
Any discussion , particularly discussion which would prejudice the current debate on the cross-border loss relief issue , would be premature because there is , for the time being , no concrete legislative proposal .
In the legislative work programme of the Commission , however , there is one point which states that , in the second half of the year , we will present a concrete legislative proposal - with the necessary impact assessment - on the CCCTB .
Then we can discuss whether the concerns are relevant or not .
One more point : if there is no unanimous agreement - and for the time being I believe that there will be no unanimous agreement - we can resort to enhanced cooperation as a solution . So , no single Member State would be forced to accept the CCCTB and to use it .
And , even in those countries that chose the CCCTB , no companies would be forced to use it , because there would be no sense in forcing companies that are not operating in the internal market - that are not doing business in the internal market - to use this common tax base .
They can stay with the domestic national base used previously .
So I share your conclusion that , in order to promote coherent development and the proper functioning of the internal market , obstacles deriving from the existence of different company tax regimes in the Member States must be tackled , preferably through common approaches and coordinated actions .
With regard to the loss offset , your report highlights several specific areas where more work needs to be done , such as addressing the particular needs of SMEs , the definition of groups and the scope for automatic information exchange .
My services will study these suggestions and comments and , where possible , bring the issues forward .
The SME aspect is already an important part of the work of Vice-President Günter Verheugen .
Another aspect , the definition of groups of companies , is an essential element of the work on the CCCTB .
I can also assure you that your recommendations for cross-border loss relief within companies and groups of companies will orient our work in the coming months .
There are several references in your report to tax avoidance .
Here it may be noted that , last December , the Commission adopted a communication on the application of anti-abuse measures in the area of direct taxation .
The Commission shares the concerns about tax avoidance expressed in your report .
Member States need to be able to prevent their tax bases from being eroded because of abuse and aggressive tax planning .
At the same time it is vital to ensure that there will be no undue restrictions to the Treaty freedoms .
By launching this latest initiative , the Commission seeks to prompt further discussions with the other institutions on how national anti-abuse measures can meet those requirements .
Your observations on tax avoidance risk will be taken into consideration .
Finally , as regards the proposed amendments to the report , the Commission would advise against amendments 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 and 6 , but it could support amendments 7 and 8 , which are in line with the spirit of the communication .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I will be very brief .
I am of course happy to note that most of the groups are going to support the report tomorrow in the vote .
My group has suggested abstaining with regard to Amendments 7 and 8 .
I think that it is in line with the Commission 's recommendations as well that 7 and 8 will probably be adopted and that means that we have a very large majority backing the report tomorrow .
I also would like to remember a little bit the past : how difficult it was before we accepted the first company taxation directives - a Parent-Subsidiary Directive and an Interest and Royalties Directive in the 1990s - to speak about these items .
But they are now there after serious discussion , and I still believe that we can have all the practical things , like anti-abusive measures , that we can improve the Parent-Subsidiary Directive and that we can improve the workings of the Transfer Pricing Forum , and such initiatives are very much needed .
But , in the end , we need a very large solution and CCCTB .
At this time it is the best available option and we must take it seriously .
I hope that it will be done during this European Parliament term , before the 2009 elections .
Something must be done before the 2009 elections and we cannot afford to wait for Member States to come up with their ratifications and referendums .
We must act now and before the time is up for this Parliament .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Abolition of discrimination in transport rates and conditions ( debate )
The next item is the report ( A6-0513 ) by Mr Costa , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation No 11 concerning the abolition of discrimination in transport rates and conditions , in implementation of Article 79 ( 3 ) of the Treaty establishing the European Economic Community , and Regulation ( EC ) No 852 / 2004 of the European Parliament and the Council on the hygiene of foodstuffs - Transport aspects - C6-0086 / 2007 - .


rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I could in fact repeat much of what has already been said by Commissioner Verheugen but shall avoid doing so .
This is a commendable initiative : small-scale measures often conceal major results , and this is one such case .
We are obviously dealing here with rules that were enacted in a different Europe .
The basic Regulation dates back to 1960 , when our countries were separate , and when rules on hygiene and food could mask discrimination and obstacles to competition .
That is why it was necessary to indicate which road to take and where to cross borders .
Many things needed to be said , and many details spelled out , but since much of this no longer serves any purpose it is a good idea for us to divest ourselves of these rules and adapt them .
We are aware that all food hygiene legislation is a sensitive matter and therefore very time-consuming .
That is the reason behind this solution , which I think makes a good deal of sense , namely to separate out the transport rules , which are easier to accept and , I hope , to implement .
The committee , which I have the honour of chairing , accepted my report unanimously .
I take this as an encouraging sign that the House will do likewise tomorrow , enabling appropriate steps to be taken in the very near future .
This is a case of virtuous simplification .
It is simplification which , at the same time as simplifying , adapts to current circumstances and new ways of conveying information , rendering many bureaucratic procedures unnecessary and perhaps enabling us to devote more of our attention to making sure that food is transported hygienically from one part of the Union to another .

on behalf of the PSE . - ( RO ) The Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation No 11 concerning the abolition of discrimination in transport rates and conditions requires land , rail or waterborne freight carriers operating within the Community to provide information on their rates , applicable agreements , terms of carriage , as well as the necessary documentation .
Thus , operators are forbidden to discriminate by applying differential rates ( with reference to the same product being carried in the same transportation system on the same route ) , but discriminations are created according to the country of destination or of origin .
This is a very important Regulation , but as it had been in force since 1960 , it needed updating .
The draft amendment simplifies existing legislation and ensures more stability in the conditions applicable to the transportation of goods .
According to the statistics provided by the Commission , it is true , as the Commissioner said , that the Regulation will affect or will have some bearing on the activity of some 300 thousand transport operators , and this amendment will reduce Europe-wide administrative expenditure by some € 160 million / year .

The European Parliament intends to reduce by 25 % the administrative burden on enterprises by the year 2012 .
The proposal for the amendment of the two Regulations , as put forward to the Commission , is among the measures designed to achieve that objective .
It is true , however , that the Committee on Transport was notified in the codecision procedure , which is contrary to Article 73 ( 3 ) of the Treaty .
Hence the proposal put forward by Mr Costa as rapporteur was adopted unanimously .
( DE ) Mr President , it would be negligent of me if I were not to reiterate , on behalf of our Group , what the Commissioner said in his opening words , namely that our Chairman of the Committee on Transport and Tourism has truly fulfilled his remit as committee chairman in dealing with this fairly unspectacular but nevertheless important regulatory issue of air transport services , especially because he succeeded in obtaining unanimous support within the committee .
We hope that the unanimity of our vote has made his life and his work much more agreeable and I just wanted to emphasis this a second time .
Mr President , I congratulate the Commission - and you do not hear that very often from up here , do you ?
But this is a rare example of a report that is on the right road - to Damascus ?
We insist on debating this proposition , for it seeks to cut regulation .
It admits that small businesses are being weighed down by unnecessary legislation , some of it going back to 1960 .
The explanatory statement says that these unnecessary administrative burdens hamper economic activity and have a negative impact on the competitiveness of enterprises .
I could not agree more ; why stop here ?
Why only limit unnecessary paperwork from 10 employees or less ?
Let us go the whole hog and apply it to the whole of the foodstuffs industry !
Go on , make a bonfire of another 100 000 pieces of legislation !
While you are at it , scrap the Commission , Parliament and the Council .
I am serious .
By cutting regulatory burdens , you enable the nations of Europe to throw off the shackles that will otherwise inevitably turn us into the economic also-rans of the 21st century .
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I just wanted to say that we are using more words than necessary here .
It seems to me that we are fully in agreement : the amendments needed to be made and go in the right direction ; it is right to separate the two sets of legislation in order to abolish discriminatory transport conditions .
My only recommendation would be that I repeat tomorrow what I said in committee , in the hope of achieving the same outcome : a unanimous , or almost unanimous , vote on this proposal .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday .
Airport charges ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Stockmann , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on airport charges - C6-0056 / 2007 - .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , of course it is always better when the Commissioner is present , as there are some critical points that I would like to put to him directly , but I will have to do this at a later time .
For more than 15 years we have been trying , or rather the Commission has been trying , to lay down a regulatory framework in the form of an EU directive on airport charges .
Two attempts have already failed because of the conflict of interest between the airports and the airlines and between the different Member States .
On this occasion , too , there was a great deal of conflict and I cannot recall a single one of the 189 amendments in committee that was generally accepted by all the parties involved .
Many airlines want to see as much cost transparency as possible from the other side , the airports , and a regulatory authority that would ultimately set the prices , along with the introduction of the ' single till ' system .
Many airports would prefer no change whatsoever to the status quo .
Moreover , the negotiations were also hampered by the structural particularities that exist in various Member States .
The United Kingdom , for example , already has a rigorous regulatory authority , the CAA , while at the same time most of the airports want to be deregulated and indeed the trend is in that direction .
In Sweden , Portugal , Greece , Finland and Spain many of the airports are operated in a system of airport networks with standard airport charges , which means cross-subsidisation and often results in little transparency .
In Spain airport charges are even laid down by Parliament , in other words the Members of Parliament decide on the levels that will apply .
In Germany this area has been controlled at federal level and not by a national authority , while in the new Member States airport charges are needed to a large extent to develop the airport infrastructure .
I mention all these different interests if only to demonstrate how complicated these negotiations have been .
What we have achieved to date has therefore been primarily directed at settling these conflicts of interest , for we in the committee are of the opinion that such a regulation is needed and that every effort should be made to agree on one .
So what has been achieved so far towards settling these differences ?
We have reduced the field of application to airports with either five million passenger journeys or more a year or 15 % of the national passenger throughput in the Member State concerned , for in the case of regional airports with less than five million passengers a year the risk of an abuse of market power is either small or absent .
Secondly , we have stipulated that airports will be free to choose their preferred business model , and thirdly , we have included airport networks generally within the scope of the directive .
Fourthly , we have firmed up the role of the regulatory authorities and allowed them to delegate all or part of the provisions to regional regulatory bodies .
Fifthly , we have introduced stricter requirements for the intervention of the regulatory authority and , sixthly , we have again allowed airport managing bodies to pre-finance infrastructure projects via their airport charges , as had been possible in the past , though subject to certain conditions .
We want to see differentiation of charges based on objective criteria and according to the level of services provided and the environmental performance , and we want to see a system for defining and concluding an overall service level agreement .
The compromises that have been negotiated were adopted by the Committee on Transport and Tourism with only one dissenting vote .
That is a real achievement , considering the starting position , and on this point I would like to express my thanks to all the shadow rapporteurs for their close and constructive collaboration .
We now have to lay down standardised principles of transparency , non-discrimination and regulated consultation and notification when setting airport charges in Europe .
This will help reduce future distortions of competition and make it more difficult for those who might seek to abuse their market power .
The directive will , in my opinion , make a significant contribution towards stabilising the inherent partnership that exists between airports and airlines and at the same time will strengthen Europe 's position as an air transport hub .
I therefore call on Members to support the Committee on Transport and Tourism in tomorrow 's vote on the directive at first reading .

Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mr Stockmann for his considerable efforts and briefly present the proposal for a directive on airport charges .
This proposal for a directive seeks primarily to transpose into Community legislation the principles that the Member States have already approved within the framework of the International Civil Aviation Organisation : non-discrimination , transparency , consultation .
The framework the directive establishes on this basis will allow us to provide a structure for dialogue between carriers and airports when determining and collecting charges .
For instance , the directive will require airports to consult carriers before adopting a decision on charges .
I took the same approach and consulted the air carriers and airports before drawing up this proposal , whose principles have been approved by both parties .
The directive also introduces the concept of an independent regulatory authority in each Member State .
This body will play a key role as it will ensure respect for the basic principles I have just mentioned .
That is a brief outline of the goals of this proposal , for which Mr Stockmann is the rapporteur .
Before continuing to the debate , I would like to thank your rapporteur and the Committee on Transport and Tourism for their support for the Commission proposal .
Mr President , I believe that this proposal is fairly balanced , and as Mr Stockmann has just pointed out , we will undoubtedly have to be very vigilant about the way in which the directive is implemented in order to facilitate better cooperation between companies and airports .
Thank you . I will now listen with great interest to the speakers in this debate .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Stockmann for his report and , on behalf of the PSE Group , I would inform the Chamber that we will be supporting the line adopted by the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
Our rapporteur has done a fine job in producing a more realistic and balanced position , but I still find it difficult to understand why this proposal was put forward by the Commission in this format and at this time .
Speaking now in a personal capacity : for many years within the civil aviation industry and with the Commission we have been fed a diet of deregulation and yet , in regard to airport charges , we are now being told regulation is the answer .
I have to say that the irony of this is not lost on me .
However , we are where we are .
I fully support the need for transparency in airport charges , with full consultation with the stakeholders .
I fully support the need to ensure that airports in a dominant position do not abuse that situation and I fully support an open and transparent appeals procedure , provided that the rules of engagement and the remit of the arbitrator are clearly defined .
However , I very much doubt whether the proposition to regulate scores of airports throughout the EU is going to produce the utopia in airport charges that the airlines and the Commission want .
Surely , if it is legislation to eliminate monopolistic practices that we seek , the regulation should be based on a market test relating to each individual airport , not an arbitrary figure plucked out of thin air for no apparent reason .
I believe that , if you have to use a figure , you should use one that reflects the economic dominance of an airport , namely a percentage of national traffic , and address it to those airports that are dominant , not those which are not .
I am not against regulating airports that are in a dominant market position , but I think regulating the majority of airports to catch the big boys , based on an arbitrary passenger figure in a one-cap-fits-all regulation , is a flawed process .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( LT ) I would like to congratulate Mr Stockmann on a report in which he once again demonstrates tolerance and competence in dealing with quite controversial proposals .
This future directive touches upon quite a specific area and is not usual regarding its content .
We all perfectly understand that the majority of airports work under natural monopoly conditions and they inevitably get into interest conflicts and the users , i.e. , the airlines , may suffer for this .
Thus we all understand that regulation is essential in this area , however there is also a risk that regulation may give the opposite effect - increased costs and expenditure may result in higher prices for the services provided by airports and this may in turn impact airlines .
From the very first meetings with interested parties , the question of whether all airports should be regulated and if not then which and how many of them should be regulated rises .
As a member of the Liberal Group , I am for regulation and state intervention in business which is as low as possible , all the more as I spoke to emphasize that about 25 airports in the European Community abuse monopolistic power or seek to do this .
Therefore , my offer was such that regulation should encompass approximately that number .
But to reach a compromise we agree with the position of the majority as well as other offers and have discussed compromises .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group - ( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen .
I would like to say how glad I am that a successful compromise has been reached in this new dossier where a joint decision is required .
It has enjoyed the support of the various groupings at the Committee on Transport and Tourism level .
It may emerge that whether this matter has to be regulated at all and what the threshold will be [ ... ] airports , airports below the threshold [ ... ] lower threshold .
I believe that we have made a good decision in that we have only dealt with those principles which are truly necessary for there not to be a practice of Member States deviating and therefore playing off against each other .
I am also glad that only airports that are really large or in a monopoly situation will be regulated .
I also feel it is a joint success that a complaints process will only be initiated if the set threshold is exceeded .
We have set realistic deadlines for this process , thus cutting short endless debates .
I personally feel it is a success that we have in the text the opportunity for prefinancing , and preventing malpractice here too .
We have created a joint compromise on the range of tasks for the regulatory authority and on owner independence .
The greatest benefit will be transparency , which will offer a great deal of help in giving the public a proper breakdown of the price of an air ticket .
The citizens of the Union will have their trust in the EU reinforced and at the same time the principle of subsidiarity will not be compromised as a result .
We have not resolved all the issues .
I expect to see debate with the Council over a good few questions , security charges for example , or double check-in systems .
In any case we now have what I feel to be a very strong position and I hope that this success will guide us in our negotiations with the Council .
Thank you , Mr President , and once again I apologise for the lateness .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( LV ) Thank you , Mr President , Commissioner .
First of all I would like to thank Mr Stockmann for the compromise he has achieved in this difficult area .
In my view , the aviation market is actually the transport sector which calls for European regulation , since it is here that the national markets of the Member States play the greatest role .
For that reason , it is very difficult to establish a non-discriminatory attitude towards EU aviation companies among the main owners of infrastructure in aviation , namely , airports .
I am pleased that the Committee on Transport and Tourism is creating a compromise whereby discounts on charges may be applicable regardless of the quality or the quantity of services , and also to new routes .
Also , with regard to the directive 's scope and relevance , it seems that the directive is touching the aviation business in one of its sore points .
The wish of many to reduce the number of airports covered by the directive is proof of this .
Thank you .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there was another reason why the debate on airport charges and on their common regulation took such an extremely long time .
An additional factor was the endless series of interventions in the course of the debate in the Committee on Transport and Tourism . This dossier was the subject of extreme lobbying , in other words there were lots of monetary interests tied up with it , and we as Members of this House have to ask one or two questions .
What is behind all this ?
Why is this happening ? Why such a hard fight , why such tough arguing ?
The answer can always be found by asking : who benefits from intransparency ?
The old question of who gains , or as the Latin puts it cui bono , helps provide an answer here .
Intransparency always benefits those who have market power , those who can dictate the conditions .
Only in very few cases is this beneficial or even fair to the consumer .
There is unfair competition whenever there is a lack of transparency , when there is concealed patronage and when there are hidden subsidies .
This is why I considered it very important that we should produce a common regulation .
For me the downside is that we were not able to regulate a much larger number of airports .
I would also have liked to include the smaller installations within the scope of the directive , for these are often in unfair competition with the larger airports because they massively promote the low-budget carriers .
Just one final point : I believe that it is very important to introduce an amendment that will link airport charges to emission performance .
This is an opportunity for us to lessen the environmental impact of the air transport industry and at the same time to reduce the noise nuisance for the more seriously affected residents .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , airports have much more influence on our economy , our spatial planning , our traffic on the ground and our environment than we could have foreseen in the past .
Large airports with an important role as international transfer hubs , or as entry points to major conurbations have developed into shopping centres , business locations for offices and distribution companies , hubs for public transport on the ground and tollgates to the surrounding area .
They are either an important policy instrument in the hands of the authorities or they have been sold to an international company that seeks only profit and expansion .
They also make profits outside the aviation sector , engage in international competition and find themselves involved in conflicts of interest with airlines , passengers , other users and local residents .
Airports can be misused , because they can force every party that is dependent on them , from airline to passenger , to contribute disproportionately to their profit .
These expensive airports also lead to the development of smaller competing airports nearby , with lower charges , poorer facilities , taking up even more space and resulting in even more areas suffering nuisance .
If the European Union regulates the income of airports , this should not be in order to safeguard the profits of these companies or to limit airlines ' costs , and nor should it be in order to strengthen aviation by offering passengers the lowest possible fares .
The aim must be to protect the environment as much as possible from the unremitting expansion of aviation and to promote safety in the best possible way .
It should also be about transparency , so that flows of funds and unwarranted differences in rates of charges can no longer be covered up as business secrets .
An outcome is now taking shape in which airports with between 1 and 5 million passengers per year will not be covered by these rules .
It would not surprise me if this resulted in more investment in smaller airports in densely populated areas .
On other aspects too , such as the complaints procedure , the stringency of standards and the level of profits , the text will be moderated in comparison with the original Commission proposal .
I anticipate that this will lead to the persistence of abuses and within a few years the demand for stricter rules will increase .
Mr President , this report on preventing the abuse by airports of their competitive position can count on my endorsement .
I am especially satisfied with it on three points .
The first is the adjustment of the field of application .
Not all airports are able to abuse their position .
The concentration on larger airports is sensible , therefore , and so I disagree with some of the previous speakers .
Secondly , I am happy with the opportunity for differentiation of charges in the report .
In view of the harmful environmental effects caused by aviation at and around airports , the instrument of differentiation could encourage the use of cleaner and quieter aircraft .
I also share the view that we should guard against putting an excessive administrative burden upon airports .
For the sake of transparency , they should disclose certain information , but having said that we need to keep a sharp eye on costs and confidentiality .
Finally , I would like to say something about Amendment 19 .
While I warmly welcome an independent regulatory authority , I think that the wording of Amendment 19 could lead to problems in some countries , because the establishment of procedures and their supervision is assigned to one and the same organisation .
I hope that the discussions with the Council will offer the opportunity to resolve this issue satisfactorily .
In conclusion , I would like to thank the rapporteur for his work and I look forward to the continuation of the debate on this report .
Mr President , the Commission talks much about promoting competitiveness in industry and about cutting red tape , but its walk in these issues is often one that takes Europe in quite the opposite direction , and so it seems to me with its stance on air travel .
Having championed increased costs for air travellers through green taxes , we now have a proposed directive on airport charges which will inevitably drive up costs for the flying public .
Regional airports are my particular concern .
They have been a catalyst for progress in many regional economies : they have opened up markets ; they have made the inaccessible accessible ; they have been indispensable in economic transformation .
And now , true to form , the Commission wishes , effectively , to stifle them with the heavy hand of bureaucracy , burying innovation under a mountain of reporting requirements for which the traveller will ultimately pay .
I say this to the Commission : if the genuine reason for this directive is to tackle the abuse of dominant position in the market , then why does it include regional airports at all , when they are not the problem ?
In my own constituency of Northern Ireland , its airports are key to its development , yet last week , when President Barroso was providing sound bites of support for Northern Ireland - and on the very day that we open a new route between Belfast and Heathrow - we have this Commission proposal which will hike costs and discourage expansion .
For those reasons , and without apology , I will vote against this proposal .
Draftsman of the opinion of the Committee of Regional Development . - ( HU ) Thank you , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen .
First , my apologies for the delay and thank you for allowing me the floor .
The creation of a transparent system for airport charges is of paramount importance since there is currently no standardised regulation governing this .
The Commission 's Framework Directive has provided for a method of levying airport charges but gives Member States enough room for movement too .
Airports and air traffic are of particular importance to the European Union since they are a link with the regions , create jobs and attract businesses .
They make a significant contribution to social and economic cohesion in the EU .
With privatisation and the arrival of commercial players , the previous balance in airport charges has been thrown a little out of kilter .
The airlines complain that the major airports behave as a monopoly .
This problem is cured by the draft Directive which promotes proper market competition since the proposal states that the charging systems and the airports setting them cannot discriminate between the different airlines .
With certain exceptions the charges must reflect the real costs of services or infrastructure .
Objective and clear criteria must be established for any charge differentiation or increase , so that users of airline and airport services pay clearly identified prices - the same charge for identical services .
The consultation mechanism we are introducing is also important .
If the airlines are not satisfied with the charges levied on their behalf they can have recourse to an independent regulatory authority .
Finally , I feel it is very important to put on record the need for the Commission of the European Union to prepare a report on the success of the Directive for the European Council and the European Parliament within 4 years of its inception .
This report would assess results and show whether the objectives of the regulation have been achieved .
Thank you .
( DE ) Mr President , there have been some wonderful arguments , at least in abstract and general terms , over whether we should have deregulation or over-regulation .
However , when it comes to the individual case it is always possible that either of these solutions will prove to be the most practical .
On the subject of airport charges the Commission was , in my view , quite right to put forward a proposal for a directive , even though in the case of the Costa report we were also right to praise the efforts being made to reduce the administrative burden .
Airports are important economic players and there are positive as well as potentially negative consequences associated with the key economic role they play .
In its proposal the Commission has put forward an interesting concept , though perhaps it is somewhat too finely woven .
We in the Committee on Transport and Tourism have made a few changes , and I hope , and indeed believe , that these are for the better .
Our rapporteur , Mr Stockmann , held a series of lengthy talks with all the stakeholders , and especially with the various groups in this House , before producing some excellent compromises that we were for the most part able to support .
I would just like to focus on three aspects .
Firstly , we wanted to ensure that the directive would prevent individual airports from abusing their dominant market position .
Secondly , we need Community-wide provisions in order to establish a smooth-functioning , non-discriminatory , transparent and comprehensive procedure for calculating these charges .
Thirdly , it is logical to set up an independent regulatory authority in each Member State in order to ensure that the provisions are implemented .
I am assuming that our proposals will be adopted tomorrow in plenary by a large majority and would like to congratulate the rapporteur , in particular , on his excellent work .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by thanking Mr Stockmann for his excellent report and good cooperation .
I think that when we reach the end of the legislative process we will have taken an important new step toward achieving a situation where the most important European airports are finally observing the same rules when it comes to levying all kinds of charges for services related to landing , take-off , airport lighting , parking of aircraft and the processing of passengers and freight .
The field of application was one of the major sticking points .
I think that the compromise is excellent : 5 million passengers , 15 % of the flights in a Member State .
Account should also be taken of the fact that in our compromise we have made provision for Member States to be given the opportunity , if necessary following an enquiry , to require other airports in the same Member State to comply with these regulations too .
I think that there are four important elements .
The first is that transparency is the constant theme right through the legislation and the imposition of relevant objectives and transparent criteria for determining the level of airport charges is essential .
The second is that variation in the level of airport charges will continue to be possible , and I also have in mind , for instance , variation based on environmental performance , based on noise nuisance .
This would make a steering policy possible .
The third important element is that a clear and compulsory procedure is worked out for consultations between the airport managing body and users and that a good complaints procedure is established .
The final element is that clear agreements are to be made on pre-financing of significant investments in the airports and how these can be costed .
To sum up , I think that we can come up with a good end result if the Council has the will to do so .
I realise that there will be a few problems on the way .
I am also thinking about the approved amendments on financing security measures , which were mainly intended as a means of exerting pressure to find a solution for another issue , as you know .
Meanwhile that is over and done with , and so I think that we in Parliament should be more flexible in the remainder of the procedure .
( LT ) The directive proposed by the European Commission ensures cooperation between the institutions controlling airports and the users and this will not allow large airports to ignore the interests of clients and take a monopolistic position in the market .
That is why I want to favour this report as a member of the Committee on Regional Development .
Air transport has to meet the economic and social needs of regional communities and it is important to emphasize that 90 percent of European Union citizens live not in the capital cities .
Therefore , it is necessary to ensure success in the functioning of regional airports as this will help to increase the attractiveness of the regions .
The presented document reduces the risk of a monopolistic position by the largest airports and this will help to soften the environmental , infrastructural and transport problems facing large airports and the cities located near them .
Namely this will enable a more rapid pace of development at regional airports and ensure the social and economic development of regions in various countries .
The distribution of freight and passenger flows is a very important base for effective regional development .
Therefore , I encourage support for Mr Stockmann 's report once again .
( PL ) Mr President , one of the European Union 's responsibilities is to ensure that the Community market develops in accordance with the principles of fair competition .
The directive on airport charges aims to prevent potential abuses by airports enjoying a dominant position on the Union 's market or in particular countries . It was proposed because not all countries apply transparent procedures when calculating airport charges .
The new provisions are to apply to 67 large airports .
I think we would do well to remember that the development of airports , especially smaller ones , plays an important part in promoting regional development in Europe . It makes a significant contribution to evening out economic differences between individual regions of the Union .
This is especially true in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
My country , Poland , is one of the leaders in air transport .
The Polish air transport market grew by 13 % last year and is amongst those enjoying the most dynamic growth in the world .
Air traffic growth calls for substantial investments , however .
That is why it is essential to allow smaller airports to include in their airport charges part of the cost of long-term infrastructure development projects .
This would be of great assistance in financing their development .

( PT ) Mr President , in this one-minute speech I would like to highlight the amendments we tabled in order to ensure that this directive takes explicit account of the constraints suffered by regions that are permanently at a geographical and natural disadvantage , such as the outermost regions , particularly in accordance with Article 299 ( 2 ) of the EC Treaty .
We believe that the directive must explicitly recognise the importance of airports to the social and economic development of these regions and to territorial cohesion .
Adequate exceptions must therefore be included in the directive , hence the proposal that , for airports situated in these regions , the rules laid down in the directive will not apply where they will not guarantee compliance with the universal public service obligations .
We hope that this proposal can count on your support .
Mr President , I think it is useful , from time to time , to remind the Commission that Ireland is an island and that we have a complete dependence on airports to be part of Europe and part of the rest of the world .
The important issue for me is regional airports and that they get full support .
In many cases I keep hearing the argument that helping small airports will increase the carbon footprint but I do not think that is true .
When all flights go out of Dublin , it just means that all the people who live near Cork Airport , as I do , or Shannon Airport or Waterford or Kerry , have to drive to Dublin or take a second flight - a shuttle to Dublin - and then go on .
Whereas often these flights could reasonably , with support for regional airports , go from a regional area directly to where they need to go .
My other point concerns disabled passengers .
It was not long ago that , when you got the breakdown of charges for airports in Ireland , it would have a wheelchair charge .
Many disabled persons contacted me and asked that this be removed because they felt that other passengers would feel that they were paying extra because of people in wheelchairs .
It is very important that we realise that one out of every ten persons in Europe will have a disability , possibly even more than that - up to 17 % sometimes - and that there should not be specific charges .
( PT ) More and more journeys are being made in Europe and to Europe , but it is becoming increasingly expensive to travel in and to our continent .
The factors giving rise to this higher cost , such as the increased price of oil , security costs and the reduction of CO2 emissions , are persistent factors that are very clearly here to stay .
In this context , our goal must be to encourage a truly competitive airport market , which is only viable where there is transparency and predictability .
These are , I believe , the main virtues of this proposal for a directive in its version currently being debated , to which Mr Stockmann has significantly contributed .
One of its particular virtues is the set of general rules for determining and levying airport charges , which lay down common principles to prevent any abuse of a dominant position .
As these rules apply to around 70 % of airports , this very correctly avoids imposing legislation on smaller or regional airports where this risk does not exist .
In addition , as regards situations such as those that exist in Portugal or Finland , for example , where air traffic is managed by associations or networks of airports , provision is made for harmonised charges for all , provided that they are compatible with competition rules .
The following points must also be highlighted : the establishment of a duty for airport operators and users to exchange information , transparency requirements and the method of calculating airport charges .
The creation of an independent national regulatory authority that will intervene only in the event of definitive disagreement over a decision on airport charges will also contribute to the proper functioning of the market .
Finally , I must conclude , Mr President , by saying that the definition of strict and transparent criteria for using charges to pre-finance new airport infrastructure projects simultaneously protects the public interest in the development of airports and new airport infrastructures and also the rights of passengers , in other words consumers , whose interests must , after all , be the main focus of our attention .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his patience in listening to and noting the various requirements that reflect the existing diversity of the airport systems in Europe .
I would also like to congratulate the Commission on being sensitive to the fact that that diversity cannot , however , imply systems that are far from transparent , which can be discriminatory or provide for limited participation on the part of the various stakeholders and users .
Following the rapporteur 's in-depth dialogue and arbitration , I believe that the current text offers us a very useful instrument to ensure that the three main stakeholders - national authorities , airports and airlines - resolve their differences , in short for the benefit of the workers and passengers . It will enable them to provide a high-quality service that is in keeping with the requirements of the new passengers and with the new requirements surrounding accessibility , greater security , less environmental impact , especially as regards noise , and less conflict and legal uncertainty through better consultation .
Perhaps it might have been better to make the application criterion simpler , stipulating only a percentage , which might have given a more representative result .
In any event , I am pleased that the text recognises the operational capacity of the airport networks , which have proved to be a very useful system for countries such as my own , where serious seasonal problems affect the airlines .
In addition , I would also like to add to this the proposal to accept parliamentary or judicial methods of ensuring the current rates .
( FI ) Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Stockmann , for having prepared the debate on this issue so thoroughly .
I nevertheless wish to focus attention on something else , from the point of view of someone who lives in a sparsely populated country of long distances between population centres .
Airports in Finland form a coherent network , where standard pricing applies in the main .
This arrangement has guaranteed reasonable operational costs , even at airports with little traffic located in remote districts .
Air connections to these areas are vital .
Amendments 9 and 16 take account of the existence of an airport network , but small airports are treated unfairly .
I hope Parliament will take into consideration the different conditions that exist in the Member States and shape the directive in a way which enables maintenance , development and funding of a national airport network on a uniform basis .

( PL ) Mr President , I would like to begin by saying that I appreciate the work undertaken by Mr Stockmann , the rapporteur , and by the Commission .
The competitiveness of the European economy calls for a transparent and rational approach to airport charges .
The latter are a significant component of the carriers ' operational costs .
This issue concerns not only airport owners but also airlines and therefore passengers too .
Airports of national or continental importance are affected along with regional ones .
The question of the size limit arises . Is the proposed amended criterion of 5 million passenger movements or 15 % of passenger movements in a particular country appropriate ?
In no circumstances should these provisions impact negatively on passengers .
The services provided by airports must comply with the criteria for safety and punctuality of arrivals , departures and transfers .
We are all aware that at the moment our airports differ considerably as regards punctuality culture .
In some of them the passenger is treated as a nuisance .
Improvements and better passenger service would be most welcome .
Mr President , I am very pleased at the outcome of the negotiations that have been ongoing for a number of months , and I am glad to see that a common-sense approach has been taken by Parliament .
The original European Commission proposal that this directive would apply to all airports with passenger numbers greater than one million per annum was extremely worrying , particularly from an Irish viewpoint , because , if this approach had been adopted , then the directive would have applied to both Shannon and Cork airports , and possibly , in due course , to Ireland West Airport as it seeks to continue its expansion operations .
What I have been arguing is that airports under the five million passenger per annum threshold are subject to much stronger market forces than larger airports , and to subject them to the terms of this directive would put an unnecessary stranglehold on regional airports .
Given the position adopted by Parliament today , we can now expect larger airports to be more transparent with their pricing policies and financing of infrastructural developments .
We will also see a strong independent regulation in all Member States to ensure that airports and airport users do not abuse their dominant market power .
I am particularly glad that , while appeals are being dealt with that airport users cannot delay plans adopted by the airport , I myself think that the six-month notice of price changes , while biased against the airline , will ensure adequate time for agreement and negotiation , if necessary , by both parties .
The fact that the airport user cannot delay airport plans will allow airports to begin infrastructure plans without delay and thus save them - and ultimately air passengers - money , as they will most likely be the beneficiaries of added cost projections .
I would like to thank my colleagues in Parliament who supported my amendments to the original proposal , and who supported my view during the negotiations , which will mean that regional airports - the smaller airports - will continue to be free , at least for the foreseeable future , from more red tape and costs of bureaucracy .
Again I join with everybody : congratulations to Mr Stockmann , the rapporteur , on a job well done .

( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I must thank and congratulate Mr Stockmann for his openness and capacity to achieve compromise between the various interests involved in the preparation of this high-quality report , particularly with regard to the outermost regions .
I support the broad lines of the Commission 's proposal and I am committed to this report because it guarantees non-discrimination in airport charges , except where this is compatible with , and necessary under , the Treaty , specifically with regard to forecasts for the outermost regions .
A compulsory procedure for consultation between airport management bodies and users must exist .
Any differentiation in charges must be transparent and based on clear criteria , taking into account the principle of territorial cohesion .
According to our proposal , future remodelling will be possible for objective and transparent reasons of public interest , particularly in relation to universal access .
Member States must ensure , and I quote , ' that airports levy the same charge for the same service .
The airport managing body may grant airport user concessions on charges based on the quality of a service used , provided that the concession in question is available to all users of the airport under publicised , transparent and objective conditions .
It may grant a concession to users which open new routes ... in accordance with EC competition law ...
The President cut off the speaker
( SL ) As an MP , a traveller and a pilot , I am pleased that with this directive the Union is for the first time regulating the sphere of airport fees , which I find useful for several reasons .
Firstly I think it is crucial that it is allowing us to determine common principles for the levying of airport fees , which will lead to greater clarity and less discrimination .
The second emphasis I see is the initiation of dialogue between airport authorities and airline companies , which should mean that greater attention will be paid to passengers , whether in terms of their safety or the quality of service .
It seems to me important that with this directive we have shown our favourable attitude towards the development needs of airports , i.e. the possibility of higher taxes , but under the condition that there is a dialogue with the users giving them clear information and ring-fencing the taxes exclusively for developmental purposes .
Finally , I would like to give strong support to the establishment of independent regulatory bodies in the hope that , in accordance with the principles of proportionality , it does not lead to excessive bureaucratisation .
I am especially thinking of those Member States that have one large airport and one largely state-owned national airline .
Although in such cases we do not need extensive regulatory bodies , it is urgently necessary to provide a structural separation of that function from activities relating to ownership or supervision .
Allow me also a remark about terminology : In my opinion it is more appropriate in English to use the term " independent regulatory authority " than " independent supervisory authority " , because the latter could be understood as some kind of inspection body , which is not intended by this directive .
For the second reading I propose that the possibility of exception , or opt-out , be introduced under certain conditions for those airports operating in special circumstances .
My congratulations to the rapporteur and those cooperating with him .

( RO ) I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Stockmann , on his significant improvements to the Commission 's proposal .
All the airports falling within the scope of this Directive will be subject to the same rules of transparency and will provide information regarding the calculation and use of airport charges .
According to Recital 1 , the main task of airports is to ensure the handling of aircraft , from landing to take-off , and of passengers and cargo .
Given the wide range of activities taking place in an airport , it is necessary to clearly define the responsibilities of each entity and in particular the manner of funding of these activities .
However , we should pay particular attention to the possibility of actually enforcing this Directive in all Member States .
Continued dialogue between airports and transport operators is indispensable .
One of our amendments asks for airport charges introduced to cover security costs to be used exclusively for implementing security measures .
Member States should also use Structural Funds in order to develop the infrastructure of their regional airports .
According to Eurostat data on five new Member States , air passenger traffic increased by 25 % in 2006 in relation to 2005 .
Over the same period Romania has seen the most significant increase ( 35 % ) .
Mr Stockmann , as rapporteur , you will have the opportunity to speak at the end of the debate .
Do you wish to speak now or wait until the end ?
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , even though ' catch the eye ' is not really intended for rapporteurs , I would just like to direct one or two questions to the Commissioner because he did not hear my presentation of a short while ago .
I will be brief , when I get the next opportunity .
All right , that is clear , but we have to finish our list .
We shall therefore move on to the next speaker and then continue with the ' catch-the-eye ' procedure .
Mr President , I believe the essence of this debate can be summed up with the question : how do you measure market dominance ?
This directive is the Commission 's attempt to bring a large number of Community airports under regulation , and it has seen fit to do this because it believes there could be an imbalance in the relationship between airports and their users , the airlines .
In some cases they are right ; the more sizeable airports in the EU , like London Heathrow and Paris Charles de Gaulle , should be regulated so they are not in a position to abuse their market dominance .
But I believe the smaller regional airports of the EU should only be regulated when they are found to be operating anti-competitively .
So , back to the question : how do you measure market dominance ?
A system that captures every Community airport with passenger numbers of five million per annum and above is arbitrary but certainly better than one million .
And , where an airport accounts annually for more than 15 % of the passenger movements in the Member State , that is better too - but still arbitrary .
Newcastle Airport in the UK , for example , with 5.2 million passengers , still has to compete with other airports all over the north of England to attract business .
Why add burdensome and costly red tape to the smaller regional airports that do actually compete with each other and need to grow ?
That is why I want the possibility for national regulators to opt out their airports from this regulation .
The secondary aims of this directive are , however , very good .
Common rules on provision of mutual information , transparency and the collection of charges is something which I applaud .
But surely , in this case , the Commission should not regulate further than that for regulation 's sake .

rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , I would like to ask the Commissioner about those points on which our position in the committee differed significantly from the Commission proposal : firstly , on reducing the scope of the directive to 5 million passenger movements ; secondly , on the inclusion of airport networks , which is a completely new point ; thirdly , on firming up the responsibilities of the regulatory authorities and allowing them to delegate duties to regional bodies ; fourthly , on pre-financing , which the Commission had not included , even though it is allowed under the ICAO .
Finally , I have one more question : what is your position on the differentiation of charges according to environmental criteria ?
These are the questions that I would still like to see answered .
Mr President , in the interests of not repeating anything that has been said , I fully support the need for more transparency in airport charges .
As charges at airports are not part of the operational costs of airlines but are part of the operational , development and maintenance costs of airports , I would like to know the Commission 's view on the compulsory need for airlines to refund airport charges if a passenger has to cancel a flight .
At the very least they should get full credit , if not an actual refund of any airport charges on a cancelled flight .
I do not think it is acceptable for airlines to pocket airport charges if flights are cancelled .
Some of them are doing that at the moment , others will refund after taking a hefty administration charge out of it , which makes it unworthy to pursue the actual refund itself .
That is a small point but a very irritating point for passengers in the EU , and I think we should say something now and tie that in to what we are talking about here .
( RO ) Since we have the duty to ensure transparency , correct information for users and passengers , and quality of air transport services and since , during the first 11 months of 2006 , 211 new regional routes were created - thus generating 1 800 new flights a week - I would like to ask the Commission what measures are being taken to inform passengers of airport charges , as passengers unfortunately do not know their rights when flights are cancelled or delayed .

Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would once again like to thank your rapporteur , Mr Stockmann , who has prolonged our dialogue .
We - and I , personally - engaged in dialogue with the airports and the airlines .
Thank you , Mr Stockmann , for having listened to both sides because it is not easy to establish , to some extent , the rules for good dialogue that allow balanced solutions to be achieved and that ensure that airports in dominant positions cannot abuse that position .
I will now respond to your questions , Mr Stockmann .
As far as the number of passengers is concerned , we feel that 5 million is acceptable .
It is essential to take the networks into account and I accept that .
However , I am very reluctant to support the delegation of duties to regional authorities .
This could be dangerous and I do not see how it would be of any benefit .
We need an impartial authority that will ensure that the airports concerned are subject to the same conditions regarding dialogue and the determination of charges .
I support the differentiation of charges according to environmental criteria .
However - and I am going to come back to this - there is no reason to envisage any pre-financing of infrastructures .
When looking at how to manage an airport successfully and the charges to be collected , it is obviously necessary to anticipate future infrastructure requirements .
There is no need for pre-financing .
In addition to those answers , I would now like to respond to some of the comments made .
Firstly , I would like to say to Mr Simpson that the directive has managed to stay away from regulation and bureaucracy .
What we want to see is respect for the basic principles .
The Member States have already accepted these principles within the framework of the International Civil Aviation Organisation .
We do not want to introduce regulation for the sake of it .
I honestly believe that we can genuinely say that we have found the best framework for ensuring good dialogue between the airlines and the airports , and , in my view , it is as part of this dialogue that progress will be made in the area of transparency .
Mr Allister said that the directive was going to make regional airports more expensive .
Quite the opposite is true , however !
On the contrary , through transparent accounts , through this obligatory consultation , through non-discrimination among carriers , we will in fact ensure , particularly in certain regional airports , that there is complete transparency and that it is easier for the consumers , the passengers to travel by air , without any nasty surprises .
As I said , and I am responding here to Mrs Lichtenberger , the directive allows the Member States to establish charges or taxes on the basis of noise pollution or other environmental aspects .
However , since this directive is trying to stay away from over-regulation , we do not need to define every one of those taxes .
In response to Mr El Khadraoui , I would say that it will certainly be possible to adjust the charges on an environmental basis .
The Council proposed this and I intend to support it .
Some of you have asked me about the problems concerning flight cancellations .
To be honest , the text does not deal with that issue , so it is difficult for me to respond .
There has been a great deal of progress on passengers ' rights , and that must continue .
I would ask you , Madam , to contact me in writing so that I can provide a more precise response to your question , which , I admit , is quite legitimate , like that of Mrs Ţicău , who also spoke .
Mr President , I would now like to outline briefly the Commission 's position on the amendments .
A number of the amendments tabled by your rapporteur strengthen the Commission 's goal of improving the relationship between airports and airlines .
Mr Stockmann , the Commission can take over 21 of the amendments that contribute to that objective .
I would mention , in particular , the amendment on the definition of a charge , Amendment 12 , and the amendments on airport networks , Amendments 14 and 16 , with a few changes to the wording .
The Commission had initially proposed that the directive should apply to airports whose annual traffic is over 1 million passenger movements .
The Commission accepts the new limit proposed in the first part of Amendment 7 since it seems to be supported by the majority of both Parliament and Council .
However , 27 of the amendments tabled by your rapporteur cannot be taken over as they stand and would need to be discussed in more detail .
These include , in particular , the amendments on security charges : Amendments 13 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 .
This issue was the subject of long and heated debates .
A compromise was reached during conciliation and it seems , Mr Stockmann , that these amendments are therefore no longer necessary at this stage .
In addition , the directive cannot apply solely to cases of infringement of competition law .
As such , the Commission cannot accept the amendments concerning situations where airports have a dominant position in relation to their users .
The scope of the directive is broader than that .
We therefore feel that Amendment 7 in part , Amendment 16 in part , Amendment 19 and Amendment 20 are unnecessary .
Nor can the Commission accept the amendments on the pre-financing of airport infrastructures .
The collection of a tax before an infrastructure is operational is contrary to the principles on which the directive is based .
However , this does not take anything away , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , from Mr Stockmann 's excellent work , which , in my opinion , has considerably improved this draft directive .
I have commented on a number of amendments , but I must once again thank Mr Stockmann and the Committee on Transport for the quality of their work and for helping us to move forward with this important text , which will enable us to structure the dialogue between airports and airlines .
We want to prevent the users from being victims of this lack of dialogue and we want to prevent a situation whereby , due to a lack of transparency , a number of practices can be implemented without any real possibility of approving them .
Those are the comments I wanted to make .
I would like to thank Parliament for its commitment to this proposal .
I think that it should provide our airports and airlines with the means of establishing permanent dialogue that will benefit all of the parties concerned .
Commission 's position on amendments by Parliament
Stockmann report
Amendments acceptable : 8 , 10 , 11 , 12
Amendments acceptable in principle : 3 , 21 , 27 , 29 , 30 , 33 , 35 , 40 , 44 , 45
Amendments acceptable with redrafting : 14 , 15
Amendments partly acceptable : 7 ( 1st part ) , 16 , 17 , 18 , 22 , 35 ( 1st part )
Amendments rejected : 1 , 2 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 9 , 13 , 19 , 20 , 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 , 28 , 31 , 32 , 34 , 36 , 37 , 38 , 39 , 41 , 42 , 43 , 46 , 47 , 48
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to thank everyone for their comments and suggestions .
We still have a certain distance to go together and there will be some hard bargaining when the Council presents its common position .
In recent weeks it has become apparent that the Council is coming over to our way of thinking on several points , including the scope of the directive , the subject of airport networks and the rejection of ' opt-outs ' by national states .
However , there are also some new points that have not yet even been discussed , such as setting national upper limits on charges .
There therefore needs to be further internal discussion on these matters .
It will first of all be important to reach as much common agreement as possible on these points tomorrow so that we have a strong negotiating mandate when presented with the Council 's position .
I would like to thank you , Commissioner , for the detailed position that you have presented .
I would just like to conclude by explaining why infrastructure pre-financing is so important for this Parliament : for one thing , it is possible under the ICAO ; secondly , we naturally do not want to see a sudden escalation of charges when the new infrastructure comes on the market ; and finally , of course , there is a large backlog demand , not just in Eastern Europe but in other new Member States too .
However , I know that this is a contentious issue and we will have to wait and see what progress can be made here .
Thank you again and I look forward to further discussions with you and with my fellow Members here .
May I also thank all the shadow rapporteurs for their excellent cooperation .
( Applause )
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( RO ) The initiative of clarifying the regulations concerning airport charges and the development of transparent , non-discriminatory procedures for the calculation of these charges is welcome , because it prevents any abuse on the part of market-dominant airports .
Transparency and the uninterrupted exchange of information between air transport service providers and clients are thus ensured for both individual airports and airport networks .
Moreover , Member States may apply the provisions of this Directive to other airports within their territory , thus encouraging competition and implicitly reducing airport charges , for the benefit of end-users .
Due to the existence of common standards , passengers will get the same services for the same prices , and cost-effectiveness will be the only criterion used by airports in the management of their equipment and services .
The appropriate enforcement of these procedures will be ensured by the establishment of an independent national regulatory authority in each Member State .
It is my firm belief that European citizens will benefit first and foremost from this regulation .
Other benefits will include : further investment in the aviation sector , improved passenger safety , security and trust , which in turn will lead to a significant long-term contribution to the development of air transport in the European Union .
Export and import of dangerous chemicals ( debate )
The next item is the report by Johannes Blokland , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning the export and import of dangerous chemicals - C6-0439 / 2006 - .

Member of the Commission . - ( EL ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to thank and congratulate the European Parliament and in particular the rapporteur , Mr Blokland , the shadow rapporteurs and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , as well as Mrs Mann and the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy for their excellent reports and the views expressed at first reading .
For the last 30 years the European Union 's policies and legislation on the protection of public health and the environment have made significant progress in reducing the risks posed by chemical substances , not only in the European Union , but also worldwide .
The European Union has constantly been an important partner in international conventions , including the Rotterdam Convention on the prior informed consent procedure for certain hazardous chemicals and pesticides in international trade .
Regulation 304 / 2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning the export and import of dangerous chemicals implements the Rotterdam Convention within the Community .
On many points the regulation does not stop at the provisions of the Rotterdam Convention , but goes further by offering a higher level of protection for countries that import chemicals .
On 10 January 2006 the Court of Justice of the European Communities adopted a judgment annulling Regulation 304 / 2003 on the grounds that it should have had a dual legal basis , namely Articles 133 and 175 ( 1 ) of the Treaty .
In response , the aim of this proposal is to adopt a new regulation with the aforementioned dual legal basis .
At the same time , the Commission , on the basis of its report on experience to date in implementing the relevant procedures , has put forward certain technical amendments to the provisions of the regulation .
This report was submitted to the European Parliament and the Council at the same time as this proposal .
The Commission 's main proposals for amendments to the regulation are as follows :
Firstly , certain exceptions are being proposed to the central requirement for explicit consent in countries of import prior to export .
These exceptions are implemented only in cases in which , despite reasonable efforts on the part of the Commission and of the national authority designated by the country of export , there is no response to the request , and provided that certain conditions are met .
These exceptions are intended to create a certain degree of flexibility , while at the same time maintaining a high level of protection - one which is , indeed , higher than that provided by the Rotterdam Convention .
Secondly , an exception is proposed to the requirement of explicit consent in cases where chemicals are exported to OECD countries , if certain conditions are fulfilled .
Thirdly , the rules relating to the period of validity of explicit consent are clarified .
In addition , explicit consents are reviewed at regular intervals , as well as in cases where alternative evidence is accepted .
Fourthly , procedures and means to allow access by the customs authorities to information are laid down , since in most Member States these authorities play a principal role in ensuring compliance with the regulation , especially as regards controlling exports .
Madam President , I should like to express my satisfaction with the efforts we have all made to reach agreement on this regulation at first reading .
The European Commission is able to accept the compromise package of amendments in order to reach agreement at first reading .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Madam President , as rapporteur for the import and export of chemicals , I am pleased to be able to report here that we have achieved a good result at first reading .
I would therefore like to thank everyone who collaborated on this .
I am thinking particularly of the secretariat of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety and the shadow rapporteurs and their staff , who were outstanding in the support they gave me .
I greatly appreciated the good cooperation with the Council , especially with the Portuguese Presidency , and the European Commission .
It was a technically complex proposal , and the discussion sometimes became quite heated on the question of what exactly was best for the environment .
The most important thing that we have achieved , in my view , is that through this new regulation the trade in dangerous chemicals will be dealt with in an ethically responsible manner .
We especially wanted to operate from the principle that will be familiar to you as the golden rule : ' Do not do unto others what you would not want done to yourself ' .
Although this is an ancient principle , which we find in the Bible , as well as in other religions , this aspect led to the usual discussions .
The original Commission proposal did actually contain very liberal arrangements for allowing the export of dangerous chemicals with tacit consent .
This was proposed , while for developing countries especially it is important that there is complete transparency about what is being imported .
After all , we are talking about substances that are banned in the European Union or severely restricted .
I believe that we have got a good result in the agreement reached .
It means that the protection and awareness-raising of developing countries is guaranteed when it comes to dangerous substances .
Madam President , this new regulation properly implements the global Rotterdam Convention , which was adopted in 1998 but has only officially been in force since 2004 .
I can therefore wholeheartedly recommend that everyone vote tomorrow in favour of the agreement reached with the Council .
Finally , Madam President , I would also like to make a case for the Council and the Commission to do as much as they can to extend the list of substances in the Rotterdam Convention .
There are about 40 substances on the list of the Convention at the moment .
There are certainly 200 substances that have been nominated to be assessed and possibly added to that list .
To protect developing countries especially , we need to set to work energetically on the other substances .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - ( DE ) Madam President , I should like to extend my warmest thanks most especially to the rapporteur and the Commission , and of course to the Council too .
We have presented a very good report here .
We in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy have given a high priority to producing a practical regulation that will control the international import and export of hazardous chemicals in a reasonable and logical way and that is sufficiently coherent that the importing countries can understand what we in the European Union are trying to achieve .
That essentially was the main problem , namely that we had put in some nice things and we had put in some dangerous things but no-one could understand what it actually all meant , all the stuff that we then added in the supplement to the international list .
The proposal before us is a good regulation and I hope that it will be understood at international level , so that it can also be properly applied .
Things that are not understood will of course not make much sense .
This can be just as dangerous ; if something is not understood then it will not work no matter what .
The Committee on Industry is satisfied and I should particularly like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Blokland , for having negotiated with such persistence and common sense that we ultimately achieved a good compromise .
I would just request that we do not try to add further to the list immediately but that we test out what is there so that we then actually have a piece of legislation that works .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the regulation before us , as you know , concerns a highly technical issue .
That is why there was no provision for a debate originally , but now that we have the opportunity to express our point of view after all , I would like to say something briefly on behalf of the PPE-DE Group .
I am also very pleased that , after a number of informal consultations with the Council and the Commission , we have reached an agreement at first reading .
This was only possible in fact thanks to the efforts and openness of our rapporteur , who was willing to listen to all parties .
Naturally I also thank the Commission and the Council for their contributions .
Now the present regulation on the import and export of certain dangerous chemicals , in addition to the dual legal basis - Article 133 and Article 175 ( 1 ) - and a number of technical changes , does indeed focus , as the rapporteur has also already mentioned , on the amended procedure for explicit consent , which is dealt with in Article 13 .
The informal discussions mainly concentrated on that issue .
I am convinced that greater flexibility is appropriate in some cases , not only to safeguard the export interests of European countries , but also to guarantee the highest level of protection of the environment and public health for all parties concerned .
That way certain dangerous chemicals may still be exported without explicit agreement or consent , but under very strict conditions .
I think that the wording in the agreement ensures that the safe export of substances is guaranteed and even strengthened .
This last point was indeed achieved by scrapping part of the Commission 's original text .
As the PPE-DE 's shadow rapporteur , I am also confident that , together with the Council and the Commission , we have reached a good , balanced and practicable compromise .
I hope that my fellow Members will approve everything tomorrow .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , first of all I would like to welcome the report and of course I welcome the implementation of the Rotterdam Convention , which is an important international convention on the ban of several dangerous chemicals .
The topic is not unknown to me .
I worked as the shadow rapporteur of the PSE Group on the restriction of several chemicals , including the ban of PFOS and the export ban on mercury , and now I and my colleagues are working on the restriction of ammonium nitrate and other substances .
We had good cooperation on these issues with my colleague Mr Blokland .
We have to understand that a European-level ban is sometimes not enough .
For instance , DDT and lindane have been banned in the EU for many years but their presence can still be detected in the blood of our citizens .
Following the European ban on certain chemicals , it frequently happens that several multinational companies produce and sell the banned chemicals in non-EU countries , especially in the Third World .
Then the banned chemicals easily return in imported products and they are also present as environmental pollutants in oceans , seas , rivers and air .
The export ban on mercury , fully supported by this House , showed us the right reaction .
The same treatment is needed for other dangerous chemicals as well .
I underline the importance of the international chemical conventions - the Rotterdam Convention , the Stockholm Convention and the SAICM - as only these instruments can lead to an international solution to the problems caused by chemicals .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , I also wish to congratulate Mr Blokland for an excellent report and for the admirably skilful way with which he has handled all the procedural issues concerned with this important report .
Additionally , I wish to thank him for the respect and attention he has shown to all shadow rapporteurs .
The Commission proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning the export and import of dangerous chemicals , enriched with the compromise joint amendments by almost all the parliamentary groups , will present a set of adequate and much-needed rules which will most likely provide protection of public health and of the environment at a high level .
The serious problems caused by unscrupulous international merchants of toxic substances are well known and feared , and it is very much hoped that the implementation of the Commission 's proposal will assist in helping developing nations to counter the serious hazards to the well-being of their citizens and to our environment .
Apart from the substance of this piece of legislation , it is also noteworthy that it demonstrates to some extent the usefulness of the Court of Justice decision concerning action of the Commission against the Council and the European Parliament .
At the same time , it raises questions as to why such actions had to be taken in the first place , and why the three core institutions of the EU could not find ways of agreeing amicably and without the need to resort to court deliberations .
Such action inevitably brought about delay , was expensive and may have caused a certain amount of avoidable interinstitutional animosity .
Nonetheless , it has happened , and it must now be put behind us - although it must perhaps guide all of us to perhaps take wiser decisions in the future and avoid court actions as much as possible .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( SV ) Madam Chairman , let me thank Johannes Blokland for the excellent cooperation we have had throughout the process .
It is ten years since the Rotterdam Convention was signed , and it was said then that prior written approval should be sought for the export of dangerous chemicals .
After all we are not dealing with just any chemicals ; the list of chemicals contains the most hazardous chemicals used by man on earth today .
So it has taken ten years .
One reason for that is the stubborn attitude of the old Commission which insisted that it was just a commercial matter .
I thank Stavros Dimas for ensuring that we now have an appropriate legal basis and can take things forward .
Nor was it always easy to negotiate with the Council .
I was shocked when the Presidency thought that lethal chemicals , which are in practice banned in the EU , could be exported to other countries over long periods without prior consent .
The reason for this was that the Council did not want European industry to be at a competitive disadvantage .
The real competitive disadvantage to our industry , however , would arise if it were forced to jeopardise health , the environment and international law in order to survive .
It is absurd to claim that we have to breach international conventions just because others do not comply with rules and standards .
You might as well say that the EU should export illegal drugs because , if it does not , the Mafia will .
I am glad that we were able to agree in the end and finally plug the loophole for non-approved exports .
We now have legislation which does not just cover Convention chemicals but also contains requirements for other chemicals which are strictly controlled in the EU .
These must now be assessed against health and environmental criteria by the appropriate authorities prior to export .
It is good that the period for exemptions has been shortened from 36 to 12 months .
It is also good that chemicals contained in products are covered .
Finally we have legislation which is acceptable and improves on the Commission 's proposal but could have been even better if public health and the environment had taken precedence over corporate interests ; that is after all the only sustainable economic model .
( DE ) Madam President , I too would like to thank Mr Blokland .
I am pleased that the European Parliament has changed tack and has closed this massive loophole .
We know that there are more than 1.5 million cases of poisoning and nearly 30 000 deaths a year in the developing world .
It would have been appalling if the Commission 's proposal had come into force , as this would have meant that dangerous chemicals could be exported without the authorisation of the importing countries provided that no response had been received within 90 days .
It would also have been a very questionable interpretation of the health and environment legislation if we had continued exporting when on the one hand we are laying down a new safety landmark by way of the latest pesticide certification , while on the other we are doing the very opposite with our exports .
The EU should not just be ensuring a high level of protection on its own doorstep but should also be advocating the same for the rest of the world , and this paradoxical softening of the export rules would have done nothing for the EU 's credibility .
What is more , we need greater transparency when it comes to the export of chemicals and pesticides .
There needs to be a better system for disclosing the quantities of products being exported by the EU Member States .
After all , we are talking about the movement of goods that are subject to restrictions and prohibitions and we in the Member States need maximum transparency in this area .
We therefore require more information on the quantities involved and on the particular Member States the materials are coming from .
Madam President , as we are new to this procedure - and , having looked around , everybody else present has spoken - does that mean I can have five minutes myself ?
I assume I can have at least two , which was the time taken off our side to allow the ' catch-the-eye ' procedure .
It is a matter we need to clarify .
I stand to support colleagues on this important regulation , which is on its second trip through the committees and these houses , because of a Court of Justice ruling 12 months ago that it should have been a dual legal base originally .
The main point I want to speak on under the ' catch-the-eye ' procedure is my general concern about legal bases and the trouble we have been running into here , not just with this piece of legislation but also with others .
A lot of time is spent , at committee level as well as plenary , in debating amendments in relation to single versus dual legal bases and different views .
I think it is time that this Parliament took stock of exactly the procedures we arrive at - different legal bases - because , often , dual legal bases are proposed to us or are proposed at Council coming back to us before a common position is reached for what I would call sloppy legislating reasons , because the larger the EU gets - 27 Member States now and growing , and I welcome that - the harder it is to be tidy in our legislation .
We really must look at what we are doing in this area .
So it is interesting that the reverse is true here .
In fact , the Court of Justice has said that we need a dual legal base in this particular area rather than the single legal base , which normally makes life much easier - if we can keep to a single legal base - because very often dual legal bases have been lawyers ' charters .
I wonder whether the Commissioner could indicate what exactly the challenge to the Court of Justice was in relation to the single legal base , who took it , and if he could give us more information on why the Court of Justice itself determined , if you like , on a dual legal base .
They have given us time to go through the procedure again and have maintained the effects of the regulation until we readopt it , as it were , and I very much welcome the fact that it looks like we are going to have a first reading agreement because of all the cooperation all round .
The Commissioner 's views on that and on the whole saga of the legal base that has us here a second time would be very welcome .
I allowed you the extra time , as I did others , since the five minutes were obviously not excessive given that there are not many Members present , but only this once .
Member of the Commission . - ( EL ) Madam President , I would like to thank all the speakers for their positive comments .
I fully acknowledge and share Parliament 's desire to achieve a high level of protection for human health and the environment , particularly in those countries that do not have the requisite infrastructure or capacity to correctly handle hazardous chemicals .
I also fully agree with the view that the European Community should play a leading role in establishing a legal framework for the Community so as to ensure a high level of protection .
On many points , the regulation does not restrict itself to the provisions of the Rotterdam Convention , but lays down implementing conditions that offer a high level of protection for all the countries of the world , not just for members of the Convention .
I am convinced that this example will encourage other countries to follow suit and to join the Convention .
The Commission will make every possible effort to support the Rotterdam Convention to enable these goals to be achieved .

In response to the concerns voiced on arsenic and mercury , the Commission would like to stress that , pursuant to Article 22 ( 3 ) of Regulation 304 / 2003 , if metallic arsenic is banned or subjected to a rigorous restriction within the Community , then a proposal will be submitted for the application of the relevant annex .
Furthermore , the Commission stresses that work is in progress in the Council and in Parliament concerning the proposal to ban exports of mercury to countries outside the Community , a ban which , as long as it is in force , goes beyond the requirement for consent imposed by the Rotterdam Convention and the Community regulation , which implements it .
Once again I would like to thank the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteurs for their efforts and their excellent work , in particular Mr Blokland .
The Commission is particularly satisfied with the result of negotiations and considers all the proposed compromise amendments to be acceptable .
As for the dual legal basis , it would , in fact , have been much easier and simpler had we had a single legal basis , but we well know the problem that arises so often : here we have , if I remember rightly , Article 133 with Article 175 , while in most other cases we have Article 95 with Article 175 .
Certainly , in proposing a legal basis , we always rely on the opinion of our Legal Service .
Here , as I have already said , we have dealt with trade and the environment , and this was the reason for the European Court of Justice 's decision on the dual legal basis .


rapporteur . - ( NL ) Madam President , Mrs Doyle and Mr Matsakis raised the problem of the legal basis and Commissioner Dimas , who I also want to thank warmly for his reply , also touched on this .

The problem , when I was rapporteur , was indeed that the President of the Council came to see me and said : ' We in the Council are unanimous in having serious problems with " trade ” as the legal basis ; we want to take advice from our Legal Service and make it " environment ” ' .
Parliament consulted its own Legal Service , and our Legal Service was absolutely confident that the legal basis should not be ' trade ' and that it had to be ' environment ' .
On that basis we came to this conclusion then , almost unanimously , at least in the Council .
It would actually have been better if we had not taken this problem to the Court of Justice , but had opened up negotiations with the Commissioner , with the President of the Council and with Parliament in order to find a political solution to this problem .
What happened then ?
Yes , fortunately the regulation has come into force .
It worked : the Council treated the matter as urgent , Parliament treated the matter as urgent .
However , there was a great deal of discussion , and in the end that led to everyone being in the wrong : the Commission , the Council and Parliament .
The Court of Justice pronounced a kind of judgment of Solomon and said : dual legal basis , while the Council and Parliament had been assuming that you could not have that , that it was impossible .
In a situation like that you end up in the position that we are all in the wrong , that it has cost years of delay , though fortunately not at the expense of the developing countries , as the work carried on anyway .
In any event , we spent quite some time on this .
I think that we should act together to prevent these problems in future .
When Commissioner Dimas had his preliminary interview with the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , we also raised this problem with him .
We also raised the problem in the three hearings with Commissioner Verheugen and with the President of the Commission , Mr Barroso .
We had the positive impression at the time that it was not so much a decision of the Commission to go to the Court of Justice but a decision of the Legal Service .
I think that from now on it should be left not to the lawyers but to the politicians to resolve this problem .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( RO ) The proposal for a Regulation concerning the export and import of dangerous chemicals is an improvement in the use of chemicals , in that the health of the population and the environment are protected more effectively .
The regulation aims to encourage the joint accountability of exporters and importers and to support them in their cooperation effort so as to ensure control over the international circulation of hazardous chemicals .
The new regulation amends the definition of the exporter so as to include persons who export such dangerous chemicals from the EU but are not resident in the EU , thus ensuring an effective control and supervision of the flow of hazardous chemicals .
The Prior Informed Consent ( PIC ) procedure , whereby certain chemicals require explicit authorisation by the importing country , also helps trading countries to obtain more accurate information concerning the hazardous chemicals prohibited on environmental and public health grounds which may transit importing countries .
Nevertheless , the PIC procedure is no substitute for effective and sustained border controls , and Member States should cooperate to ensure the effective management of the movement of these hazardous materials on their territory .
in writing . - ( DE ) The new regulation on the import of certain hazardous chemicals and pesticides now includes a number of sensible technical amendments .
In the past , international trade in this area was forever being halted because of administrative obstacles . This was mainly due to the fact that the importing country had to give its ' explicit consent ' before the goods could be shipped out .
There is no doubt that this consent is absolutely essential when dealing with potentially hazardous substances and for this reason it is a requirement that should be retained .
The principle of subsidiarity is , after all , one of the pillars of the Union and it is important that the Member States themselves should in future still be able to determine which potentially hazardous substances are allowed to cross their borders .
However , from the point of view of free trade we need to retain a certain amount of flexibility in this area .
Having more room for manoeuvre also makes it easier to prevent those countries whose import surveillance systems have not yet been sufficiently developed from being taken advantage of by exporters whose operations are not effectively monitored .
The current compromise takes these considerations into account and not only ensures that potentially dangerous chemicals are traded in a responsible way but also provides the room for manoeuvre that is needed so that the international exchange of goods can continue to run smoothly .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Opening of the sitting
( The session begins at 9.00 )
Documents received : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Community strategy on health and safety at work 2007-2012 ( debate )
( EL ) On the agenda for discussion , we have the report by Glenis Willmott , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , concerning the Community strategy for 2007-2012 on health and safety at work ( 2007 / 2146 ( ΙΝΙ ) ) .
rapporteur . - Madam President , health and safety at work encompasses a vast array of issues .
At a simple level , it is about reducing accidents at work and work-related illness .
For the individual , it is about his or her physical integrity , dignity and well-being .
For businesses , it is about reducing the costs of absenteeism , sick pay and loss of productivity .
For society as a whole , the costs of poor health and safety at work have been put at an astronomical 3.8 % of gross national product .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights , signed last month in this very Chamber - despite the disgraceful outburst of certain UKIP and Conservative MEPs - provides in its Article 31 that everyone has the right to working conditions which respect his or her health , safety and dignity .
It also provides that every worker has the right to limitation of maximum working hours .
The European Agency for Safety and Health at Work estimates that every year over 140 000 people in the EU die from occupational diseases and nearly 9 000 die from work-related accidents .
These figures mean that every three and a half minutes somebody in the European Union dies from a work-related cause .
That means that , in the short time I have been speaking already , it is possible that somebody has died and , by the time this debate is finished , it is probable that 20 people will have died .
Some of our colleagues may contest the fundamental right to good health and safety at work , but I am sure none of them would question the right to life .
A health and safety at work strategy for the EU should be strong on properly implementing and enforcing the existing regulatory framework .
What we already have in place is largely very good , but it does need to be consistently enforced throughout the Union .
However , this does not mean that , where existing legislation is clearly inadequate , we should not update it in order to make it work properly and provide the best levels of protection possible .
It also does not mean that we should react to suggestions for legislative instruments like a vampire does to garlic , as some would do in this House .
Of course , no one would argue that the legislative route is always the best .
However , there are cases when binding rules are necessary in order to ensure that a new or emerging risk is properly and consistently addressed in all Member States .
The Commission communication is to be welcomed and applauded for its target to reduce work-related accidents and its strong focus on SMEs .
However , we also need to focus on occupational illnesses which have a huge cost in terms of workers ' health , the cost to businesses and their productivity and to society as a whole through associated social security and health care costs .
The report reflects this and urges the Commission to ensure that occupational diseases are correctly identified and remedied , with a particular focus on occupational cancers , with a view to setting targets for their reduction .
We also need detailed action plans with financial and timing commitments .
Besides the targets for a 25 % reduction in accidents , there appear to be few ways in which progress can be monitored and measured .
Priorities for action identified in my report include a carrot-and-stick approach to enforcement of existing legislation .
I would like to see the Member States reward business for good health and safety with tax rebates and a preference in calls for tenders and the introduction of a bonus-malus system in insurance policies , as well as other financial incentives .
However , I would also like to see tougher sanctions for those rogue employers who neglect the health and safety of their workforce , as well as more infringement proceedings against Member States who do not adequately implement and enforce the existing health and safety legislation .
Any health and safety strategy should naturally focus on those who are most at risk .
Such vulnerable groups include migrant workers , who are often exploited , as well as young and ageing workers , who need special attention , and those with disabilities .
It is essential that the 1989 Framework Directive be rigorously applied to these groups and other workers who are often ignored , such as agricultural and health care workers , when drawing up and implementing their strategies .
The Member States need to take full account of these groups .
We need a framework directive on musculoskeletal disorders to address a problem such as lower back pain - repetitive strain injuries , effectively - and lower back disorders .
There are lots of other issues I would like to raise but we are running out of time , so I look forward to hearing other colleagues and what the Commission has to say .
Member of the Commission . - ( EL ) Madam President , honourable Members of the European Parliament , I would like first of all to thank Mrs Willmott for the excellent report which she has prepared on the Community strategy on health and safety at work .
The Commission places a high policy priority on health and safety at work , and shares your views on a large number of your recommendations .
Indeed , I would like to emphasise that it must be a Community strategy and not merely a Commission strategy .
This is truly the only way to achieve the fundamental and ambitious aim , which is a continuous and sustainable reduction in occupational accidents and diseases .
One of our foremost concerns , therefore , will be the participation of as many sides as possible at political , operational and institutional level .
The Commission 's strategic aim of achieving a 25 % reduction in work accidents in the European Union in the years 2007-2012 does indeed require the active participation and commitment , not only of the public administrations , but also of the social partners with their responsibility , at workplace level , for preventing accidents .
It is very important to stress the commitment which the Member States entered into with the Council resolution of 25 June 2007 : to develop and apply strategies for public health and safety at work , geared to national conditions , in cooperation with the social partners , and also to set national , measurable targets for reducing accidents at work and the incidence of occupational illnesses , especially in those sectors of activity in which the rates are above average .
The Commission is particularly pleased with the European Parliament 's response to its communication , and with the support for the general priorities and lines of action set out in that communication .
I have noted Parliament 's concerns regarding the need for adequate planning and distribution of resources , and regarding the assessment of progress , and submission of progress reports , in respect of the strategy targets .
The Commission will provide details and the exact plan of the special measures to be taken at Community level , on the Community Agenda scoreboard .
We will also secure the participation of the Advisory Committee on Health and Safety at Work , within the framework of a three-way exchange of information on the content of the national strategies , the targets , the actions undertaken , and monitoring of progress made .
Parliament will be promptly informed of the results of this procedure .
As regards your request for a review of Council Directive 91 / 383 , I would like to inform the honourable members of the European Parliament that the departments of the Commission are at present analysing the situation in various Member States on the basis of a study prepared by an external consultant .
In 2008 , a relevant report will be drawn up , and the Commission will decide what further action to take in this area , taking account of the conclusions of the report .
As regards the request for review of Council Directive 92 / 85 , I would also like to inform you that the departments of the Commission , after consulting the European social partners on possible amendments to that Directive , are now carrying out an impact assessment to determine the consequences of certain amendments to the Directive .
If , on completion of the impact assessment , the Commission decides to submit a relevant proposal , there is little doubt that this proposal will be approved by the Commission in 2008 .
I share your view on the need , within the coming period , to improve the enforcement of Community legislation on health and safety , especially for SMEs , with a combination of measures which will give balanced emphasis to employer responsibility and worker participation .
As regards occupational health , I expect the new strategy to be a further step towards creating a healthier work environment throughout the EU , where the needs of an ageing employee population will be met and the more vulnerable groups will be fully protected .
The Commission will intensify its efforts in the direction of adequate definition of health indices and other statistical measures , to ensure that occupational health hazards are properly monitored .
We are confident that the priorities set out in the Community strategy 2007-2012 , and those set out in the report which you will approve today , will open the way to safer and healthier workplaces in the European Union .
Draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality . - Madam President , the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality stresses in its opinion that the most significant health problems presented by women and caused by their working conditions are musculoskeletal disorders and psychological problems , on the one hand .
On the other hand , it stresses that the need to analyse the risks that women and men face and take appropriate measures does not mean the reintroduction of protective policies of exclusion , nor does it mean developing different jobs for women and men .
Even though the framework of Community occupational safety and health ( OSH ) directives is neutral in its approach to gender , it is not a sufficient reason for work-related risks to women 's health and safety to be underestimated and neglected compared to the risk to men 's health and safety , both in terms of prevention and research .
Workers , male and female , across the European Union are exposed to different risks in their workplaces : chemical , biological and physical agents , adverse ergonomic conditions , a complex mix of accident hazards and safety risks , together with various psycho-social factors .
Therefore , women and men do not constitute a homogeneous group .
Consequently , strategies and measures to improve OSH must be specifically adapted to particular workplaces , taking into account the fact that some factors might affect women and men differently .
The opinion also stresses new risk factors such as harassment , violence and bullying by clients at the workplace , mainly in public service sectors that employ mostly women .
Finally , it emphasises the need to consider the introduction of hazard , risk and prevention concepts in school curricula and the educational systems in general as an effective means of building a strong and sustained preventative safety and health culture .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , may I express my thanks to Mrs Willmott for the fair and constructive nature of our cooperation in committee .
The report reflects the high priority attached to health and safety at work in the 27 Member States of the European Union .
The key safeguards are emphasised and weighted .
The cost of accident prevention and safety is high , but let me stress unequivocally that good health is priceless .
The important points are that the provisions should be transposed and applied in all Member States and that the European Union should help Member States to transpose the rules and should offer them advice rather than meting out punishments .
I believe that particular attention should be focused on small and medium-sized enterprises , which need assistance in this field if they are to remain competitive .
In this respect we call on the Commission to create the appropriate basic conditions for SMEs in cases where these conditions do not yet exist and to improve them where they do exist .
The protection afforded to employees must not depend on the country in which they work or the size of their company .
In the brief time at my disposal I only wish to list a few points of particular importance , such as better protection against hepatitis and AIDS and the continued systematic removal of asbestos from workplaces , however complex and expensive that may be .
I believe we must focus on hepatitis B and especially on those people who run a high occupational risk of infection by hepatitis viruses , in other words medics , paramedics , carers and first aiders .
In the realm of first aid , efforts must also cover those people in many Member States who , in addition to their daytime jobs , perform unpaid voluntary work with the emergency services .
I believe it was very important that the report stuck rigidly to the subject and avoided citing examples , which might well have engendered prejudgement of many issues .
Thank you for our fruitful cooperation .
The EPP-ED Group endorses the report .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on 6 December 2007 an accident at a ThyssenKrupp factory in Turin caused the death of seven workers .
That extremely serious incident shows that the safety problem has certainly not yet been resolved .
The tragedy in Turin also raises another matter for consideration in this Chamber .
We would have expected this multinational to conduct itself properly , but that was not the case .
Italian newspapers reported yesterday that in a confidential document drafted by a senior manager of ThyssenKrupp following the tragic steelworks fire , and seized by the magistrates ' court , the survivors interviewed after the accident were described as workers setting themselves up as heroes and stars on television .
There are no words to describe that allegation other than as a disgrace .
It would be very important if this Parliament , as also the Commissioner , aside from all formalities , could and would express their indignation towards ThyssenKrupp .
What happened in Turin happens to some extent everywhere and , on the basis also of the very good Willmott report , underlines the need for a commitment to a very real reduction of accidents and deaths at the workplace .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , this is a very good report and I wish to thank the rapporteur for her cooperation .
I am pleased that the report talks about better implementation of the current directives .
I also welcome calls for better inspection .
There is no point in Member States paying lip-service to implementation , as many do in the field of health and safety , and then , quite often , calling for more legislation , even if the scientific and medical evidence does not establish a risk .
One area which does require legislation - and we called for this in 2005 - is prevention of the more than one million needlestick injuries that affect healthcare workers each year across the EU .
Imagine the horror of being accidentally pricked by a needle and then having a horrendous wait to see whether you have contracted a serious infection , such as HIV or hepatitis B !
The Commission must heed our call and bring forward an amendment to the 2000 Biological Agents Directive .
In some areas , exchange of best practice is probably enough , which is why I am pleased that my amendments on health care-acquired infections were adopted in committee .
Infections like MRSA are serious not only for hospital patients , but also for hospital workers .
Rates of infection vary considerably between Member States .
For example , the rate of infection in the UK is 10 times higher than in the Netherlands .
We need to know why , and how we can learn from best practice .
That is why , in one of my amendments adopted in committee , I called for an EU code of good practice on health care-acquired infections , and for the screening of all health care workers to be encouraged across the EU .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , let me begin by thanking the rapporteur , Mrs Willmott , for her excellent work and especially for having been so willing to compromise .
More than 160 000 people are killed and some 300 000 incapacitated every year in the EU because of industrial accidents and occupational diseases .
That is too many . In this society of ours in which the individual is often regarded as a mere production factor , too little emphasis is placed on the human aspect of this problem .
The state , by which I mean legislatures and governments , must ensure that purely profit-driven business operators bear the social cost of exploitation .
That is the only way to ensure that the necessary priority is attached to health and safety at work .
Public opinion tends to take more notice of industrial accidents than of the wide diversity of occupational diseases .
More extensive and vigorous efforts are needed to redress the balance .
Improvements cannot be achieved without close scrutiny , in other words inspections and analyses and the setting of precise targets for reductions in the incidence of occupational diseases , including new illnesses affecting those who work in fields such as nanotechnology .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , adopting this report on health and safety at work would add yet more bureaucracy and red tape , just when I thought the Commission were intending to reduce that !
Workers losing time through illness and injury put up the cost to the enterprise concerned and hence their prices .
In an EU of free movement of goods and services there is more competition , so those who do not look after their workforce lose business .
People off work through illness also raise the cost of social benefits , contributing further to a rise in prices .
It is therefore in a company 's best interests to keep its workforce in good health .
Good ideas always spread , so that should not be too difficult .
This depends , of course , on there being a free market , but of course , if like some members of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs you think this leads to the law of the jungle , then you have another serious illness to contend with .
Apparently , Member States which promote a free market are psychiatric cases .
( FR ) Madame President , the suicides of Renault and Peugeot workers in France and the thousands of cases of lung cancer among people whose jobs involve contact with asbestos are clear evidence that health at work is a problem .
In response , the European Commission has produced a communication elevated to the status of a ' health strategy ' , which in fact reads like something from Walt Disney - a resolution drafted by Snow White for the Seven Dwarfs .

And it really is quite touching .
In paragraph 35 , for example , we are told that we need healthy lifestyles at the workplace ; paragraph 29 is about encouraging medical examinations ; paragraph 54 urges the installation of fire sprinklers ; in paragraph 49 we read that stress is a threat to health ; and recital D suggests , low and behold , that fatal accidents are more common among construction workers than among senior European civil servants .
Luckily , the rapporteur for the Committee on Industry has solutions to offer , including the employment of a psychologist and a chaplain for every 500 employees .
We are actually told nothing , however , about the causes of occupational illness - of which there are three .
The first is the ideology of dismantling protection at our borders , thus placing our workers in unfair competition with Asian slave labour .
The only way our industries can survive is by going all out for higher productivity , at the expense of health .
The second problem is the daft policy of the strong euro , making us uncompetitive in terms of exchange rates .
The only variable left to adjust is productivity , which is forced up once again , and once again health is compromised .
The third cause of our troubles is the neurotic philosophy of competitiveness - in effect an economic war between Europe and Asia or Europe and Latin America .
But wars result in casualties and deaths , and the victims in this case are the people afflicted by occupational illness and accidents .
In other words , the European worker is out there like a bull in the global economic arena , stressed and bloody and giving his all , until his health has gone .
The solution is to take our workers out of that global arena with its unfair rules , and that will require new customs technology for deductible customs duties .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wanted to give an overview of the key points of this strategy and discuss the recommendations contained in my opinion .
Guaranteeing equal social coverage of all workers regardless of the form of contract , speeding up bureaucratic procedures for small and medium-sized undertakings , and providing incentives , including financial incentives , for training are aspects of primary importance .
To discuss only those aspects would , however , be less than generous towards those who rightly call for explanations and justice in face of dreadful tragedies such as the one that occurred a few days ago in Turin , to which Mr Panzeri referred a moment ago .
During the night of 6 / 7 December , a fire that spread through the ThyssenKrupp factory killed seven workers ; the fire extinguishers were not working .
It was only later that it emerged that the factory did not comply with safety regulations !
The European Parliament and I myself cannot fail to record that disgrace .
I certainly do not intend totally to condemn the conduct of the German multinational or even imagine that the factory , however guilty , maliciously and deliberately failed to comply with the safety requirements in order to save money .
I will not espouse the ideological arguments put forward by some Italian left-wing union members who , on learning last June of the closure of the factory , set themselves up as champions of safety and declared that they were responsible for and took care of safety at the factory .
However , the moment has not yet come to make judgments , especially hasty ones .
While respecting national competences in the matter , I do consider it urgently necessary for the European Union to guarantee that laws are implemented in full , first and foremost by reinforcing the inspection activities of the Agency for Health and Safety at Work , and to strengthen the coordination between the various national agencies by improving the functioning of the European Senior Labour Inspectors ' Committee .
( EL ) Madam President , there is no doubt that health and safety at work contribute to quality management , economic performance and competitiveness , and that they help in the development of the economy , and in the achievement of budget targets , including the budgets for the social security schemes .
Of course , beyond all these technical matters , there are humanitarian reasons which make it not only necessary , but also a matter of priority , to protect the health of employees and ensure that workplaces are safe .
The strategy for 2002-2006 has given positive results , and the prospects for 2007 onwards are positive if we all play a part - not only in terms of European planning , but also at the corresponding national level - in monitoring and planning for health and safety , especially in the vulnerable categories , which means young people , older employees - whom we are calling on to participate in production for a longer period of their lives - and also women , who are likewise called on to participate in working life .
A working life with new demands , fragmented into many different kinds of contract , self-employment , and small and medium-sized enterprises which lack the capability of large enterprises to impose proper working and safety conditions .
It must therefore be the concern of all of us to manage national and Community resources correctly , as the Willmott report proposes , so that the desired results can be achieved .
( EL ) Madam President , I would like to begin by congratulating our colleague Mrs Willmott , because her report has to a large extent covered the serious gaps in the Commission 's communication .
Dignity at work means health and safety at work .
It means carrying out studies on the prevention of occupational risks , and it means employers providing preventive medical check-ups .
It means lifelong learning , vocational education and training .
It means health and safety as key criteria for commercial agreements with third countries .
But if these proposals are to carry any weight , a basic requirement is , of course , continuous social dialogue , but above all , we need to confront the fundamental threats overshadowing the area of labour relations .
I am referring specifically to the spread of poverty among employees , the rapid growth of unofficial forms of employment , and the increase in working hours .
If there are no fully human-centred policies capable of reversing this new employment " dark ages ” , social clashes are inevitable .
( EL ) Madam President , the measures proposed by the European Commission for strategy until the year 2012 , are mostly superficial and concentrate on ensuring that competitiveness is not affected .
The target of reducing accidents by 25 % by the end of the strategy period may look impressive , but in reality it is completely inadequate .
The target should be to lay the groundwork and reinforce the institutional interventions by the state , so that the tragic death toll of thousands annually - and similar numbers with serious health problems due to the quality of their working environment - comes closer to being eliminated .
The rapporteur focuses rather on the exploitation to which employees are subject , such as those working in hazardous jobs , women , temporary workers , immigrants , the elderly , and proposes stricter measures against employers , and guaranteed supervision .
One of the most significant contributions of the report is perhaps the finding that permanent employment is a requirement for combating accidents and work-related illnesses .
In addition , apart from accidents , more attention should be given to the causes behind the onset of mental illnesses , addiction , and the psychological hazards of the workplace .
What is needed , then , is a many-sided approach to all the factors affecting health and safety in the workplace .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I must admit that when I read the Community strategy for health and safety at work 2007-2012 , which was presented last February by the European Commission , I was in many ways disappointed .
Even though the Commission set out in this strategy a relatively ambitious target to reduce the number of industrial accidents by 25 % , the strategy contains only a very small number of concrete initiatives and recommendations as to how to achieve this target .
In addition , it focuses again mainly on industrial accidents , which are of course only one aspect of work-related health problems .
Occupational diseases are somewhat neglected .
This is , in my opinion , a step backwards .
On the other hand , I must thank and congratulate Mrs Willmott on her report on this strategy .
The report , unlike the Commission 's document , contains many concrete proposals and recommendations as to how to achieve better results in the field of health and safety at work .
I am pleased that the rapporteur is also stressing the need to define cancer correctly and to express cancer numerically as an occupational disease , to specify the targets for the reduction of this severe disease .
Up to now only 5 % of cancer cases caused by work were classified as an occupational disease .
I have greatly welcomed the incorporation in the report of my amendment , which I tabled in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the need to secure for the general public free access to technical norms .
This is a problem employees of many Member States are constantly struggling with and one that should be rectified .
Madam President , if we are going to reduce workplace accidents , we need to know how they happen .
We cannot study all accidents and all near misses but , let me tell you , a 19-year-old Irish lad died on a construction site because his lighter Japanese bulldozer had heavy European shovels .
His death was registered as a construction death and the Irish Health and Safety Authority never looked any further .
So how can we save the next person that drives a tractor with mismatched equipment ? Because we do not know .
We cannot investigate everything , but we can look at all fatal and debilitating accidents , especially those in the most dangerous sectors like agriculture , fishing , construction and transport .
We need to break it down to make practical measures .
Also , aside from risk jobs , we have very vulnerable sections of the workforce - elderly , disabled and workers who do not speak the language of their present workplace .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first I too want to express my sympathy following the tragedy that struck the workers in the Turin factory ; I believe it is indisputable fact that there are too many deaths from occupational accidents in Italy because not enough is being done to prevent them and comply with the rules .
Responsibility for this is shared equally between undertakings , unions and inspection agencies .
We find undertakings that resort to illegal workers , especially from non-EU countries , or factories such as ThyssenKrupp , with their old-style industrial arrogance ; those who should be defending the interests of the workers often consent to , if not connive in such situations , instead of being vigilant and quick to point out failings in the safety system to those in charge ; finally , the works inspectorate and other bodies in charge of control and monitoring often fail to show much initiative .
We must promote safety at the workplace in the EU and in that respect the Willmott report is more satisfactory than the Commission proposal .
I believe that when we speak of work and industry , we must not confine ourselves merely to ensuring freedom of competition and competitiveness .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , people are still dying at the workplace .
In an area where man should be able to demonstrate his ability to manipulate matter with force and creativity , to develop his knowledge and earn his living , we all too often find instances of death and threats to life and limb .
That is why there is such anger and bewilderment in Italian public opinion about the seven workers who died in the fire at the ThyssenKrupp factory in Turin last December and why we must ask ourselves what was not working properly in that factory , so that we can avoid these disasters .
We are responsible for such inadequacies in every place of work .
Today we have highly-advanced legislation designed to support an appropriate preventive policy , define the obligations incumbent on undertakings and deal with new occupational diseases in Europe .
What we lack , however , is adequate controls , inspections to ensure the laws are observed , staff and financial resources .
We still do not have a culture that values the importance of rigorous preventive services , that regards prevention as a continuous process rather than as a one-off obligation , that establishes a continuous dialogue between the parties concerned with a view effectively to developing high safety standards , and that can spot the emergence of new psychosocial occupational diseases .
In conclusion I also believe we must come back to the subject matter of the Green Paper on corporate social responsibility , which is a cohesive and innovative aspect , in relation to the commitment to reduce occupational accidents and diseases .
( CS ) To start with I would like to thank Mrs Willmott for her very carefully prepared report .
It is stated that the Commission 's objective is to reduce industrial accidents by 25 % .
I do not believe this will be possible .
There is an insufficient number of work inspectors and they have insufficient tools at their disposal to make changes .
The influence of the trade unions is being permanently reduced ; in many countries they no longer take part in investigations into the causes of industrial accidents and eradication of their consequences .
Further , there is the jungle that is the employment of workers by agencies , and there is also the pressure for constant expansion of so-called flexibility in the working time of employees .
This leads to employees working many hours and the accident risks are increasing .
( PL ) Madam President , the draft resolution emphasises the social responsibility of companies for health and safety at work , while paying attention to the issue of honest competition .
It takes into account the great importance of dialogue between social partners , particularly the role of trades unions in improving safety in the work environment .
It also draws attention to the need for special treatment of small and medium sized enterprises in the strategy for improving health and safety as well as the need to provide ongoing training to employees .
The majority of accidents involve persons who are just starting work , who are lacking experience , as well as persons who have too little time for rest after work .
It contains important comments concerning the rehabilitation and integration in the workplace of persons returning to work after an accident , as well as requirements concerning non-discrimination as regards access to work for persons with cancer .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur .
( PL ) Madam President , we have been debating the European labour market strategy in this house for some years .
We have many opinions as regards the direction our activities should take .
There are those who favour a profound harmonisation of employment legislation , others who defend the view that the natural diversity in European labour markets is advantageous for the EU economy .
As you know , my views on this matter favour the second view , with one important exception .
This exception concerns the regulation of health and safety at work .
I believe that , in this area , the active involvement of EU institutions is both justified and necessary .
Following the most recent extension to the EU we can see an even greater diversity of work conditions .
This diversity is both territorial and environmental in nature , as , whatever the country , the majority of work accidents and work-related illnesses affect such groups as migrant workers , young employees or older persons .
I do not want to imply that these are groups that are subject to targeted and conscious discrimination .
It is rather a consequence of insufficient education and lack of experience .
All the more reason for providing appropriate work and safety conditions for just these workers .
I would also like to point out that , in any Member State , we can see greater problems in complying with the highest safety standards at work in such sectors as construction , agriculture and transport .
It is in these sectors above all that small and medium sized enterprises are found and their financial , organisational and legal capabilities make it difficult for them to comply with high health and safety standards .
It is just these companies that require support from the European Union , from EU institutions and from the governments of Member States , and this support is needed urgently .
It is not just a question of sanctions and increased monitoring .
These instruments , which are of course essential , should be accompanied by investment in the education both of employees and employers as well as financial support for improved and safer workplace equipment .
( RO ) We welcome the good intentions of the Commission ; however , we are in doubt as to their effectiveness .
Accurate statistics concerning occupational diseases are required in order to maximize policy impact and to protect workers .
Existing data are incomplete , either misjudging phenomena or ignoring reality .
Women are the main victims of this shortcoming , primarily because they are more involved in informal , or " grey " , economy .
In this sector , the effects of working conditions on health are not recorded at all .
The existing legal framework maintains an approach which lays emphasis on accidents and hazards in the so-called " heavy ” , male-dominated branches of economy .
We call on the Commission for a more careful consideration of the specific differences between male and female employees and for an assessment of the availability of data broken down by gender and data concerning the long-term effects and psychological consequences of employment .
To substantiate our request , we would like to invite you to take a tour of a textile factory .
Sight and hearing can be significantly impaired , and the prevalence of circulatory disease is high .
Statistics ignore the situation .
This is so-called " light " industry , where most of the workers are women , and wages are also low because there are supposedly no risks involved .
Thus , current statistics preserve the historical inequality between men and women , including the gender gap in payment .
( DE ) Madam President , a Community strategy for health and safety at work is absolutely essential .
While technical health and safety measures are effecting rapid improvements , the meteoric pace of change in the working world poses new risks .
The problems and hazards involved in working with new chemical substances are self-evident .
First and foremost , however , the increasing pressure to perform which characterises the contemporary workplace creates not only physical problems but psychological problems too .
Insecure jobs and people 's fear of losing their livelihood lead to psychosocial problems .
New potential for aggression builds up , new stress factors lead to mental abuse , and bullying becomes a common occurrence .
SMEs are particularly susceptible to such contemporary phenomena unless these are curbed by means of countermeasures , information , supervision and training .
Accordingly , this resolution is more important than is probably recognised .
I congratulate the rapporteur .
( DE ) Madam President , health in the workplace must be given priority .
Our Parliament buildings in Brussels and Strasbourg are among the places where more action is needed .
Just take the ambient temperature in this chamber , which borders on a health risk .
I also believe in the power of good example .
A few months ago I was stranded in a hotel in Greece as a forest fire raged all around , and I must say that the hotel , a typical SME , had prepared for that eventuality in the most exemplary fashion .
Had not all the safety precautions been perfectly devised , well organised and properly drilled , many of the people there could probably not have survived .
That is why I believe that great importance attaches to this learning process to which Mr Ettl referred , this training and preparing for emergencies .
Incentive systems would also be useful in this respect ; insurers , for example , could allow appropriate discounts on premiums to companies with trained staff , and social-insurance schemes could also offer relevant training courses .
- ( SK ) As a Member of the European Parliament and a physician , I welcome the Commission 's plan to reduce industrial accidents within the European Union on average by 25 % and I am aware of the need to implement more effective measures in all the Member States , among which there are huge disparities .
Besides sectors such as metalwork , the construction industry , electrical work or forestry , I would also like to highlight the high-risk jobs of doctors and healthcare staff , who in their jobs are exposed to huge risks of infection and AIDS , tuberculosis , hepatitis and many other infections .
I also regret that the reduction in the number of industrial injuries and occupational diseases in particular did not include , for example , migrant workers , workers with temporary contracts , workers with low qualifications , and women in certain companies , such as small and medium-sized companies .
I would highlight the provisions in some countries that successfully implement comprehensive rehabilitation after an accident as a condition for successful return to the labour market .
( RO ) As ITRE rapporteur for this document , I have asked for the active promotion of involvement in European trade unions and I have called on the Commission to propose a legal framework that would encourage social partners to engage in cross-border bargaining .
The European Commission and the Member States could provide funding for training labour representatives which would defend and promote workers ' rights to safety and health at the workplace .
We also asked all Member States to sign and ratify the UN Convention on the protection of migrant workers and their families and to coordinate the improvement of access to training , particularly for part-time workers and contract workers , to enable them to secure more stable employment .
I believe that Member States should enforce the measure required for difficult or dangerous work to be recognised as such and reflected in the social protection of a person both during employment and after retirement .
( RO ) A European strategy on health and safety at work is a welcome initiative on the part of the European Commission .
However , I believe that further aspects should also come under scrutiny .
As one of the previous speakers very aptly pointed out , we should take into account that there is a special situation concerning immigrants on the European labour market .
A recent study of the European Commission shows that migrants are exposed to much higher degrees of risk concerning health and safety at the work place .
This is due both to the prevalence of illegal work , and to other factors such as : lack of awareness of social benefit and pension entitlements in Member States , and problems in the cross-border use of health insurance .
Such matters fall within the Community remit , and the Commission should be closely monitoring the application of European laws , so as to improve the precarious circumstances of migrants .
Moreover , European funding could be used for training additional labour protection inspectors who would identify failures to comply with health and safety regulations at the work place .
Madam President , I would like to speak about needlestick injuries , because I was responsible for the 2006 report on this issue .
I wonder whether the Commissioner would agree with me that , where a risk is identified that needs to be tackled at European level , then there is a need for the Commission to ask expeditiously .
If he does agree , I wonder whether he can explain why it took a full year for the Commission to manage and assess the first round of consultation with the social partners on needlestick injuries , even though there were only 10 responses in that consultation .
I wonder whether he can also assure us that work on this issue will proceed faster in the year ahead .
One million workers a year are affected by needlestick injuries .
That means around one and half million will have been affected since the report was completed by Parliament .
Could the Commission please act a little faster in future ?
rapporteur . - Madam President , I should like to thank my colleagues for their comments and to make just a couple of points .
Firstly , on the issue of cancers , it is necessary to revise the Carcinogens Directive to reflect technical progress and changes in scientific knowledge in the world of work .
It is important that we have effective binding limits for carcinogens , mutagens and substances toxic for reproduction .
Limit values should be based on scientific evidence , and I would urge the EU Scientific Committee to examine crystalline silica as a matter of priority .
I would urge colleagues not to delete reference to this and oppose Amendment 6 .
Secondly , the report calls for nanotechnologies to be monitored and potential risks to health assessed , and I would urge colleagues to oppose Amendment 5 , which seeks to delete this . I fully recognise the potential benefits of nanotechnologies .
Nevertheless , the rapid growth of such technologies is outstripping our understanding of the potential occupational health risks : workers can be exposed to nanoparticles through inhalation , dermal contact and ingestion , and we cannot bury our heads in the sand and refuse to carry out research and assess whether there are any risks .
Thirdly , I would just like to reiterate the call for the Commission to bring forward a legislative amendment to the Directive on risks from biological agents at work in order to address the problem of needlestick injuries .
This needs to be done as a matter of urgency .
As I mentioned earlier , health and safety is a fundamental right included in the Charter .
We need a strong EU strategy to ensure that this fundamental right is upheld and that workers throughout the EU are adequately protected .
Each single accident and each work-related illness constitutes a breach of a worker 's fundamental rights .
We all know there is a strong economic case , as well as good business reasons , for good health and safety in the workplace but , more importantly , the strongest argument has to be the cost to human health and the lives that can be saved .
One life every three and a half minutes - who can argue with that ?
( Applause )
- ( EL ) The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today , Tuesday 15 January 2008 , at 12 p.m.
in writing . - ( FR ) I should like to begin by congratulating the European Commission on its Community strategy on health and safety at work 2007-2012 , and on the work achieved by our Parliamentary Committee .
Every year , almost 500 000 people die or suffer permanent disability for work-related reasons , and we must applaud the European Commission 's goal of achieving an average 25 % reduction in work-related accidents in the EU .
I support the idea of increased activity by the European Agency for Safety and Health at Work in Bilbao ( Spain ) .
In this matter and , more generally , in the development of social Europe , I regret the fact that neither the report nor , moreover , the Communication from the European Commission stresses that it is essential to support the social partners ; we must always remember that under the existing Treaties , with Articles 137 ff. of the Treaty establishing the European Community ( TEC ) ( and this has been confirmed by the Lisbon Treaty that is in the process of being ratified ) , legislative instruments are available to the latter to facilitate the development of European social law .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
Application of social security schemes to employed persons , to self-employed persons and to members of their families moving within the Community ( debate )
( EL ) On the agenda for discussion , we have the report given by Csaba Öry on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , concerning the application of social security schemes to wage-earners , non-earners and members of their families moving within the Community - C6-0104 / 2007 - .
Member of the Commission . - ( EL ) Madam President , honourable members of the European Parliament , the document submitted to you today is the latest Regulation amending Regulation 1408 / 71 .
This is the well-known Regulation on the coordination of social security schemes .
For more than 30 years , this Regulation has formed the basis for coordinating the national social security schemes .
In recent years , an effort has been initiated to update and simplify this Regulation and the Regulation implementing it .
Parliament has already approved the new Regulation 883 / 2004 , and the remaining instruments which are required for its implementation are already under negotiation .
These are the implementing Regulation and the text of the Annexes .
Pending the entry into force of these new legislative instruments , it is necessary to update the validity of Regulation 1408 / 71 .
This new technical update is therefore submitted to you .
It applies only to the text of the Annexes to the Regulation , and aims to take account of the changes made to the national legislations .
It is important that this text should be approved without delay , so that Regulation 1408 / 71 can be updated , ensuring legal certainty and observance of citizens ' rights .
I would particularly like to thank the rapporteur Mr Őry for the cooperation between our two institutions .
As he clearly stated in his report , a vote on this act on first reading will make it possible to adopt it without delay .
In this spirit , the amendments have been drawn up , including the technical changes made by the Council .
On the other hand , he has not included , at this stage , the discussions which can more fruitfully be held in the context of examining the implementing Regulation , for which the rapporteur is Mrs Lambert , or the text of the Annexes , especially Annex 11 , for which the rapporteur is Mrs Bozkurt .
There are some who would like to seize the opportunity given by this report , to address wider issues - for example , trans-border health services .
Despite the obvious concern about these issues , I do not think it is advisable to examine them within the scope of the present technical update .
A limited but pragmatic approach to the technical update is a better safeguard for citizens ' rights .
I would particularly like to thank Mr Őry for this .
The Commission is in favour of amendments 1 to 6 , 9 and 11 , which bring the original text into line with the Council 's general orientation , and in favour of amendments 7 and 8 , which regulate a particular difficulty which arose recently in a Member State , the Netherlands , after the health insurance reform came into effect .
On the other hand , the Commission is not in favour of amendment 10 .
The imprecise drafting of this amendment does not allow proper management of the specific situations which it aims to regulate .
The amendment calls into question the rules of priority in the field of family benefits .
Such an amendment would have legal and economic consequences far beyond the Member State concerned .
Thank you for your attention , and once again I congratulate the rapporteur on his contribution and his excellent cooperation .
rapporteur . - ( HU ) Madam President , Commissioner , allow me to say a few words about the legislation before us and its significance , before I move on to the smaller matters surrounding the proposed amendments .
As the Commissioner said , it is true that this is very old legislation .
It was born in 1971 and has traditionally played a prominent role ever since , as a secondary regulatory instrument for the fundamental right of freedom of employment within the Union .
It cannot be denied that the right of free movement of labour recorded in the Treaty would be worth very little in itself if citizens looking for work in other Member States could not have access to the social security systems , or if the portability of rights could not be ensured .
In connection with movement within the Union , workers who take significant risks must not suffer any disadvantage with regard to social security and fundamental social rights .
Only then can free movement of labour play an important role in equalising the Union 's labour markets , which the Union 's economy needs .
On the other hand , we should also see and note that Regulation 1408 , which we are now discussing , can only fulfil its function if we continuously harmonise it with national legislation .
However , questions on social policy , employment and movement of labour basically belong to and affect national competences .
This is why it has been , and is , necessary to constantly amend and supplement the legislation from one year to the next .
This is crucial legislation , since it looks as though we are just agreeing on different wording , but in fact this affects people , people 's destinies and people 's everyday problems .
Therefore , as legislators , it is still our duty , even if we know that this text will only be in force for a very short time because , as the Commissioner has already mentioned the new Regulation and the new Directive already exist .
They have already been born .
Until we produce the implementing regulation , the interests of legal security require that we continuously update and adjust the wording to changes in the national legislation .
A good example of this is the first proposed amendment , where in Hungarian law the concept of ' close dependant ' was amended in the Civil Code , and now an opportunity has opened up for us to adjust the European wording to this .
However , this also related to the proposed amendments affecting the Netherlands , where likewise it very clearly concerns people 's destinies , and where there is doubt regarding entitlement to various social benefits for the families of soldiers serving abroad .
This is clearly unacceptable and must be added .
We did , however , find a solution to this problem during the Commission 's work , by accepting the verbal proposal by the Council and incorporating it into the text .
There is therefore no problem here , as I feel that the tenth proposed amendment mentioned has also borne a reassuring solution , since the Dutch government has undertaken to notify the relevant citizens in a clarifying circular , so there is now no need for this proposed amendment to be adopted by the Parliament .
There was , however , a need for cooperation , so I would like to thank the participants , my fellow Members who submitted amendments , the Council and the Commission . Thank you very much for the floor , Mr President .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , as Mr Őry has just said , mobility in the employment market is of the utmost importance .
In fact , the coordination regulation we are discussing today brings the adjustments to the laws of the Member States into line every year .
The Member States should actually have to test every law or every amendment to social security or tax law to check whether it is also Europe-proof . Then there would not be too many problems .
With a clear result , it would not be necessary to make adjustments later on .
Together with Mr Őry , I have tabled a number of amendments and I think really that Members should each look at their own Member States when the time comes for the annual adjustment to see whether everything proposed in the administrative consultation has in fact been brought into line with the real situation in Europe .
We have tabled two or three amendments .
The first two , Amendments 7 and 8 , relate to health insurance for members of the families of military personnel resident in Belgium or Germany .
Dutch military personnel are not covered by the Health Care Insurance Act and so members of their families could not be insured either and therefore had to join a scheme that became more and more expensive .
The Dutch Government has written to the House asking the European Parliament to adopt the amendments , because that is the quickest solution .
The third amendment - Amendment 10 - concerns the Dutch law on child care .
A family that lived in the Netherlands and worked on the other side of the border was not entitled to a child care allowance .
That has also now been resolved by a change in the law .
That means that , through our perseverance , we have achieved quite a number of things for many people .
I am also grateful to my colleagues for not allowing themselves to be deterred by all the second reading arguments , but backing us up so that we have been able to achieve a great deal .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Őry , on his balanced report .
Secondly , I would like to stress how important it is for the European Union 's various social security schemes to be coordinated and improved , and adapted where necessary .
It is quite clear that a number of what we consider to be essential amendments have been tabled to allow an informed debate as part of a process facilitating the approval of Mr Őry 's report at first reading .
Social security questions in Europe clearly involve much more than the problems this report seeks to resolve and the associated regulatory practices .
The issue here , however , is to take account of the changes that have taken place in social security legislation in states such as Ireland , Hungary , Poland , the Netherlands and Austria in order to ensure effective modernisation and adaptation .
Ladies and gentlemen , as we know , discussions are in progress in parallel on the introduction of the new regulatory system , particularly the negotiation of the respective implementing regulations .
We welcome the rapporteur 's position in this case too , and we understand and share the view that only a limited number of absolutely essential amendments should be supported , as we said in committee .
These amendments seek to guarantee the necessary legal certainty so that the new regulation can best be brought into force .
I have meanwhile learned that Mr Őry has withdrawn the amendment concerned for the reasons explained .
In conclusion , Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , what is most important is to help to ensure , in the field of social security too , proper implementation of the principle of worker mobility in the European Union , which was reaffirmed at the Lisbon summit and throughout 2006 , the European Year of Mobility .
Without such mobility of labour and without proper coordination of the social security system , European workers will have limited opportunities to move in labour markets .
That is what we do not want , and we therefore support this report .
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights guarantees citizens ' freedom of movement and residence .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union guarantees the freedom to choose an occupation and the right to engage in work .
However , we know that in practice there are still many obstacles preventing citizens from making full use of these rights in the Community .
Since 1971 , the regulation we are discussing here has been considered the basis for guaranteeing social security for citizens moving from one Member State to another .
The regulation , as was mentioned , has been applied for more than 30 years and its provisions are amended quite frequently with respect to national legislation .
However , this regulation lays down the general principle that all national governments , social security institutions and even courts have to comply when applying national legislation .
Thus it is ensured that people who make use of their right to move to other countries within the Community will not suffer when different national legislation is applied .
Social security systems differ greatly from country to country and although the regulation is frequently amended it does not aim to unify systems but to generalise them .
Therefore , it is gratifying that in this way it is possible to protect the most vulnerable citizens of the Community , such as women , pensioners and the disabled as well as their family members .
I believe that this document helps to unify not only the EU Member States but also the citizens .
Therefore , ladies and gentlemen , I earnestly urge you to vote for it .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , freedom of movement , work and residence throughout the European Union are some of the most important benefits gained by our citizens .
For this reason their social insurance situation constitutes one of the most important issues , especially now , when there has been a movement of peoples such as has not been seen before in Europe , a migration much supported by all EU institutions .
I understand that , taking into consideration the implementation of the amended Regulation on social security schemes ( at present the 1971 Regulation is still in force ) , we are trying only to change that which it is necessary to change and to adapt it to the changes that have been introduced in certain countries .
However I believe that we have not taken advantage of the opportunity that has presented itself and we have not amended the Regulation in accordance with the direction proposed in the new one .
Even though four years have already passed since the draft of the new Regulation was approved , it has still not come into force , and the old one is now over 37 years old .
It may be better to carry out thorough improvements to that which is already in existence than to wait for the new one , as time is passing and people are becoming impatient .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I too would like to thank the rapporteur for his work on this .
I know that this often seems like a very technical piece of work , but these rapid annual updates are important because they offer transparency for citizens about their entitlements .
It also means that certain individuals can be covered more quickly .
I would also like to stress - as others have done - that this is a coordination , not a harmonisation .
Often that means that certain things which seem very reasonable are not necessarily acceptable within the coordination 's very limited scope .
I think we also need to be clear that this coordination is not intended to undermine national systems and open them up to market forces - as I think we are beginning to see , particularly in the health sphere at the moment .
As others have mentioned , the implementing regulation for the update is in progress , but we already know that certain issues are not going to be covered .
I think we need to find a solution for these outside the scope of this coordination , and I would urge the Commission to look at this : for example , when tax revenue is increasingly being used to underpin social security systems and people working abroad find that they are paying tax to contribute to a social security system to which they no longer have access .
I would also urge - as Parliament did some time ago - that national practice come into line with the spirit of the regulation so that we do not find , as is happening in France at the moment , that certain individuals are now no longer able to access systems to which they have been paying because of changes in national regulations .
( CS ) Commissioner , there is no doubt that it is necessary to approve the technical changes that are proposed in the annexes to this regulation .
By doing so we will harmonise the regulation with the new terminology in some countries .
However , I would again like to point out that European legislation has already for several years contradicted the rulings of the European Court of Justice on more precise specifications of rules regarding the claims of patients to reimbursement for the cost of healthcare provided abroad .
The contradiction is most marked with regard to hospital care and extends to all judgments : I would stress that it relates to all of them not just those cases where the Council has already achieved consensus .
It is true that patients have their rights upheld if they turn to the European Court of Justice , but this legal status is not acceptable .
I would like to remind you again of the wasted opportunity to amend by an appropriate method the claims of insured persons when preparing the new , simplified Regulation ( EC ) No 883 / 2004 .
An opportunity to amend the principles set out by the European Court of Justice in the Services Directive , which came up two years later , was also wasted .
Now another year has begun and we are making only technical , not conceptual changes .
The new implementing regulation may solve this issue , but it does not look that it will solve all matters , because the Council did not agree on all issues .
In addition , the situation may be complicated because DG SANCO is now presenting a proposal for a new directive on patient mobility .
That is why the Council can expect controversial negotiations .
One topic that causes controversy is the dispute over subsidies .
We can also expect further delays as regards the establishment in law of the citizens ' right to have hospital care reimbursed .
There are differences of opinion over the level of reimbursement and conditions of authorisation by an insurance company in one 's country of origin .
In my view , this situation is very undesirable from the point of view of legal certainty , accessibility and citizens ' understanding of the law .
Some countries are solving the problem by not informing their citizens about the claims granted by the judgments of the European Court of Justice .
I am convinced that it is necessary to solve this problem as quickly as possible by amend Regulation ( EC ) No 883 / 2004 .
We should not rely on the controversial new directive on mobility from DG SANCO to secure , without further delay , compliance with the judgments .
( NL ) Mr President , I thank Mr Őry for his excellent work .
In the short time I have to speak , I should like to underline one point .
Not everything that is wrong with the coordination of social security systems can be blamed on the legislation .
Many of the problems that occur are caused by the implementation of the rules , something for which the Member States themselves are responsible .
A number of those practical problems have come to light during the work on the Őry report .
That is precisely the case when it comes to coordination ; not only must the legislation be correct , its practical application must also be consistent with it .
I therefore welcome the fact that from time to time the Council Presidents consult with Parliament , for instance on Annexes XI and VI to Regulation No 883 , on which I myself am rapporteur .
It is certainly of the utmost importance that the work by the Council on this regulation and the annexes should be completed within this Parliament mandate .
I wish future Council Presidents every success with that .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to support Mr Őry 's report .
It is very good that the EU is coordinating social security schemes , as , in the enlarged European Union , millions of persons work beyond the borders of their own countries .
The most numerous of these are my own countrymen , Poles , of whom over 2 million now work in various Member States .
From one side the fact that workers can move about freely is encouraging , but , from another , we are saddened by the ever-increasing number of instances of foreign workers being treated badly .
In some countries instances of criminal treatment of Polish workers have come to light , forcing them into slave labour .
Polish workers are becoming victims of racially motivated attacks .
This has happened in the United Kingdom , and , most recently , in Germany - the Polish media have described cases of brutal attacks on Poles in the German town of Löknitz in Mecklenburg .
These are serious events and we would expect all Member States to take more steps to protect foreign workers from exploitation and persecution
( HU ) With the collapse of Europe 's borders and changes in lifestyle , there are several million European citizens who were born in one country , have worked in one or more other countries and would like to spend their retirement in yet another country .
They pay their social security contributions in another place than where they will reap the benefits later .
Equality of competition conditions also requires that social security services are harmonised .
In the long term , it is therefore inevitable that a standardised European social security system will be created , including a pension system , health insurance and welfare benefits .
A working group of the Hungarian Socialist Party has recommended that this vision be incorporated into the long-term programme of the Party of European Socialists .
Harmonisation will naturally take time and legal disputes , but I am sure that , in the Europe of the future , the future belongs to standardised social security .
( BG ) Mr. President , distinguished colleagues .
For a united Europe , harmonisation of social legislation and coordination among the EU Member States in respect of social security schemes is key , since freedom of movement is one of our core values .
Anyone wishing to work in an EU country needs to be well aware of their rights and responsibilities ; similarly , Member States need to protect the social rights of their citizens and ensure most favourable working and living conditions .
The social security status of citizens working in EU countries has a direct impact on Community welfare and on its economic performance .
In Bulgaria , as one of the new Member States , the issue of social security is particularly topical .
I believe that harmonisation of social security at the European level will ensure clearer and more simplified rules for European citizens .
I support Mr. Őry 's report and urge you to support it by your vote .
Member of the Commission . - ( EL ) Mr President , the point about this document is that it will be approved quickly , with a view to strengthening legal certainty for citizens .
We know that the regulations on modernisation and simplification are under approval , and therefore the present proposal would lose much of its point if we were to delay it .
On the need to incorporate the recent decisions of the Court of the European Communities into our legislation , I would like to say that this is a technical matter and must be discussed within the framework of discussion of the Regulation to be enforced .
The Commission has to a large extent already taken account of the Court 's recent case-law in its proposal for trans-border healthcare , which is to be discussed soon in the Collegium of Commissioners .
A favourable vote by the European Parliament on this document will enable the Commission to concentrate its efforts in future on updating and simplifying the texts .
We still have a lot of work ahead of us before the new texts begin to be enforced .
This effort will in the long term facilitate exercise of the rights of citizens moving within the European Union , and so this fundamental aim of European unification will take on a more concrete form .
Allow me once more to express my thanks to the rapporteur for the excellent work he has done .
rapporteur . - ( HU ) Thank you for the floor , Mr President .
To close , it is perhaps worth summarising a question hiding in the background to this debate - several people have mentioned it , including Mrs Lambert and Mrs Bozkurt .
As a matter of fact , while I was preparing this report , we never discussed any questions of content , because we always agreed on it .
What we did discuss was where it is the competency of European legislators and where it is the competency of national legislators .
I would like to assure you that in this case we managed to strike this very fragile balance .
We therefore spoke to the Commission and the Council about all the proposed amendments .
Sometimes a debate emerged eventually , and sometimes frequently , but we found the solution .
Let this be a lucky or a good example that we can even work together from time to time if we need to .
The fact that we do need to is evidence for us , but I also feel we should not doubt that the citizens of Europe also need us to .
For my part , I have not tried in the report to recommend far-reaching changes to the text , simply because we are waiting for reports by Mrs Bozkurt and Mrs Lambert on Regulation 2003 .
I therefore feel that the legislation remains in force for now - we have perhaps improved on it a little - but we will continue the debate when we produce the implementing regulation , and I feel that this is right and proper .
I would like to thank the Council , the Commission and my fellow Members again for their cooperation .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 11.30 a.m.
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( RO ) The Regulation that we are amending ( No 1408 / 71 ) plays a very important part in achieving one of the four fundamental freedoms of the European Union , that is , freedom of movement .
Free movement of labour in the European Union must not be restricted either directly , by restricting the professional categories open to the nationals of other Member States , or indirectly , by undermining the social benefits to which non-national employees are entitled .
For this reason , the regulation proposed by the Commission with additional amendments made by Parliament will clearly specify when citizens may enjoy the special benefits granted by their State , under what circumstances these benefits may be exported , and whether other social schemes apply , so as to ensure fair treatment for non-nationals .
Moreover , if we are to extend the categories of employment contracts used in Europe , we need a common understanding of what sole trading or self-employment entails .
Not least , I believe that this report helps to safeguard the social rights of citizens working in another Member State .
Removing obstacles to the recognition of social rights will lead to more mobility within the Union and increased employment .
Consumer credit ( debate )
The next item is the recommendation for second reading of the report by Kurt Lechner , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on the common position of the Council with a view to the adoption of a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on consumer credit and repealing Directive 87 / 102 / EEC ( 09948 / 2 / 2007 - C6-0315 / 2007 - 2002 / 0222 ( COD ) ) .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner Kuneva , ladies and gentlemen , obtaining credit is a different matter from purchasing goods .
The legal complexity of the transaction is far greater , and established national financing practices and legal traditions play a far greater part . Accordingly , public trust is often crucial in matters relating to consumer credit .
Against this backdrop , harmonisation of the law on consumer credit has its limits and should be done cautiously and gradually .
As the weaker party to the contract , the consumer must undoubtedly receive legal protection , but at the same time the guiding principles in this field , as in the law of obligations in general , must be freedom of contract and the personal responsibility of grown-up people , not prescription and paternalism .
National legislators must have enough discretion to guarantee consumer protection flexibly in their own countries and to deal quickly with awkward new developments in the sphere of consumer protection .
A body of legal provisions alone does not ensure that consumers are actually protected .
Impact assessments would have been essential , given that consumer credit affects hundreds of millions of people .
Legislation should be based on typical case scenarios and not on exceptions .
In this respect , I must first of all thank the European Parliament as a whole for rejecting the Commission 's totally unacceptable initial proposal and for amending it substantially and decisively at first reading .
Secondly , I welcome wholeheartedly the new approach adopted by the Commission in its amended proposal dating from 2005 , whereby only specific fundamental elements would ultimately be harmonised .
I must , however , criticise the Council 's common position .
Instead of focusing on a sound practicable European solution , the representatives of the Member States have been introducing their own specific rules , defending them and compiling a litany of them in the compromise .
The result is a set of provisions that create far too much red tape .
That is no good to consumers .
Swamping consumers with information does not help them .
It generates considerable additional costs , which have a disproportionately strong impact on small amounts of credit .
Accordingly , my aim from the outset was to try to streamline the rules and give national legislators more leeway .
In this context I would like to thank my honourable colleagues , because all the votes in the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection went in that same direction , and all the decisions of this House seem set to do likewise .
Let me just cite two key examples , namely the substantial improvements and slimmed-down provisions regarding overdraft facilities and the emerging arrangement on Article 16 in respect of compensation for early repayment .
In spite of these improvements , however , I believe that the emerging majority is only prepared to go halfway , no doubt partly influenced by the absence of consent in the Council and by the desire to bring the legislative project to a conclusion .
I nevertheless consider it imperative that additional improvements be made if the proposal is to be judged favourably in its entirety .
I wish to mention two other points that are important to me and to seek your approval once more .
Firstly , the threshold at which the directive starts to apply should be raised to EUR 500 .
I am well aware that the value of that amount varies throughout Europe .
The point , however , is not that the directive should only apply once the EUR 500 threshold has been crossed but that national legislators should retain the option of applying their own provisions from the first euro rather than being bound to restrict their action to credit of 500 euros or more .
Secondly , consumers should have the option of waiving the prescribed explanations regarding pre-contractual information , one reason being that these explanations could hamper the internal market .
I do believe it ought to be enough to provide the consumer with a copy of the terms of the contract in advance in order to satisfy the pre-contractual information requirement - which is , incidentally , what the Commission envisaged in its own proposal .
That would limit the stacks of paperwork .
Unless these changes are made , I fear that the desirable aims underlying this directive , namely to open up the single market to consumers in Europe and give them a wider range of products and options , will not be achieved .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the vote in this House on Wednesday on the Consumer Credit Directive is a very important moment for Europe 's 500 million consumers .
It will directly affect many people 's lives , and it is about two critically important issues .
The first is about consumers being able to make better-informed choices when they take out credit loans : to pay for a family wedding , a washing machine or a new car - the things of life .
Second , it is about consumers getting more choice and a more competitive market .
It is also a very important vote for businesses , creating a single , simple framework of rules so banks and other creditors can do business more easily across borders .
We need to seize this opportunity to move forward .
It is clear that the status quo is not working .
The figures speak for themselves .
In Europe the average consumer credit interest rate varies from around 6 % in Finland , the cheapest Member State , to over 12 % in Portugal .
In Italy , credit rates are about 9.4 % , in Ireland about 6.8 % .

Europe 's consumer credit market is fragmented , broken down into 27 ' mini markets ' .
And , in a European credit market worth EUR 800 billion , direct cross-border financial services make up only a tiny fraction - 1 % - of all distance credit transactions .
Clearly , the internal market is not functioning .
Clearly , competition at EU level is not functioning .
The result is that consumers are being denied choice and more competitive offers , and competitive businesses are being denied opportunities to access new markets .
The Consumer Credit Directive is necessary to start to break open the potential of the internal market and boost competition and choice .
There are two main aims of the Consumer Credit Directive : to provide standards - comparable information - to consumers to make informed choices , and to give businesses a single set of standards to sell competitive credit offers across borders .
The Consumer Credit Directive focuses on transparency and consumer rights .
I will highlight just a few of the important common elements it puts in place .
Concerning advertising for credit loans : if there is a figure in an advertisement on credit , it will be mandatory to provide the same standard list of essential information all over the European Union .
Most importantly , for the first time , the annual percentage rate of charges will be calculated in the same way across the European Union .
This is a very significant step forward , so that consumers can see the real cost of credit using one single figure .
Concerning pre-contractual information : information given to consumers for credit offers will be presented in the same standard credit information form across the EU , and it will give all the key facts and figures - from interest rates to information on charges and linked insurances .
This will allow consumers to make a direct comparison between different offers presented in a standard , comparable way .
The Directive also sets out two essential rights for consumers .
Once they have concluded the credit contract , consumers will be able to withdraw from the credit without having to give any reason and without any charge .
This right , a new feature in almost half of the Member States , will apply to all consumer credits in the European Union .
In addition , the Consumer Credit Directive confirms the consumer 's right to switch , and this must be a very stable policy line - not only in this area .
The right to switch with the right to repay early at any time : this is a critically important issue for the Commission , to ensure fair compensation to banks and at the same time to safeguard the consumer 's right to make a free choice and to proceed to a more competitive offer on the market .
This is essential if competition is to thrive .
I fully recognise that harmonising legislation in this very sensitive area is not an easy task , but I am convinced that markets are made by people and should be made to work for people , and I believe that we in Europe are in the business of putting people at the centre of the market , giving people the power to chose , giving businesses the power to compete , and getting the European market to work for consumers .
I want to emphasise that , in the modern world , it is not about pitching consumers against business , but building healthy markets where consumers can choose and businesses can compete .
I believe that the amendments put forward by the PSE and the ALDE Groups - with which the Council has agreed - constitute a fair and reasonable compromise .
In my opinion , this is the best option in the interests of both consumers and financial services providers .
I believe that the vote for this compromise package is a vote in favour of competitive markets , clear information and more informed consumer choice .
It is a modest beginning in the consumer dimension of financial services , where much needs to be done .
So I look to the Members of this House : you are the ones to speak directly , on behalf of European citizens ; you have fought , for so many years , for the things that really matter to people in their daily lives .
The task is to vote to support an agreement today on credit rules that will provide real added value to Europe 's citizens in that space where they lead their lives and to send a clear signal of Europe 's willingness to roll up our sleeves and work in an area that greatly concerns our citizens and businesses , large and small , today .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , I wish to begin by acknowledging the huge amount of work done by the rapporteur for our group , Mr Lechner , and also to pay tribute to both the Commission and the Council for the work we have done together on what has been a difficult and sometimes controversial proposal , which , as the Commissioner has said , has gone on over a number of years .
At its core - and here I agree completely with the Commissioner - is an extremely important proposal for Europe 's consumers in the internal market .
Consumer credit is a really important mechanism for bringing consumers into the market place .
We want a thriving and innovative market ; we want companies actively offering a wide range of products and services tailored to the need of consumers to buy specific articles , products or services .
But , above all , we want a well-regulated market in which consumers feel confident in accessing that market and knowing that they will have the information but also the safeguards of being able to see clear contract terms .
It is quite clear in financial services that good regulation encourages market activity , and that is what we have been seeking throughout this process .
However , the problem we have had with this Directive is the fact that the consumer credit market across the European Union is at very different stages of development : many countries , like my own , already have well-developed regulation .
The original idea of a maximum harmonisation would have meant that consumers in those countries would have been disadvantaged , and it has been trying to get that balance right that has occupied us .
I just want to correct one impression that I think Ms Kuneva gave , perhaps unintentionally : the package of compromise amendments on the table is supported with one exception only by this group .
We have tabled the same amendments ; it is a consensual position across Parliament .
I think there is one aspect that we are still arguing about , but I am sure we will get there and then we will have a good and important package .
However , the important thing is that we keep monitoring the evolution of this market , ensure that it develops in a responsible way and deal with some of the problems that might arise from the evolution and development of that market .
I am confident that this House will rise to its responsibilities and we will come up with a good package tomorrow .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , and previously the Committee on Legal Affairs , have always recognised the potential benefits , to both businesses and consumers , of developing an internal market and consumer credit .
I was present during the gestation of this legislation and hope to be there tomorrow for the final delivery , as it were , of the new consumer credit baby !
The last five years of discussion and debate have demonstrated fundamental differences between the Commission and Parliament , and more specifically between the Member States , on the best way to achieve this , and I firmly believe there are lessons to be learned from that .
All proposals - even a modified Commission proposal - have to undergo a rigorous impact assessment to enable all parties and stakeholders to evaluate the merits of the proposals and to engender consumer confidence and business confidence .
It is regrettable that neither the Commission nor the Council was prepared to do this at the time .
However , our job today is to address the new text , which is a vast improvement on the original proposal .
It focuses on the essential elements and components for starting to open the market and for protecting the consumer .
Its benefits include enabling consumers to compare offers of credit , obliging lenders to assess the credit-worthiness of the consumer - which will be important in the fight against debt across the EU - and obliging lenders to provide explanations and , as a result of our amendments , all creditors will now be responsible for providing comprehensive and standard information in a simplified format .
I welcome the 14-day withdrawal right and the right to early repayment , which are good elements for engendering consumer confidence and encouraging them to look beyond their home market for credit offers .
This is not just about opening the market , and the fact that we now have free movement of labour and people across 27 EU Member States gives this law new significance .
For example , a Polish plumber working in France or Germany and borrowing from a credit institution there can now obviously compare the different offers on APR in the knowledge that he has the standard information enabling him to take the right decision .
Finally , I welcome the fact that the Commission , by exempting credit unions from this law , is not strangling small Community providers with red tape .
I also welcome the Member State flexibility there is now .
This has , for example , enabled a high level of protection to be maintained for consumers in the UK , which will now retain the right to joint and several liability for credit cards .
There is therefore enough flexibility in this proposal to make it work , and I would urge Members to lend it their support .
As chair of the Committee , I think that our work does not finish here ...
( The President cut off the speaker )

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , this is normally the time of year we all wish one another a ' Happy New Year ' . However , in the UK , and globally , the news this new year has been dominated by worries over the economy , and particularly over consumer credit .
It is not just a question of normal post-Christmas depression ; we all know that it goes much deeper than that .
Credit is going to be a difficult issue for the foreseeable future , for both lenders and borrowers alike .
As legislators confronted with that global backdrop , we need to do something .
We need to stimulate the EU 's market in financial services , while on the other hand ensuring that our consumers make sensible and informed choices , and that all the information and the comparators are available to them in order to do so .
Many of us in this House , and particularly in the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Affairs , have spent the last couple of years sitting on an enquiry by Parliament into the demise of the British insurer , Equitable Life .
We know what the consequences are for consumers , in the context of financial services , if we get the cross-border regulatory regime wrong .
In this instance we need such a regime and we need to get it right , particularly in view of the global circumstances we are facing .
This directive can help .
It can help Europe 's market in financial services at a difficult time , and it can empower and assist our consumers in obtaining credit and doing so competitively .
My group has signed up to and put forward , with the PSE , a package that we hope will be agreed .
It seems to us that , at the end of the day , we are faced with an argument that is almost about one word , in one article , after seven years of negotiating and drafting .
It would be a pretty poor affair for this House and for Europe 's institutions if we cannot overcome that and deliver this directive , which will , hopefully , bring to the European market all the benefits we have heard outlined .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - I support the need to update EU legislation in this area .
The last time we had a directive on this was in 1987 , and certainly the consumer credit market has changed dramatically since then .
This EU Directive on Consumer Credit Loans seeks to introduce a greater level of competition into the EUR 800 billion consumer credit market .
It will bring legal certainty to consumers , which is absolutely vital if people are to shop around and look for the best product which suits their needs .
It will also help business to compete .
When you look at the differences in consumer credit rates around Europe - from 6 % in some countries up to 12 % in others - it surely is time that the consumer got a better choice .
These new rules will make the market more transparent for consumers and business competitors alike .
The main effect of this Directive will be to provide comparable and standard information to consumers across the EU who take out loans .
For credit offers , the information given to consumers , whether it is interest rates , numbers and frequency of payments , must be set out in a new EU-wide European credit information form .
So I very much welcome this .
I think that it is vital for consumers that they have confidence and that there is legal certainty in this area , but I believe that this will bring greater competition in this area and will , at the end of the day - as has already been pointed out - give more choice to consumers , and that the consumers will benefit greatly from this Directive .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we must regrettably adopt a directive tomorrow which does not meet our own criterion of better regulation .
There has been no impact assessment , even though this is an entirely new proposal , in spite of the intervening enlargement of the EU with the accession of 12 new Member States , in spite of major differences between Member States in financing practices and regulatory systems and in spite of social disparities within Member States .
Instead of complete harmonisation , there was an urgent need to give the Member States greater freedom of action .
The Member States can respond quite differently and far more quickly today to the various new models that appear on the market on a daily basis .
The Member States are also better equipped to respond to a financial crisis .
They can regulate matters in a shorter time frame than it takes the European Union to act .
This is why it would have been wise to confine ourselves here to minimal harmonisation instead of trying to harmonise as much as possible .
That is the criticism we have to make of this consumers ' directive .
Moreover , we also deplore the fact that numerous opt-out clauses have had to be adopted in order to get all the Member States on board .
This , unfortunately , has done nothing at all for the rigour of the provisions .
There is also , however , one exemption for which we would argue , and it relates to renovation loans .
In view of the formidable challenges posed by climate change , there is an urgent need to exempt from this proposal renovation loans secured by mortgage , which have nothing to do with consumer credit but should be treated as mortgage loans .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , when rules are laid down as to how an agreement between two parties is to be drafted , account must of course be taken of whether the parties have equal status or whether one party has an advantage over the other from the outset .
If one party has an advantage , this must be taken into account in the way the agreement is drafted and a formula must be devised which strengthens the weaker party .
When it is a case of consumer credit , which is what we are discussing now , it is the person needing credit who is in the less favourable position .
Unfortunately neither the rapporteur nor the compromise proposal take sufficient account of this responsibility , of consumers ' rights and consumer protection .
This is particularly serious since it is invariably those with the least financial resources who seek purchase credit .
I also want to say that , despite the fact that we have a decision requiring gender mainstreaming in all our work here in Parliament , no gender analysis of this directive has been carried out , also despite the fact that we know that many women on the lowest wages are precisely those who often get caught in the debt trap .
I maintain that there must be a ceiling on the level of compensation to be paid in the event of the early repayment of loans .
I also maintain that a three-day cooling-off period is far too short .
Besides , I want minimum harmonisation , not maximum harmonisation .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , I wonder if I might perhaps offer a few words of wisdom here .
I have spent most of my life in merchant banking , albeit not retail banking , and I have to say I do not regard it as the business of politicians to come between a consumer , or a lender , and a borrower .
I would not dream of trying to regulate on this subject , with all my experience .
I look down the list of people who actually serve on this committee and in this Parliament and I do not see a great deal of experience there , so it is a question of the blind leading the blind .
I think that this place , which has not managed to audit its own books for nearly 11 years , commenting on this is slightly absurd .
The fact that you can actually have rules for Bucharest , London and Paris and consumers in those places is absolutely ludicrous .
Perhaps I could warn people like the UK Government that bailing out banks to the tune of 50 % of their entire reserves is fundamentally wrong .
So , if I may , let me give one tip to the consumer : ' never a lender or a borrower be ' , and to governments , let me say : ' a fool and his money are soon parted ' !
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin by thanking the rapporteur and , of course , the Commissioner too , who has played a highly constructive role in this complex matter .
Mrs Wallis referred to the fact that this dossier has been what I like to call haunting the corridors of the European Parliament and the other European institutions for more than seven years , and in my opinion these have not been seven years of transparent legislating or seven years of better regulation but a muddle that very few Members of this House have yet managed to untangle .
In this respect I do not believe we have done any great favours to the European consumers and citizens who have had to watch this backstage wrangling among the Member States , but if this final outcome provides greater transparency for consumers who wish to buy a car , for example , enabling them to make an informed choice between a hire-purchase agreement and a personal loan , I believe it will be useful .
Reference was made here to the fact that the European credit market is worth EUR 800 billion and that the differential between the highest and the lowest interest rates is about 6 % .
There is , of course , a lot of mileage in this , and it is to be hoped that consumers will be able to benefit from the available scope too , but I have good reason to be sceptical .
The fact is that a consumer who wants to buy a digital camera for EUR 220 and then has to complete a ten-page credit form in writing will scarcely be able to comprehend all the risks involved in a credit transaction for EUR 220 .
The result , in my view , is that much of what is meant well in this package will not ultimately help the average vulnerable consumer but will create such difficulties for consumers that they will even prefer not to buy anything on credit terms to avoid the daunting task of completing the extensive set of forms .
That remains my view , and I hope that the variations in interest rates will become more transparent for consumers and that this will be of benefit , although I still believe that the preceding process has been unacceptable .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I believe we must see this through so that consumers and banks know what will and will not apply to them in future .
I believe the compromise which we developed last week and which the Liberals have now endorsed too is a thoroughly reasonable one and that we have come up with a common solution which is tenable and consumer-friendly .
That is the main thing .
If I may take issue with Mr Schwab , first of all the form is not ten pages long , and secondly I consider it a very good thing that we have a common form in which the consumer must be told clearly and transparently the total amount of the credit , the term of the agreement , the rules governing the right of withdrawal and the applicable annual percentage rate , which might then be calculated on the same common basis in all Member States .
That is transparency , and this transparency is what we need and what is at stake in tomorrow 's vote on the proposal contained in amendment 46 .
I hope we can ensure that transparency really does win the day .
Forgive my saying so , but while the rapporteur has unquestionably worked hard , my group cannot condone this Parliament of ours being railroaded into a situation in which the Council suddenly appears to be consumer-friendlier than the European Parliament .
My group regards this purely and simply as an unacceptable state of affairs , which is why we must ensure that a fair balance is struck between the natural right of the banks to do business - a normal feature of any market economy - and the need to protect consumers by ensuring that they are given the information they need to choose the right form of credit and reject unfavourable options .
That is the way to go , and that is what we should adopt tomorrow .
( NL ) Mr President , I should first like to thank Mr Lechner for his drafting and his constructive cooperation .
I should also like to thank the Commissioner and the Council , because it was a lengthy trialogue .
Unfortunately we were not able to reach a compromise , but we were only a hairsbreadth away from one , so I am pleased that on Wednesday morning we shall be voting on that same compromise and I am assuming we shall achieve it .
Why ?
We have in fact been talking about it for seven years already .
If we want to have any political credibility with the market and our citizens , with consumers but also with the sector and the industry. it is important for us to take a decision at last .
A compromise is always give and take and of course there are aspects that could be improved , but that applies to all parties .
The fact is that a compromise is mixing water with wine and then you get a result and you have to be satisfied with it .
I believe that the present plan is in the interests of both consumers and the financial sector .
That is what we have to work towards , that is in the interests of Europe and the internal market .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , first of all I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his excellent work , which no doubt required considerable patience , but has doubtless brought him considerable satisfaction .
This report can certainly be counted as being one of the most controversial and most difficult compromises .
Its objective is to bring more closely together different regulations in various EU countries , which really are very different , and legislation in this area is largely under the control of Member States .
Harmonisation in this sector is quite simply impossible .
We can only try to introduce a partial convergence of requirements , and even this , as we have seen over the past months , has caused considerable problems .
I agree with the approach taken by the rapporteur , that in an area as difficult as this Member States should be given as free a hand as possible .
This seems to be the only sensible solution to enable such a difficult and weighty report to be accepted by all interested parties .
It would appear that , in its present form , the text has been simplified .
What can be seen in all the work over this report is the lack of an analysis of impacts , and such an analysis would certainly have improved its quality .
Overall , this draft seems to me to be satisfactory .
Obviously this version is far from being ideal , but it has been adapted to the current situation in Member States .
This proposal will abolish financial and administrative burdens on consumers and will , in my opinion , introduce important provisions to protect the consumer , making it easier to obtain credit .
One of the most useful proposals is the introduction of comparisons .
( NL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I personally cannot share the enthusiasm for this text .
Important steps have been taken , but this text does not serve the purpose , which is to create a harmonised framework .
That harmonised framework has not been achieved on a number of points that we consider essential .
Let me explain .
There are two points that , as far as our delegation is concerned , are still difficult or very difficult .
The pre-contractual information package is reinforced and harmonised . That is good .
But it is undermined by the various formulae that are allowed for the annual percentage rate of charge for opening credit .
I just need an explanation of how consumers are going to be able to compare those various formulae objectively .
Secondly , in the case of my country , Belgium , the position of consumers is likely to be weakened , in that the database has to be consulted but there are no related sanctions for the banks .
That could plunge people even further into debt .
I also think it is a missed opportunity for the banks themselves .
It is still a wasted regulation .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the Commission 's well-intentioned attempt to establish a functioning internal market with enhanced consumer rights in the realm of consumer credit .
The result of its efforts , however , must honour the pledge made to consumers by offering them a wider choice , better terms and conditions in the wake of increasing competition and less red tape .
Judged by that standard , the final draft directive on consumer credit is unsatisfactory in many respects .
Firstly , the prescribed standard information , which runs to some eight pages , is too extensive .
I doubt whether customers will actually use it to inform themselves of the detailed terms and conditions .
In practice , this is a tangible increase in red tape , for which consumers will have to pay at the end of the day .
Secondly , the provisions on early credit repayment squander the opportunity to let consumers share in any windfall that might accrue to the creditor because of a favourable change in interest rates after the lending date .
Thirdly , the compromise that has been reached will effectively put an end to overdraft facilities , which are standard practice in Germany and widely used elsewhere .
The public will deeply regret this and will have one more reason to gripe about the Brussels Moloch .
What counts is quality , not quantity .
( SK ) I would like to thank the rapporteur , Kurt Lechner , for the exacting work he did when drawing up this report .
He managed to simplify the Council 's overcomplicated and bureaucratic proposal through new amendments .
I would like to take the opportunity presented by the presence of Commissioner Kuneva at this discussion , which is important to European consumers , to draw attention once again to the important role of consumer organisations , which must be able to play their rightful role in every Member State and receive adequate support from the Commission .
To improve the quality of consumer protection , the individual consumer bodies require additional finance to be able to educate consumers and provide independent advice on consumer credit , notably to the most vulnerable consumer groups .
Commissioner , although you have achieved much encouraging progress for consumer groups and although your arrival gave the green light to consumer protection , I would ask for your help again in 2008 .
- ( LT ) I welcome the appearance of this directive ; it is a step in the right direction .
However , I would like to draw your attention - in particular the Commissioner 's attention - to Article 16 .
In my country , consumers do not receive any compensation if they repay credit early .
Now , when this article comes into force , consumers will actually pay more .
I find it hard to believe that this denotes consumer protection .
Surely , it is said that there are plenty of legal protectors in the article intended to ensure that consumers do not have to pay for this , but when we talk about legal protectors we mean legal games and not the real economy .
In the real economy , if it is possible to tax a consumer , he or she will always be taxed .
Therefore , I ask you to take care to structure Article 16 better in view of the fact that in many countries this tax is not applied at all .
Mr President , I think we have managed to get quite a good result in the recent negotiations .
What we have not managed to improve is simplicity .
I think that now there is far too much information for an ordinary consumer in Europe .
Whenever the Council members and Member States request more derogations from the standard information , it makes this whole directive more complex .
I think that standard information really should be standard .
It should be an EU level playing field .
Every time that we in Parliament or Member States in the Council say that we should have different adaptive rules by the Member States we make this issue more complex .
I totally agree with the Commission 's objective .
Probably the compromise negotiations are headed in the right direction , but something should be done about the simplicity issue before this directive gets into the books and reaches consumers .
( FR ) Mr President , colleagues , Commissioner , I should like to make just a few observations .
I think it is good for our Parliament 's image to show European consumers that we have the protection of their interests in hand .
Mr Lechner 's report certainly reflects a tremendous amount of work , on which I congratulate him , but I think that the task now , in the final stage of the process , is to strike a compromise that will enable us to demonstrate the importance that we as parliamentarians ascribe to the consumer .
It would be rather hard to swallow if the Council were portrayed at the end of the day as the consumer 's best defender .
We need to find a compromise over the few words that divide us , in order to avoid a conciliation procedure which , I believe , would be in no-one 's interest .
We also need to avoid taking retrograde steps , and the fact is that consumers in France , like those in Lithuania , are not financially penalised for early repayment .
We cannot present consumers with a situation less advantageous than that which they currently enjoy under national legislation .
If there are no other speakers , let me remind Members that they may use the ' catch the eye ' procedure to ask for the floor again if they believe they did not complete their first statement .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would also like to express my sincere thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Lechner , and to all Honourable Members for raising a lot of important and wise remarks .
Let me just comment on a few of them .
We believe that the threshold is set up very carefully .
Our common aim is not to deprive vulnerable consumers of protection by directive .
That is why we set up a threshold which equally embedded the interests of the new countries and which does not exclude most average credits in the EU-12 .
It is also , we believe , a big advantage to have a standard info-sheet , which many of you have pointed out as one of the main positive steps in the directive .
This will be one of the biggest advantages and we will not deprive the consumers if we substitute it for the contract copy , because consumers cannot easily compare copies of the contract .
They often have difficulties understanding the contract copies - and this is borne out by Eurobarometer research .
As to full harmonisation - actually I would like to stress that this is ' targeted ' full harmonisation . The reason why it is better than minimum harmonisation , as some of you proposed to discuss even today , is that we think that it is necessary to lower market-entry barriers for financial services providers , and this is one of the main reasons why this proposal for a directive is going ahead .
Through this , we need to increase consumer confidence .
That is why targeted full harmonisation is the best way to do it .
The Commission would like to reassure Mr Harbour especially that it will monitor the market .
My services have launched a study to collect indicators and data on the present market .
A few years later we will use the same indicators and collect the same data .
This will allow us to decide on the follow-up .
To conclude , I can only repeat that in my view , going through the conciliation procedure would not help us reach a better compromise than the one you have on the table today .
Consequently , I very much hope that Parliament will be able to adopt this text at second reading tomorrow .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it has emerged clearly in the debate that we have a common aim .
In particular , I can unreservedly endorse what the Commissioner said in her introductory remarks .
The only question is whether the draft that is now on the table can actually achieve our common objectives .
I believe there are a number of defensible opinions on this issue .
The uniform annual percentage rate of charges certainly represents unmitigated progress , as does the common uniform right of withdrawal .
Let me re-emphasise , however , that consumer protection is best served if we consider the whole picture , as the Commissioner rightly indicated , rather than tacking together all the provisions that apply anywhere in Europe .
More statutory provisions do not mean greater protection of consumers .
On the subject of interest-rate differentials in Europe , I must point out that I should have welcomed the presentation of an analysis of the extent to which these differentials might be due to divergent legal provisions and complexities in particular countries and whether it might be the case that interest rates are lower where legal rules are simpler .
I do not know the answer , but the question ought to have been examined .
Competition and general consumer education also serve to enhance consumer protection , but excessively convoluted rules do not .
Let me say a brief word on the trialogue . I certainly held the view that we should thrash out our differences here in Parliament .
Far be it from me to thwart an agreement .
Nevertheless , since we always argue for transparency , particularly in the Council but in other forums too , I do not think it right that an informal body should hold these discussions behind closed doors . Instead , each institution should initially express its opinion , motions should be tabled , and a solution should then be found on that basis .
Let me repeat once again that the draft has been considerably improved in the course of more than six years of deliberations - I want to make that abundantly clear - and Parliament has played a crucial part in the improvement process .
I also see this to some extent as an endorsement of my own work .
In my opinion , however , the draft is simply not good enough .
Be that as it may , it will enter into force .
I have no hesitation in thanking my fellow Members , the Commission and indeed the Council - which , in point of fact , has always provided very straight answers and detailed information - for their contribution to the performance of what has generally been a thoroughly gratifying and pleasant task .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 16 January 2008 , at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - Parliament 's vote on this very important dossier means are now one step closer to fully implementing the four freedoms .
This directive will bring more rights and transparency to consumers when taking a consumer credit .
Comparing credit conditions across borders and choosing the best offer will now become much easier than before .
After five years of preparations , the directive will apply to all unsecured loans between EUR 200 and EUR 75 000 .
I want to point out that it is important to set the lower threshold at EUR 200 , since loans do not often exceed EUR 500 , especially in the new Member States .
The consumer will benefit not least from all contractual information , a common method for the calculation of the annual percentage rate and a 14 day withdrawal period .
Balanced laws like this help us to achieve the approval of the citizens for the European Union .
in writing . - An EU directive on consumer credit has been talked about for some time , so today 's debate on the directive is to be welcomed .
There is great hope that the directive will lead to consumers looking beyond their own national boundaries for loans - allowing them to shop around for the cheapest loan available .
It should , when implemented and taken up by EU citizens , lead to people availing of cheaper credit .
But this is the key to its success : firstly knowledge among EU citizens of the possibility of availing of loans across borders , and secondly a willingness of citizens to take up this option .
At present , it is clear that there is a reluctance among citizens to shop around within their own Member State for best value in loans , just as there is still some resistance among consumers to change banking institutions , though that may be changing slowly .
The success or otherwise of this directive depends on its effective implementation by Member States .
Only time will tell if it lives up to our expectations and provides greater choice to consumers , greater availability of consumer loans and most importantly lower costs on such loans .
in writing . - Consumer credits are an essential pillar of the internal market .
First of all , I think this directive is a first step and a good example of how the EU delivers concrete results , even in such a controversial issue .
Second , in my opinion in the longer term further harmonisation is needed once we have gathered experience on the working of this directive so as to make it easier for consumers to shop across borders and to give full legal certainty to businesses on their obligations when offering these credits in other Member States .
Third , I want to thank all the people involved for their perseverance in this process , which has lasted for years .
( The sitting was suspended until the vote at 11.15 a.m. and resumed at 11.30 a.m. )

1 . (
2 . (
- Before the vote :
3 . (
- Before the vote :

( EL ) Mr President , my dear colleagues , as we know , the European Commission 's original proposal included in a single Regulation the amended proposal for Regulation No 11 abolishing discrimination in prices and terms of transport , and the amendment to Regulation ( EC ) No 852 / 2004 on the hygiene of foodstuffs .

The Commission 's proposal was based on Articles 75 , 152 and 95 of the Treaty establishing the European Community , and the stipulated procedure for adopting the Resolution was co-decision .
The colegislators - Council and Parliament - decided to split the original proposal into two separate Regulations : one for the amendment of Regulation No 11 on transport , based on Article 75 ( 3 ) , which does not provide for any intervention by the European Parliament in the legislative procedure , and on which the Committee on Transport gave its opinion ; and another Regulation concerning amendment of the Regulation on the hygiene of foodstuffs , based on Articles 95 and 152 ( 4b ) , on which the Committee on the Environment is to give its opinion shortly .
Today we are called upon to decide whether Article 75 ( 3 ) provides an adequate legal basis for amending the Regulation on transport .
The amendment to Article 852 / 2004 , as we have said , will be discussed later .
The proposed Regulation which is submitted today provides for the deletion of Article 5 , which ceased to be valid in 1961 , and an amendment to Article 6 , aimed at reducing the carriers ' administrative obligations by abolishing their obligation to retain copies showing full price information , since this information is included anyway on the consignment notes and in the carriers ' accounting systems .
This amendment makes it possible to check transport rates and conditions , and identify any discrimination .
So this is an amendment that corresponds exactly to what is provided for in Article 75 ( 3 ) , second sentence , of the Treaty of the European Communities , and since the amendment to Article 6 is necessary to enable European authorities to check observance of the principle of non-discrimination in the field of transport under Article 75 ( 3 ) of the Treaty , the Committee on Legal Affairs made the point that Article 75 ( 3 ) is the only legal basis than can be used when amending Regulation No 11 .


4 . (
5 . (
6 . (
7 . (
Voting time

on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , on a point of order , under Rule 160 of the Rules of Procedure , our group has requested that we have roll-call votes today on everything , and I know that has excited some interest in the Chamber .
Just by way of explanation , not just this group but many MEPs from all groups are deeply concerned about the method of voting that takes place in here .
In fact , you yourself in the chair just a few months ago said we have made mistakes here , which , in a vote of this size , are statistically normal .
We would argue that when we are voting on legislation there should not be any possibility of mistakes being made .
Perhaps I would ask Members , when they are going through this lengthy roll-call procedure , to consider just how important voting is , and perhaps in the light of that we will get MEPs next month , when we vote on the EU Lisbon Treaty , to vote for an amendment to allow those 10 countries that promised their own people a referendum , the opportunity to do so .
( DE ) Mr President , I have only one request .
Rule 159 of the Rules of Procedure states that ' Normally Parliament shall vote by a show of hands ' .
For this reason it would be right to examine whether the IND / DEM Group 's motion to have all votes taken by roll call is consistent with the Rules of Procedure .
I believe it is not .
May I ask that this be done by tomorrow .
I believe we shall be voting today as stipulated in the voting list , but I would ask that the question of legal admissibility be reviewed by tomorrow .

( IT ) Mr President , two things : I think the television camera set up here should be moved to allow Mr Donnici - and all of us - to see the presidency and other colleagues .
Let me also take this opportunity to welcome the decision by the European Parliament 's Bureau to dedicate Parliament 's press room to Anna Politkovskaya .
The House Rules of Procedure state that voting is normally to be by show of hands unless a roll-call vote is specifically requested .
When voting by show of hands it may so happen , not often but from time to time , and only from time to time , that either because MEPs do not raise their hands or because there is some confusion , the presidency makes a mistake when assessing the outcome of a vote .
Should that happen then , again frequently , an MEP will request verification and as a result the President holds a roll-call vote to that end and the situation is resolved .
This is all , therefore , provided for , and our votes proceed perfectly correctly 99.9 % of the time .
In any event , the President of the Parliament received a letter from Mr Booth MEP noting this issue and requesting action to be taken on it .
This matter will be discussed at the Conference of Presidents and , of course by the working group looking at reform of the House 's working methods .
This is in train .
Please be assured therefore , Mr Farage , that we are going to pay a great deal of attention to this matter and are seeking to ensure that things run more smoothly every day .
Mr Swoboda , we are going to vote today by roll call , which is also in accordance with the Rules of Procedure as a roll-call vote has been requested by a political group .
Today .
And from today we will take decisions .

Mr President , on that very point , during the last parliamentary term , a group chaired by Mr Corbett , from the PSE Group , submitted proposals to the House to the effect that , if more than 100 amendments were tabled at the plenary stage , then the report in question should be sent back to committee .
There have now been a number of occasions when that has not taken place .
I wonder if , when recommending to the Conference of Presidents that it look into these matters , you could also recommend it consider the very good recommendations which Mr Corbett brought forward during the last parliamentary term .
Mr President , pursuant to Rule 145 , I would just like to make a personal statement .
Yes , I have written to the President of Parliament complaining about the voting , as you know .
I have updated him several times since then , because my request for full electronic voting was turned down by the committee .
Its response was ' no follow-up ' .
I have , in fact , written several times .
The worst case that I have reported was overturned from ' rejected ' to ' approved ' by 567 votes to 17 , with 18 abstentions .
That is why I have called this system ludicrous in the past .
It really must be dealt with .
Formal sitting - Grand Mufti of Syria
Ladies and gentlemen , it is a special honour and pleasure for me today , in this European Year of Intercultural Dialogue , to extend a warm welcome to the European Parliament to His Eminence Sheikh Ahmad Badr El Din El Hassoun , Grand Mufti of Syria .
( Applause )
As I emphasised last week in Ljubljana at the opening ceremony for the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue , the European Parliament attaches great importance to this year of dialogue between cultures .
I am firmly convinced , as are many others , that it is both possible and essential for people from different cultures and religions to live together in peace , both within the European Union and in the world at large . Particular importance attaches in this context to our relations with the peoples on the opposite shores of the Mediterranean and in the Middle East .
The fact is that the fruits of this dialogue will have a lasting effect on our common future .
Together we must build an intellectual and cultural bridge across the Mediterranean , embedded in mutual enrichment and shared values .
We build this bridge when we engage in continuous , honest and open dialogue in which we listen to each other , exchange our opinions frankly and develop mutual understanding .
Tolerance is at the heart of intercultural dialogue .
Tolerance does not mean indifference .
Tolerance means putting forward our own points of view and hearing and respecting other people 's convictions .
Where we find it impossible to accept another person 's point of view , it is still necessary to treat such views with respect , to exchange ideas and opinions peacefully and , wherever possible , to pave the way for joint action and thereby defuse tension .
We must stress the things we have in common , including the substance of universal democratic values .
Foremost among these are human dignity and the defence of inalienable human rights .
In the course of 2008 and thereafter , the European Parliament will take several opportunities to engage in such talks .
Today 's visit by the Grand Mufti of Syria represents the first of these opportunities .
Ahmad Badr El Din El Hassoun , formerly Mufti of Aleppo , is regarded as an outstanding champion of inter-faith dialogue in a country where the religious communities in all their diversity still live and work together in peace .
This is clearly symbolised by the fact that the Grand Mufti is accompanied on today 's visit by high-ranking religious leaders . That was his express wish , and may I make special mention of Bishop Antoine Audo , head of the Chaldean Catholic Church in Syria , and bid him a warm welcome .
Your Eminence , it now gives me great pleasure to invite you to address the European Parliament .
( Applause )
Ladies and gentlemen , your applause shows that this House is at one with me in sincerely thanking the Grand Mufti of Syria , Sheikh Ahmad Badr El Din El Hassoun , for his message of opposition to violence , war and terrorism .
Human dignity is central to him , and that is the basis for cooperation between cultures . His is a tolerance which says that we have our own point of view , that we are not bound to embrace another 's point of view , but we respect it and therefore live together peacefully in this world , recognising human dignity .
Thank you , Your Eminence , for your address to us here in the European Parliament .
( Applause )
1 . (
2 . (
Mr President , I rise under Rules 152 and 160 of the Rules of Procedure , concerning voting procedure and roll call votes .
It is obvious that the Rules of Procedure have been abused and used in a way utterly contrary to their intention .
Could I ask , through you , that specialists such as Mr Corbett and others look very carefully at what has happened today ?
My understanding is that the President has the discretion to rule that any request for a roll-call vote be declared invalid .
That may become a necessity when we have heavier voting sessions in the future .
( DE ) Mr President , in this House we have very liberal and , in particular , minority-friendly Rules of Procedure , and rightly so .
It is our wish and our duty to preserve them .
This , however , presupposes that the various groups exercise their minority rights properly and do not abuse them .
When that happens - as it has done today - we should rethink this practice .
Mr President , I must take exception to the two points of order just made .
The rules are absolutely clear on this .
Every group has the right to request roll-call votes .
No discretionary power is given to the Chair .
We have always accepted that , ultimately , in any democratic chamber the majority has the right to get its way , but what we have just heard is the most intolerant position that does not allow any opposition , that does not allow any dissenting view and , if my colleagues want to understand why the European Union is so unpopular with the voters out there , you need only consider your own intolerant attitude towards anyone expressing any view other than your own .
( Applause )
Mr Hannan , to my knowledge , all votes which have taken place this morning have been by roll call .
Therefore the Rules have been complied with meticulously .


Mr President , I wish to point out to Mr Beazley and Mr Rack , and perhaps to yourself , Mr President , that today is the first time since I have sat in the European Parliament that we can actually be confident that the results are right , because normally it is a farce !
So do not moan at us , we are helping you to tidy up this place so that in the future more of this work is done in committee and we are not given hundreds and , in some cases , thousands of amendments .
What we have done is entirely within the Rules and all of you - in particular those who believe in this place - should learn a lesson from it .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I rise under Rule 171 of the Rules of Procedure and table the following motion on behalf of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament : in view of the urgent need to discuss the Rules of Procedure and their interpretation , I move that the sitting be suspended as of now and that all further debates , including the explanations of vote , be postponed until ten o 'clock this evening .

( Applause )
Fourteen MEPs in the House have requested explanations of votes for each of the seven debates held yesterday and this morning .
Fourteen MEPs , each of whom has requested an explanation on each of the seven debates : ten are members of the IND / DEM Group , two of the PPE-DE Group and two are Non-attached .
If these explanations of vote take place now they will probably take up about two hours of our time .
Therefore I submit the following point of order to the House : either we take the explanations of vote and stay here for two hours more or we suspend the session now as proposed by Mr Schulz and hold the explanations of vote tonight .
( The House agreed to this proposal . )
Ladies and gentlemen , notification of the timing explanations of vote will be given at 3 p.m.
Voting time ( continuation )
The next item is voting time .
( For results and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
Mr President , very briefly , I do not think you actually followed the Rules of Procedure correctly during the earlier voting session .
You said ' the voting is now open ' , but you did not ask ' have all Members voted ? ' before saying ' the voting is closed ' , and you did not read out the results .
I think you were out of order .
Mr Booth , the result of the vote is on the screen .
As you have asked for all today 's votes to be roll-call votes , that is what we are doing ; what I am trying to do is to make this form of voting as painless as possible for the House , if that is all right with you , Mr Booth .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 12.55 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Agenda
( FR ) Colleagues , I have to remind you that 19 Members have requested time for oral explanations of vote on each of the seven reports that were adopted before lunch .
There are a further 10 individual requests for explanations of vote .
Theoretically the time required for explanations of vote would thus be 143 minutes , something more than two hours .
In order to be able to take these explanations of vote today , I therefore propose the following change in the order of business :
We would take the Commission 's statement on waste in the Campania region , which is currently scheduled for 9 p.m. , immediately after the Angelilli report on the rights of the child .
The explanations of vote would then be taken during the evening sitting , after the oral question on the status of elected MEPs in Poland .
The order of business would thus be as follows :
from 3 to 5.30 p.m. : Cashman report , Angelilli report , then the Commission statement on waste in the Campania region ,
from 5.30 to 7 p.m. : Commission Question Time ,
then during the evening sitting from 9 p.m. to midnight we would have , in order : the Pack report , the Graefe zu Baringdorf report , the oral question on the status of elected MEPs in Poland and finally the explanations of vote on those items put to the vote before lunch .
Mr President , on a point of order , for clarification of the Rules as they were ruled upon earlier today .
Under Rule 171 , invoked by Mr Schulz , about the suspension of the sitting , it does not say - because we had finished the votes and were before an explanation of vote - that the rule could be invoked at that particular time .
If the sitting was then suspended , it is precedent in this House that , when you resume the sitting , you continue with the business , and continuing with the business - based on precedent in this House and what we have done in the eight years I have been here - would be the explanations of vote .
I am quite happy to come back here at whatever time is necessary to give my explanations of vote , because I want to do that for a number of reports .
I would ask you what the basis of the ruling on Rule 171 was , because I do not think that was in order ; you know you are twisting the Rules , as well as I do here , to go against the democratic wills of some Members of this House .
It is a strange type of democracy when you are trying to silence a minority who are just doing what they are allowed to do within the Rules of Procedure .
( FR ) Colleagues , allow me to remind you of a few basic facts about how we operate here .
The President can suspend the sitting at any time .
I merely have to get up - to rise from this seat - and the proceedings will be suspended automatically .
Rest assured , please , that I have no intention of rising from my seat , but do be aware that all it takes for the proceedings to be suspended is that the President should get up .
So my first point is this : the proceedings were suspended because it rests entirely within the President 's power to suspend the sitting when he or she chooses to do so .
A second absolute rule is the following : this is the plenary session and only the plenary session has control - total control - over its agenda .
That is why I am proposing to you that you amend the order of business along the lines I have just suggested .
Should you not wish to make the changes I have proposed , then in that case - and only in that case - Mr Heaton-Harris , you would be right , we would work to the agenda previously agreed .
I will therefore now ask whether the Members are formally opposed to changing the order of business as I have just suggested .
We will formally hear the case against the proposal and then I will take a speaker in favour of it .
Mr President , it is undoubtedly true that you , as President , could leave the chair and the Assembly would be suspended .
However , that is not the basis on which what happened before lunch time happened .
That was on the premise of a proposal under Rule 171 , from Mr Schulz , that the House be suspended .
The rule is quite clear , that when such a proposal is made there should be a speaker for , and a speaker against .
That was not the case , meaning that the proposal was irregular and should not have been put to the vote , and that the decision is not binding .
You should , therefore , now return to the agenda .
( FR ) I would remind you again that the House is the sovereign authority here .
So the President in the chair is entitled to do as I am now doing , namely to call on two colleagues to speak , one for and one against .
That is a prerogative of the President .
Of course the House has to take a vote , but I believe that a vote was taken this morning , and electronically confirmed .
I do not think that the result of that vote can be contested .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I only wish to acknowledge that the President who chaired the sitting this morning did indeed forget to ask who wished to speak for and against the proposal .
It is equally true , however , that a clear majority of this House voted that we should not debate or hear the explanations of vote now but at ten o 'clock this evening .
Now there is a new proposal , and I wish to support it on behalf of my Group and , I think , on behalf of other Members too .
I believe the arrangement you have proposed makes good sense , and we shall see how the vote goes .
Moreover , as you said yourself , the House is sovereign .
The majority of the House will decide .
( Applause )
( FR ) Colleagues , I have taken one speaker against and one speaker for the motion .
If someone has something to say at this point , it should be on a different matter , not to re-argue the for and against .
If that is what you wish to do , I cannot give you the floor .

Mr President , on a point of order , this Chamber may be sovereign , as you say , but it nonetheless must follow its own Rules of Procedure .
The suspension or closure of a sitting is covered by Rule 171 ; I quote , ' The sitting may be suspended or closed during a debate or a vote . '
Now , this morning was not during a debate or a vote , it was after the vote .
Furthermore , Rule 163 , ' Explanations of vote ' , does not allow discretion to the Chair to not hear them or to change the time .
It reads explicitly , ' Once the general debate has been concluded , any Member may give an oral explanation on the final vote for not longer than one minute ' .
It is true that the rules of this House give substantial arbitrary power to the speaker .
But these are two items where no such power pertains , and this House chose - in the most flagrant way - to tear up its own Rules of Procedure rather than delay a couple of people from having lunch .
I have to say it is symbolic of the way in which the European Union is proceeding with the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty , nay , European Constitution , that you tear up your own rule book when it does not suit you , rather than tolerate an opposing point of view .
( FR ) What I propose , colleagues , is as follows : clearly we are not in a position this afternoon , here in plenary session , to assess all the various arguments about the interpretation of this rule .
If Members wish to engage in recriminations , let them do so in writing to the President of Parliament .
I am sure that he will refer complaints to the appropriate committee .
What I am concerned to do now is simply to decide on the order of business .
I have made a proposal .
I have heard one Member speak against it and one Member for it .
I now put it to the vote .
( Parliament agreed to the request . )
( The order of business was thus established . )
Approval of Minutes of previous sitting
( FR ) The Minutes of the sitting of Monday 14 January 2008 have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is very kind of you to give me the floor 20 minutes after I asked for it , even though I am right opposite the presidency .
I want to speak for the record and for the sake of democracy in this Chamber .
The Presidency of Parliament and all the group chairmen must realise that two wrongs do not make a right .
What is politically useful is not always politically correct and after listening today to the Grand Mufti we have to decide in a manner that is clear and unequivocal for all of us whether we in this Chamber follow the democratic provisions of the Rules of Procedure or follow the interest each individual may have according to circumstances .
A mistake was made this morning with regard to Parliament 's Rules of Procedure and we will not correct that error by voting today in an empty Chamber .
We are making another mistake to the detriment of democracy here .
I am not saying on behalf of the UEN Group whether it is important to discuss the waste in Italy at 9 p.m. this evening or at 5 p.m. tomorrow , or whether it is important for explanations of vote to follow the vote , as has always been the custom in this Parliament , when the vote is expressed as it should have been this morning .
I do ask you , however , Mr President - and you may cut me off , that does not interest me at all - what this Parliament 's Rules of Procedure say ?
Do you know ?
In regard to this question , you want to reply to this deserted Chamber that it should vote on the basis of those who were given the floor and not those who wanted to express an independent view !
That is madness !
( FR ) Madame President , I trust my tone will be as measured as your own was agitated .
I gave you the floor because I wished to know whether you were for or against approval of the Minutes of Monday 14 January .
You had nothing to say on that point .
I was , however , courteous enough to hear you out and I hope that our colleagues will be similarly appreciative of the manner in which you chose to address the House .
I shall take it , therefore , that there are no comments , as Madame President is not seeking the floor again .
( The Minutes of the previous sitting were approved . )
Towards an EU strategy on the rights of the child ( debate )
The next item is Roberta Angelilli 's report , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs - Towards an EU strategy on the rights of the child .

rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first I want to thank colleagues for their valuable cooperation , and in particular Mr Frattini for his commitment since the beginning of his mandate to safeguard the rights of the child .
The report obviously does not pretend to be exhaustive , but I believe it is a good point of departure .
The objective was to lay the bases for a strategy aimed at promoting and safeguarding the rights of minors in the European Union 's internal and external policies and to support Member States ' efforts in that sector .
We wanted to take as our premise the specific nature of the rights of minors , which are totally distinct from the more general category of fundamental rights , although they form an integral part of them .
The strategy aims above all at the positive affirmation of the rights of the child , which include the right to a family , the right to health , education , social inclusion , but also the right to entertainment , the right to play , to engage in sport , together with the right to a clean and protected environment .
In substance , the aim is to create a society tailored to the child , in which the child can feel protected and actively involved .
That is why the report is based on two main presumptions : ( 1 ) active participation of children in decision-making that affects them ; ( 2 ) mainstreaming , that is to say incorporating and promoting the rights of the child in all European Union policies .
In short , the rights of minors must finally become a political priority for Europe , given also that children account for about 30 % of European citizens and much still remains to be done for them , beginning with the fight against violence and abuse , in face of the worrying growth of paedophilia and child pornography networks .
The general objective is to ban all forms of violence , including so-called traditional practices , honour crimes , and forced marriages .
It is not enough only to ensure the certain punishment of those who commit violence ; we must guarantee a strategy of prevention , aimed especially at helping children at risk .
Another priority is to combat child poverty .
It is worth pointing out that even within the European Union 19 % of children live below the poverty line and we must , therefore , provide aid measures that are also designed to support their families .
In particular , we need measures targeted at Roma children and street children , who are often forced to beg and thus become easy victims of exploitation , trafficking and organised crime .
Another basic aspect of the strategy is to guarantee the education and training of all children , including the most poor and disadvantaged .
We also need measures targeted at the less able , so as to prevent any form of discrimination .
We are among experts here so perhaps there is no need in this Chamber to list all the urgent problems that need to be tackled : from the marketing of violent video games to the rise in cases of international kidnapping of minors , the red tape that makes international adoptions difficult , the tragedy of the child soldiers , child labour , the failure to register the birth of a child , the remarkable number of disappeared children of which no more is ever heard .
I could go on and on .
In truth , we must apply the appropriate instruments and provide prompt information in order to exchange experiences and good practice , and we must create synergy between the related legal and penal instruments in order to address the problems in concrete terms and in real time and possibly succeed in preventing them .
Let me conclude by saying that approval of the Lisbon Treaty will give us a few more chances .
The EU Charter of Fundamental Rights now forms part of the Treaty , including , therefore , Article 24 , which expressly governs the rights of the child , thus creating a legal basis for implementing the strategy .
At this point , we as a Parliament , but above all the Member States , must set to work immediately .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me give warm thanks to Mrs Angelilli for this report .
From the start of my term of office , the rights of the child have clearly been a top priority , a central item of my agenda , and the cooperation with Parliament in this field too has now led to the policy lines that will be the outcome of this report - which I hope will be adopted by a very large majority - guidelines for action that the Commission will follow , for there is not a single point in that report that I do not endorse .
It sets out horizontal initiatives that cover a number of policies , but the common denominator is that minors , that is children , form the heart of our society and it is , therefore , clear that they deserve our utmost attention .
Over the coming weeks I , together with my staff , will consider how to put the individual points contained in Mrs Angellili 's report into practice on the basis of concrete initiatives .
There are , in fact , already some measures under way . They include the presentation of a communication that you have taken into account and that dates back to July 2006 , a general communication on a European strategy on the rights of the child that has the entirely political objective of making those rights a political priority , as Mrs Angelilli noted .
Other measures now under way include the creation of a standard helpline telephone number , 116 000 , which will be the same throughout Europe .
Let me take this opportunity to invite the many Member States that have not yet put that measure into practice to lose no more time in doing so ; here , I am obviously addressing not Parliament but Member State governments .
That decision was taken more than a year ago yet more than half the Member States still do not have a helpline that actually works , although it is a decision that , I believe , could have been implemented in a short space of time .
Last October we discussed , with the Presidency in Lisbon , whether we could jointly set up a European network of early warning systems for the event of the abduction or disappearance of children .
You know we were looking at the good example of the French system , we looked at how things worked in Belgium , we noted that Portugal and Greece were setting up , or in recent weeks have already set up systems ; but it is clear that child abductors disregard borders and , therefore , early warning systems cannot stop at geographical borders .
We have done a lot of work on Internet crime against children .
Our work with a conference of experts last November produced important results in terms of the kind of technical cooperation that could lead to the interconnection of electronic systems to prevent and react to on-line paedophilia .
That is one of the most terrible threats to children , and you know that thanks to its inclusion among the 2007 priorities of Eurojust and Europol we are now able to dismantle many international paedophile networks operating via the Internet .
We also submitted a report last November - one of the points that was emphasised - on progress in implementing the framework decision dating back to 2004 on combating the sexual exploitation of children .
In that report , as you may remember , I highlighted the fact that too many Member States have still not transposed that 2004 framework decision , dating back four years now , on the sexual exploitation of children .
We certainly created a useful instrument with the European Forum .
The first experience with it in Germany , under the German Presidency , mainly related to Internet abuse and violent video games .
The next European Forum on the rights of the child , which will take place under the Slovenian Presidency , will address other subjects , including in particular international adoptions .
We will look at the situation and , as Mrs Angelilli hoped , we are also looking into practical ways of inviting children , children 's representatives , to take direct part in all European Forum meetings .
You will understand that it is a delicate matter to invite children , including rather small children , to take part in those meetings , but that is the objective that has been decided and we will , therefore , fall in with that proposal from Parliament too .
We are developing a dedicated European website for children , written and presented in a simple way , which explains , for example , how to guard against the many safety threats to children in everyday life in a non-aggressive and non-shocking way ; it explains how to , let us say , steer clear of such dangers .
We have said very little about the Fundamental Rights Agency ; one of my proposals was to make the rights of the child a priority under that Agency 's multiannual programme .
We still have much to do .
Mrs Angelilli rightly says that we must consider migrant children .
That is an aspect we will address specifically in the framework of European immigration policy : children are often victims , they are often the most vulnerable in the general context of migration flows .
We must place more emphasis on the need to implement the European action plan to combat people-trafficking , with particular reference to children , in addition to women , for as the two weakest categories they are often the victims of international people-trafficking .
We must look into means of financing practical proposals and projects under European programmes .
The new Daphne programme and the new fundamental rights programme may , for example , enable us also to provide financial aid for the European Network of Ombudspeople for Children .
I attach great importance to that network and also , clearly , to the NGOs working in that field .
The new programme , known as Daphne III , has been refinanced and may serve as a particularly useful instrument .
In conclusion , I am , of course , more than ready and willing to continue developing this political strategy , with a view also to producing very concrete results for our citizens in one of the areas particularly close to our heart .
Rapporteur of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality . - ( EL ) Mr President , protection of the rights of the child has never been lacking from the internal and external policies of the European Union , but because of the absence of a legal basis , these policies have been piecemeal , and for this reason your proposal , Mr Vice-President , for the development of a strategy for the protection of the rights of the child has been favourably received by the European Parliament , and also by civil society .
We hope it will be strengthened with the entry into force of the Reform Treaty , which will include as an integral part the Charter of Fundamental Rights , as was mentioned by the rapporteur , Mrs Angelilli , whom I congratulate for her skills of synthesis and her presentation of today 's report .
With the possibility of an integrated and coordinated approach to the protection of children at European level - thanks , amongst other things , to the numerous interesting proposals by the Commission - the child must be regarded not as a victim , but as the holder of positive rights and obligations , who should grow up in a healthy family environment with the assurance that his or her material and non-material needs will be met .
Respect for the rights of the child should be strengthened not only through the planning of European actions , but also by the political will of the Member States , with measures which will answer to the fundamental needs of children and protect them against multiple dangers .
The Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality focused , in its opinion , on the question of supporting the mother and the family in the performance of their obligations .
It urged support for vulnerable groups , namely children at risk due to abuse and lack of education , healthcare , proper nutrition and opportunities to develop and achieve their potential .
The reconciliation of the parents ' working lives with family life : this is an inalienable right of the child , and also represents the creation of valuable capital and an investment in the society of the future .
Both inside and outside the European Union , children 's positive rights are often violated , and there is still discriminatory treatment due to sexual inequality .
There are gender stereotypes and perceptions which marginalize some groups of children and particularly girls and young mothers .
The protection of women , especially during pregnancy and when they are bringing up children , must be a requirement , so that children , from the very start of their lives , can enjoy their fundamental rights .
Thank you very much , Mr Chairman , and I also thank Mrs Angelilli for her report .
I welcome the fact that the Slovenian Presidency chose as one of its priorities the question of children in armed conflicts , which was also one of my topics .
My opinion on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs also deals with the need to register children at birth .
Children who are not registered are invisible and therefore often become victims of sexual abuse or trafficking ; they are imprisoned along with adults and are used as active combatants in the armed forces , because it is impossible to establish whether or not they are already adults .
The birth certificate of a child guarantees the child his name and nationality as well as access to medical care , for example .
I regret , however , that the report is only being adopted in January : the majority of the opinions were voted on and submitted to the committee before the summer and the report could thus have been adopted earlier .
A solution to this issue of children rights is needed urgently .
One illustration of this is the recent case of the transfer of more than 100 Chad children to France .
The aim of the action was to help the deserted families in Darfur ; the children - orphans - would be looked after by foster parents in Europe .
The UN confirmed , however , that in the majority of cases the children were not orphans and did not come from Darfur , but from Chad , the neighbouring country .
Finding an urgent solution to the issue of children 's rights is not only a necessity for developing countries : it is a necessity for us too .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Development . - Mr President , I would like to say at the outset that the Committee on Development feels very strongly that it is important for the Commission to mainstream children 's rights into all aspects of development policy , seeing this as a means of achieving the Millennium Development Goals .
I know that the Commission communication proposes to deal with such issues .
I wish to state very clearly that we need a children 's rights approach and need to move away from a common focusing , in this debate so far , on issues such as child-trafficking , abduction and pornography .
We need to ensure that we understand we are talking about the rights of children : the rights of children to be consulted ; the rights of children to be listened to ; and the rights of children to have the respect of adults and not be told by adults what they should be doing .
I also very much welcome the fact that the Lisbon Treaty makes reference to children 's rights .
We welcome this , because at the moment only animal rights have this kind of legal base in the European Union , and we urgently needed to make this the case for children too .
Finally , in the wider world and in Europe itself , we need to see that what we are doing is safeguarding children 's lives and generally enhancing the well-being of all the children in Europe and in the wider world .
Rapporteur of the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs . - ( EL ) Mr President , I would like to begin by congratulating Mrs Angelilli on the constructive work she has done .
The strategy for the rights of the child is a positive step towards a coordinated approach both to internal policy and to external relations .
The Committee on Employment , whose opinion I drafted and am now presenting , emphasises the social aspects of violation of the rights of the child .
It focuses on child poverty , which affects nearly one child in five in the European Union .
It also stresses the problems of child labour and social exclusion , and calls for special attention to be given to the vulnerable social groups , such as child immigrants , street children and children with disabilities .
We are afraid that today 's children , Mr President , are being called upon to live in a world worse that that known by previous generations .
The European Union must therefore act now , with substantial commitments , targets and necessary resources , both at Community level and at the level of Member States .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Culture and Education . - ( DE ) Mr President , may I begin by congratulating the rapporteur on her report and on the cooperative nature of our deliberations .
We fully agree with many major aspects of the report .
I wish to highlight two points , however , to which I attach particular importance . The first of these is the right to education as a prerequisite for children 's social development .
The Member States must create unhampered access to education for all children and young people , regardless of their ethnic and social background and their family circumstances .
This also means that any kind of exclusion , discrimination and violence against children must be prevented .
It is essential to press ahead as quickly as possible with the launch of the helpline .
The second point that is very important to me is the promotion of language , as languages are one of Europe 's cultural treasures .
There is also an innovation that we should not overlook , for the rights of children also extend now to their involvement in new developments in the field of education and training and in particular the cultivation of media literacy . Competence in the use of information and communication media is an extremely important educational tool and must be vigorously developed .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( HU ) Thank you for the floor , Mr President .
I think there are only a few of us who would not be directly or indirectly affected by the topic of protecting the rights of children .
The Community institutions have already dealt frequently with various aspects of this topic , but agreed with the submitting committee that , in addition to all this , a comprehensive strategy needs to be developed .
There are some specific areas that we absolutely must take into account when working out such a vision .
These include , for example , the prohibition of all kinds of violence against children , fighting poverty and discrimination , and the right to education .
As Mr Frattini stated in his introduction that the Agency will deal with this area in particular , I would like to make a recommendation to you : why not make the first specific request from the Commission to the Agency that it investigate the enforcement of precisely this area , the rights of the child ?
I find the sexual abuse of children , child labour and the enormous differences existing today between how children with refugee status are treated in individual Member States particularly worrying .
The problem of street children and children forced to beg is a serious problem here in our immediate surroundings .
I am also convinced that the fight for the complete enforcement of the rights of the child within the Union must mean above all reassessing the role of the family in this new Europe , and reinforcing the role of upbringing alongside education , so that our children receive guidance , as well as professional knowledge , in our ever more troubled world .
Perhaps fewer children would be inclined towards violence , suffering physically or damaged psychologically . Thank you .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , I want to start by thanking Mrs Angelilli and all the shadow rapporteurs , but also all the Members who have contributed to getting us to a point where we shall soon have the first decision of the European Parliament on an EU strategy on the rights of the child .
The key question concerns the involvement and influence of children .
There will be some painstaking and important work to be done in order to ensure that this becomes a reality and not just words .
Children and young people expect as much .
The point that I consider to have been the greatest success is the proposal concerning violence against children .
The committee has unanimously backed my demand that all violence against children , including corporal punishment in the home , must be prohibited by Community legislation .
It is a great success for children .
In my home country , Sweden , where corporal punishment is banned , every child at nursery school and all young people know that adults may not strike a child .
The fact that we are now making it clear that there must be cooperation in putting an end to all forms of abuse of children means that we need increased cooperation from relevant bodies such as banks , travel firms , credit firms and exchange bureaux to stop child pornography , sex tourism and the exploitation of children , and to get an internet which is safe from paedophiles .
Illegal websites must also be shut down .
Member States must legislate against buying sex in order to ensure that children do not become a trade commodity .
The most difficult problem we had in the committee related to adoption .
I am very happy that we are now agreed that a child has a right to a family , irrespective of whether it is the child 's own family , a foster family or through national or international adoption .
It is the child 's best interests which should decide the matter , not adults ' best interests .
We all remember what happened at children 's homes in Romania and Guatemala recently - kidnappings of children for adoption are fresh in our memories .
Children are not a trade commodity .
It is now up to the Commission to listen to the wisdom which we have shown in Parliament and to come back with concrete proposals on how we are to give effect to children 's rights which now , with the new Lisbon Treaty , become an objective to be embodied in law in the EU .
With the new Lisbon Treaty the EU must listen and ensure that the rights of children are integrated into its work .
This must happen as a matter of course and must also apply in the global perspective , in development work , in culture and in all areas .
Child poverty will of course be a central issue , but also the question of how children fare in war and in relation to health risks of all kinds .
I am proud to have participated in this work in Parliament , which will take a decision on the matter tomorrow .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( ET ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen .
I am pleased that the European Parliament has finally reached this debate on the European Union 's strategy for children 's rights because a policy which encourages children 's rights will form the bedrock of tomorrow 's society .
The well-being of society and the state depends on the values and methods used by future parents .
My thanks to the rapporteur for drafting such a comprehensive document .
It is appropriate that the principles set out in the UN Convention on the rights of the child and its additional protocols have been used as the basis for developing an EU strategy on the rights of the child .
However , this strategy to be more effective and applicable throughout all 27 Member States , it must contain more specific provision for implementing measures whose application would be supported both by using Member States ' and European Union resources .
The strategy is comprehensive , and I do not have time to go into every aspect .
I would like to highlight just one positive initiative , but one which is effective in all respects , namely the recommendation in the European Union children 's rights strategy for a European Union-wide child helpline telephone number ; we have had a child helpline number in Estonia for three years now and I can confirm to you that it works well .
I would like to direct your attention to two important target groups , the safeguarding of whose rights I believe we should focus our thoughts on more keenly .
The first of those target groups is disabled children .
It strikes me that in our strategy on the rights of the child , greater attention should be focused on safeguarding disabled children 's rights ; and that also they , like other target groups , should have genuinely guaranteed opportunities , equal opportunities , to be actively involved in the life of society .
The second area I would like to highlight is that of guaranteeing the rights of children who are not cared for by their parents .
All children unquestionably have the right to a family .
Unfortunately today it is not possible for all children to grow up in the bosom of the family , and they live in children 's homes .
We have not paid sufficient attention in our documentation to children who have left children 's homes at about 18 or 19 years of age : legally they are adults , although in social terms they are not ; this is an area which we should begin to focus some attention .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , as an MEP who for some years now has been involved in protecting the rights of children , I am very pleased to accept the report of Mrs Angelilli concerning the creation of a unified EU strategy on the rights of the child .
Violations of children 's rights , violence against children , the trade in children for illegal adoptions , prostitution , illegal work or for begging on the streets : these continue to be an enormous problem for the EU .
Every strategy concerning children 's rights should be based on the values and principles contained in the UN Convention , particularly as regards protection against all forms of discrimination .
Every child must have a guaranteed right to have continuous and direct contact with both parents , as well as the right to be brought up in the parents ' culture and the right to learn the language of both parents .
These rights are repeatedly violated by the German Office for Children and Young People , the Jugendamt , as regards children one of whose parents is foreign .
In cases of divorce , the Jugendamt uses any method to deprive the parent who is not German of their parental rights .
Children are deprived of their right to learn the language of the second parent , and it is forbidden to have conversations in languages other than German during meetings that have been arranged .
Official documents state that it is harmful for children to be bilingual .
Over 250 complaints against the actions of this office have been filed with the Committee on Petitions .
Despite the fact that a year ago the European Commission stated that the actions of the German Jugendamt violate Article 12 of the EU Treaty , which bans all discrimination , the German state has become even stricter in its discriminatory practices against children of foreigners and this is an absolute scandal .
I hope that since this report is the voice of the European Parliament , this will help to remove the discrimination that is found in this area .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , children are not mini-adults , nor are they what people call a natural part of the family or of society .
They are legal persons with their own rights .
All Member States of the EU signed the ground-breaking UN Convention on the Rights of the Child , but in many aspects of children 's rights we in Europe have barely scratched the surface .
One bright spot is the fact that the European Commission has put children 's rights on the agenda , but the Commission 's proposal , in our view , still comprises too many fine words and too few specific measures .
I am pleased that the report fleshes out the Commission 's recommendation , and for this I reiterate my congratulations to the rapporteur .
We must hope that the Commission is doing its homework and will be more specific in the 2008 Green Paper on the rights of the child .
We need indicators and precise timetables for the realisation of children 's rights .
Allow me to focus on three points that are important to me . The first of these concerns the rights of girls , especially girls from migrant backgrounds .
Realising the rights of the child invariably involves the establishment of equality between girls and boys and equal opportunities for both , and this is reflected in the present report too .
Let me express my gratification at the adoption by the committee and the rapporteur of our proposal that headscarves for girls should be banned at least in primary schools in the EU in order to give girls genuine freedom of choice and the right to a childhood .
Likewise , there is no justification for prohibiting girls from migrant backgrounds from attending school .
The second point to which I attach great importance is that of violence against children and increasing neglect .
There is a need to improve children 's media literacy .
There has been an alarming rise in the dissemination of pornographic material and scenes of violence through mobile phones , and this leads to desensitisation and an accelerating spiral of violence .
I ask you , Mr Frattini , to look long and hard at ways of improving the protection of young people in the media and of protecting children more effectively against violence .
My third point concerns the environmental rights of the child , a subject that no one has raised yet . By this I mean the right of every child to grow up in an intact environment .
Regrettably , in its strategy on the rights of the child , the Commission did not consider the need to take more account of children , not just adults , when we set future pollutant ceilings .
That applies to noise levels as well as to hazardous substances .
I therefore ask you to incorporate the environmental rights of the child , for today 's children are the citizens of tomorrow .
We all bear responsibility for ensuring that our European home is also a child-friendly home .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I want to thank Mrs Angelilli for her sensitive approach to a very important matter : a society that knows how to welcome its children will know how to welcome all its citizens .
In the same way , I believe that today in this Parliament we are taking a very important step , because institutions that are able to address the concerns of minors will certainly be more able to address the concerns of all European citizens .
This report contains many interesting and dynamic ideas , which are also pointers for the Commission in relation to further steps that we expect .
There are some points that need to be emphasised , especially the need to pay great attention to unaccompanied minors held in administrative detention centres for migrants .
When it inspected those centres , the European Parliament 's Committee on Civil Liberties found that in many countries , such as France , Belgium and Italy , many unaccompanied minors , many children , are held in inhuman and degrading conditions that are unacceptable for young children as , incidentally , they are unacceptable for all men and women .
We emphasise the need to insist on that point .
We also believe that great attention must be paid to avoiding child labour .
Child labour is often linked to exploitation and poverty .
That is why that this Parliament must make a major contribution towards improving social conditions in the European Union .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , I have many things to say about the rights of the child .
Firstly , I welcome the amendments to this report that focus on the family and their importance in providing for a child 's development .
I would like to stress the primacy of parents - not the state - as the guardian of children and , for this reason , the importance of support for the family in their responsibilities .
The state should assist the parents in protecting and promoting the child , and it should only take over from the parents when the parents are unwilling or unable to serve their children .
On the issue of disability , I praise this report for acknowledging that children with disabilities should be assured full respect and granted equal treatment .
I myself have represented many children and their parents who struggled to guarantee education for them .
A tragic flaw in the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child on which this is based is that , although it guarantees primary education for all children , it makes specific educational provision needed by disabled children ' subject to resources ' .
These three words have militated against children with special needs getting the help they need in my country .
Amendment 3 deals with children within the EU who have previously been in institutionalised care .
This important issue has come to the attention of many MEPs following the BBC documentary Bulgaria 's abandoned children , which focused on care homes for children with disabilities .
There will be a screening of this documentary with the participation of the film-maker on 4 March 2008 , to which I invite all my colleagues .
Recently the EU voted against an amendment placed before the Committee on Budgets that sought to divert EU funding that goes into institutions towards community- and family-based services .
This amendment failed .
We must be coherent in our approach to de-institutionalisation and integrate children into society , and we must put our funding into community-based approaches in the future .
I also welcome the strong line Parliament takes on trafficking , especially with Amendment 1 .
It is hard to imagine anything worse happening to a child than being stolen from their family , whether for military , sexual or labour purposes , or even to fulfil the desire of a couple for a child .
I also want to mention the trafficking of babies before and after birth for organ and cell harvesting and remind my colleagues that the preamble of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child includes children before birth as well as after .
I am pleased that the report takes into account migrant families and unaccompanied minors .
With increasing cultural blends , we must continue to acknowledge the importance of embracing all children in our ever-changing society .
As much as it is wonderful that labour migration enables parents to go abroad and earn more and provide better for their families , we need to be working towards an equity that will not necessitate this separation and will allow families to stay together in their home country or their country of choosing .
Now I should like to address the issue of sexual and reproductive rights , which is repeated in six articles of this report .
I am personally responsible for six teenage girls and two teenage boys .
Of course they need to know the facts of life but , at the same time , they need to know the most important fact of life : that they are extremely valuable , developing individuals , persons with a dignity and a future , with a unique contribution to make to their community and family .
They do not benefit from the message that is so often given in the name of sexual and reproductive rights that they cannot be responsible and are , in fact , walking disasters who need adult help with damage control , and that they can get this help without any negative effects to themselves or without the knowledge of their parents .
The richness of adolescence can and should receive the support of those who are older , who love them and who have already been there .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my colleague 's report is excellent and I regard Union action and a Union strategy to protect the rights of the child as priorities .
We must recognise that minors have rights and call for policies and measures in that area that are also aimed at protecting the life of the individual from the moment of conception .
The report calls for further measures and - and no one can disagree with this - for the affirmation of children 's rights as an integral part of the rights that are binding on the Union and its Member States and that require a specific legal basis .
Among the many urgent problems facing children let me highlight the striking number of disappearances ; these child disappearances often have a tragic ending as a result of sexual exploitation and violence linked to child pornography .
I believe the Union cannot accept that any of its Member States should in any way tolerate paedophilia of any kind and must ban the right to advertise it and , obviously , to commit it .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
In light of the demographic crisis , every child 's life has a price put on it .
We cannot press unilaterally for an increase in the birth rate whilst paying scant attention to ensuring the conditions necessary for the living conditions , equal opportunities and spiritual and physical development of the children that have been born .
I therefore consider Mr Frattini 's commitment to giving horizontal priority in Union policy to guaranteeing the rights of the child as extremely important .
The report , on which I would like to congratulate Mrs Angelilli , rightly highlights certain problems that must be solved with the utmost urgency .
The extent of child poverty is staggering , since , as my fellow Members have mentioned , every fifth child lives in poverty , and of course this is very closely linked to leaving school early .
We cannot close our eyes to the situations of the several thousand street children and homeless children in the Member States of the Union , of whom many are forced into begging , stealing , illegal labour or prostitution .
According to a study published recently by UNICEF , there are no countries , and no Member States , that are not affected by the matter of child trafficking .
We know little about the children , estimated to be several hundred , who disappear from children 's institutions and refugee camps each year .
Violence against children and the increase in aggression among children are grounds for justifiable concern .
Mr President , under the Lisbon Treaty , the rights of the child are guaranteed by Article 24 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
The report - the adoption of which I support - is the first step for the Union 's institutions , including the Parliament , to take serious steps in order to comply with the rights of the child , and improve their situations , more consistently .
Then , hopefully , the Member States will not spare their efforts either . Thank you for your attention .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , I am delighted that the Commission is proposing to put in place an EU strategy on the rights of the child .
Because a great many EU policies affect children , we need to take specific measures so that their rights can be protected and their active participation encouraged .
I am particularly pleased that Parliament has called for a definition to identify ' children at risk ' .
This will enable us to provide specific help to children who are victims of a social situation that threatens their mental or physical health .
At the same time , we cannot simply leave children who live in poverty to their fate .
These children do not always receive the protection they need , because their parents lack the necessary resources .
If they are not to be condemned to social exclusion , they therefore need special assistance , and governments must be responsible for ensuring that all children - whatever their parents ' social or legal circumstances - have access to health and education , so that equality of opportunity for all is actually guaranteed in practice .
I should like to highlight the particular situation of migrant children .
Administrative detention of children is not acceptable .
We cannot understand why anyone fleeing from war or from desperate circumstances should be treated like a criminal , and that applies all the more so in the case of children , all of whom are entitled to protection and education in accordance with the Convention on the Rights of the Child .
- ( LT ) We acknowledge that children 's rights are part of human rights , which we are obliged to respect under international and European agreements .
Children 's rights are acknowledged in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union .
This should become a component of the Reform Treaty and be obligatory for all EU Member States .
Commissioner Frattini , in the communication you say that the situation within the Union with regard to the protection of children 's rights is still not satisfactory .
But I think it is awful .
Almost one fifth of children live in poverty .
In Lithuania , almost half the families consisting of one adult and dependent children live in poverty .
Moreover , we are not able to obtain statistics on how many children in the enlarged Community were left without parents when they emigrated in search of employment and left their children without appropriate care .
We read about sexual and psychological violence against children with horror .
We have compassion for children who we meet in the street and put a coin in their begging hands .
However , more often we do nothing because it is easier to turn away , close our eyes , and say it is not our fault , others are responsible for it .
You , Commissioner Frattini , say that it is the responsibility of individual Member States and you do not want to intrude in their affairs .
Brussels intrudes in many of the affairs of Member States : it is important for us to regulate agriculture , internal markets , the flow of capital .
We think that these are the issues of vital importance .
I believe that our biggest concern should be human rights and , primarily , children .
They are our future .
I think that specifically the European Union should take responsibility for guaranteeing human rights and , primarily , children 's rights .
I disapprove of a document that merely takes care , remembers and encourages .
I think that here we are required to actively take care of our citizens .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate Ms Angelilli for an excellent report on a subject that is key for the future of the European Union .
Most of the proposals in this report are of course deserving of support , but I have a couple of concerns .
First of all , the principle of equality of girls and boys is discussed , which could be understood as saying that they are identical , whereas every parent knows that girls and boys are different and require a different approach as regards their upbringing in order to fulfil the principle of their equal dignity .
Secondly , from the point of view of children 's rights , the increase in the number of alternative family structures , which is discussed in the report , constitutes a threat against which action should be taken .
There is no mention of the threat in this report .
And thirdly , as there is a call in paragraph 167 to provide children and young people with sexual education , paragraphs 163 and 164 , which speak of the right to sexual and reproductive health , are unnecessary unless these terms are being used to hide a right to abortion .
At this point it can be seen that it is not possible to separate the rights of children who have already been born from the rights of unborn children Even though they begin life as embryos they inevitably become children , and if anyone has any doubts about this they should remember that we were all once embryos .
( PT ) In this one-minute speech I would like to stress that I consider the European Union 's first priority in relation to children to be to assess the effect of its policies on failure to enforce or the enforcement of children 's rights , in particular in connection with a rapid and substantial reduction in child poverty , providing all children with equal opportunities .
In this context I would like to ask , by way of example : what effect does the European Union 's monetary policy and its objective of price stability , or rather , wage restraint , have on failure to enforce children 's rights ?
What effect do European Union ' flexicurity ' , labour market deregulation , easier dismissals , increasingly insecure employment contracts , increased working time and the flexibilisation of working hours have on failure to enforce children 's rights ?
What effect do current European Union policies promoting the deregulation and privatisation of public services , including health and education , have on failure to enforce children 's rights ?
These are some examples of what would be the European Union 's most appropriate , necessary and urgent mainstreaming in relation to children 's rights .
( PT ) Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , violence against those who cannot defend themselves is particularly reprehensible .
Violence against children is especially odious .
Community legislation that prohibits all forms of violence , whether physical , psychological or sexual , is required .
Mention has already been made of UNICEF data for 2003 , which indicate that in some Community countries , such as France , around three children die every week from abuse and negligence , while in others , such as Germany and the United Kingdom , the figure stands at around two per week .

I welcome the commitment of European Union Member States and institutions in implementing child policies , which have grown in number in recent years .
Existing legislation , policies and structures , however , are still insufficient to respond to the whole range of questions raised in connection with protecting children , whether they are victims of poverty , trafficking , domestic violence , sexual abuse , pornography , child labour or the outrage of child soldiers that persists in the 21st century .
I therefore congratulate Mr Frattini on this initiative , which shows that the required willingness exists to make this an EU priority and to create a general EU strategy to effectively promote and protect children 's rights in internal and external policies .
I am also very pleased that the new Treaty of Lisbon incorporates children 's rights as one of the objectives of the EU , thus providing a new legal basis for defending those rights .
Prevention and awareness-raising must be improved and social rights to support victims must be strengthened .
Cross-border operations against child pornography Internet sites must also be reinforced to ensure that the sites are closed down and the criminal networks dismantled .
The Internet offers children excellent opportunities to communicate and to obtain information , but we must ensure that they do so safely .
( EL ) Mr President , our children have independent personalities , they have an inviolable right to the protection of their fundamental rights , which means no degrading treatment and violence , no inhuman working conditions , no exclusion from education , no poverty , no sexual exploitation and abuse , no child soldiers at war .
And children have greater need of these universal values than adults do .
Firstly because they are , by definition , young and vulnerable .
Secondly , because the parent or teacher or priest and all those with whom they come into contact are always in a position of authority towards them ; and thirdly , because if anything goes wrong during childhood , this ultimately has a decisive effect on a child 's future life .
These are the rights which we are called upon to support today .
I shall focus on two :
Firstly , the children of immigrants are perhaps the most vulnerable .
Those who are born amongst us , at least , must immediately acquire the nationality of our country .
They should not be stigmatised from birth , and should of course go to school regardless of their parents ' status , and should not be condemned to social exclusion .
Secondly , protection of children on the internet : children who often go online and surf unsuspectingly and talk to strangers , and children who may be victims of sexual exploitation - commodities in a very profitable business .
Mr President , the internet is the new village square .
Just as parents warn their children not to talk to strangers in the village square , so they should be educated and made aware that similar concern and advice are needed when it comes to the internet .
Europe should play its part in providing such education as well as helplines for parents and children faced with such situations .
Mr President , I agree with virtually all the recommendations made in this excellent report .
In particular , I agree that the future EU strategy should recognise the important role of the family as the basic institution in society for the survival , protection and development of the child .
I also support the right of the child to maintain , on a regular basis , a personal relationship and direct contact with his or her parents unless , of course , that is contrary to the child 's best interests .
I fully endorse the suggestions in this report to establish a child-friendly society , in which children can feel protected and actively involved .
Paragraph 27 urges the Commission and Member States to take action to ensure observance of the rights of mentally-disabled children to access education .
In an Irish context they have a right to an appropriate primary education , but this is subject to resources .
In reality this often means they receive an inappropriate primary education .
Paragraph 27 also states that mentally-disabled children should have access to the courts .
There was recently a case in Ireland of a young girl with Downs Syndrome who had been sexually assaulted , and yet a judge decided she was not competent to tell the truth to the jury .
He tested her in court with the assistance of the prosecution lawyers .
During this test , the accused and his lawyers were present , but the girl 's family was ordered to leave the court .
Unless all children can be assured of the absolute right to access the courts we will be failing our children .
Finally , I should like to put a short question to the Commissioner .
The recent decision to incorporate children 's rights into the Lisbon Treaty as one of the objectives of the EU will provide a new legal basis for children 's rights .
Can the Commissioner elaborate - even briefly - on the practical outcomes he expects from this ?
I put this question particularly in the light of the forthcoming referendum in Ireland on the Lisbon Treaty .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to draw attention to the problem raised in paragraph 118 of the report with regard to restrictions on free contact with children in broken multi-national families .
There are particularly glaring examples of this in Germany as a result of the actions taken by the institution called the Jugendamt .
As a result of these actions , parents who are not German citizens are deprived of the right to speak to their children in their own language , and , in extreme circumstances , are even deprived of their parental rights .
The provisions creating the Jugendamt date back to 1939 , I repeat , 1939 , and they continue to function under the law in an almost unchanged form .
This institution acts on behalf of what is called the good of the child , but this concept has not been defined anywhere , which means that it can be interpreted in any way whatsoever .
In proceedings , the Jugendamt favours parents of German background .
Another concern is that it is not subject to any outside controls ; for this reason I would ask that the European Commission should prepare a regulatory proposal that would make it possible to avoid any form of discrimination in the institutions of Member States , as is currently the case in Germany .
( PL ) Mr President , first of all I would like to express my total agreement with the statement by Mrs Foltyn-Kubicka .
The issue of protection of children 's rights has benefited from the increasing attention paid to it by European Union legislators .
At the same time , however , an ever-increasing number of areas coming under EU jurisdiction have a direct impact on the rights of the child .
For this reason it is with pleasure that I accept the Commission 's announcement concerning the introduction of a strategy on the rights of the child .
The intention to give priority to this issue in the European Union , i.e. acknowledging children as fully fledged subjects of law , is deserving of our full support .
However , the cautious title of the report , i.e. ' towards a strategy ' , not simply ' a strategy ' , would suggest that there will be further steps in the form of public consultations , which could help to set out the chief priorities for future EU measures .
To date , the European Union has not yet created any special legal foundation concerning the rights of the child .
At this point I would like to state my disappointment , since , if the constitutional treaty had been ratified , it would have introduced a more appropriate legal framework in Article I-3 , which had a direct application to the rights of the child .
Protection of the rights of the child as an internal and external objective of the European Union was included in the Lisbon Treaty .
These rights are also enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
It is shameful , however , that one hundred million children living in the European Union are not equal as regards the rights and freedoms that they possess .
It is obvious that , because of their vulnerability and specific needs , children require special care , as well as appropriate legal protection .
However , the rights of the child should not be separated from , and should not be in opposition to , human rights in general .
An analysis of EU documents would suggest that there could be a movement in favour of treating the rights of the child as an issue that is somehow separate from human rights as a whole .
This is a dangerous path and could create dangerous divisions .
I would like to thank the rapporteur that she did not allow the delicate nature of this issue to cloud her balanced approach to the subject .
It is good that the report does not concentrate exclusively on protective measures , but also emphasises the need for positive affirmation of the rights of the child , such as the right to a family , education , social inclusion , health care and equal opportunities .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
A strong society and economy can only be built on generations and citizens who are sound in body and mind , so we must do our utmost to guarantee the destiny and rights of future generations even in our own interests , since sooner or later we will all depend on the solidarity of future generations .
Mrs Angelilli therefore deserves recognition for her report , which clarifies the theme in a complex manner .
The right of our children to a full life is a complicated system of social requirements and legal guarantees : the right of children to be born and brought up in healthy surroundings ; their right to study and to make their dreams come true .
Family and child poverty is a fundamental barrier to enforcing these rights , so it cannot be emphasised enough how crucial it is for the European institutions and Member States to take on a role in the fight against poverty .
This must also be done to prevent crimes against children and the exploitation of children .
A borderless Europe entered a new era at the end of last year .
It is a great challenge for the opening up of the Schengen area not to create favourable opportunities for criminals .
It would therefore be desirable to design a system to make information on crimes committed against children , and the sentences , available to the Member States and to protect children from criminals being employed within their environment .
Mrs Angelilli 's excellent report will become truly valuable if legislative steps ensue . I trust it will be so .
Thank you , Mr President .
( RO ) Children 's rights are an essential topic uniting us all , irrespective of our country of origin or political viewpoint .
To speak about children is to speak about our future , the future of European citizens and of the Union itself .
Therefore I can only welcome the report on the European strategy on children 's rights .
The drafting of the report is in itself a confirmation of the importance of the topic and the text included in the Charter of Fundamental Rights , as it involved the participation of various committees which contributed six opinions .
The best interests of the child should be of primary importance .
Through its values and its concept of development , the European Union has the moral duty to ensure that the rights of the child are a major priority for action , both internally and internationally .
Within the European Union , I would like to reiterate the importance of two aspects : first of all , the negative consequences of migration and the precarious condition of children left behind in their home countries by migrating parents .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for accepting my suggestion of drawing attention to this issue still affecting European citizens ' lives , and I would like to assure him of my support in his appeal for appropriate care , social integration and comprehensive education for these children .
No less important is the objective of ensuring the right to education for all European children .
Outside the European Union , it is essential that we promote children 's rights on an international level , especially as part of the European Union 's relations with its neighbouring countries and its strategic partners .
Among the diverse situations worldwide , I would like to draw attention to the infringement of children 's rights in cases of crisis and conflict , particularly frozen conflicts where the rule of law is simply denied .
The European Union cannot tolerate such situations and must take firm action to ensure that children 's rights are respected everywhere .
2007 saw the European Union taking decisive steps in this direction , but 2008 will be a crucial year for the actual enforcement of the new strategy concerning children 's rights .
Therefore , I call on the Commission and the Council to give due consideration to the Parliament 's recommendations , to ensure that this strategy is a success .
( ES ) Mr President , this report brings a comprehensive , consistent vision to the work we must encourage from European Union level as far as children are concerned .
We must involve everyone who has responsibilities in this area in making boys ' and girls ' rights to an equal education effective , combating all types of violence and child labour , and protecting immigrant children .
Aware of trends in society , we acknowledge that the traditional model of the family cannot be the sole reference-point and that there are increasing numbers of alternative models which we must consider in our deep-seated conviction that children must enjoy a positive family environment .
On a related issue I would like to raise the initiative on international adoptions where there is a need for regulations which are better tailored to reality and which can address the unknown factors which we are faced with today ; such a process is already under way in some States , such as Spain , safeguarding the best interests of minors .
However , before I finish I should like to express the reservations of the Spanish socialist delegation to paragraph 127 , on the ban on the veil in schools , as we are more in favour of dialogue and mediation .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are discussing the most vulnerable sector of society , but also a future which needs solid foundations in values such as respect , tolerance and coexistence .
Mr President , I welcome this report and the work the rapporteur has done on it .
From listening to the debate , there is almost total agreement on what we need to do when it comes to children 's rights , and we have come a long way from the old adage that ' children should be seen and not heard ' .
Today we not only want to see our children but also to hear and listen to what they have to say .
However , we need some clarification - and perhaps the Commissioner could do that for me - in relation to what competence the EU has in this area of children 's rights in the light of the Treaty that has been spoken of and our vote in Ireland on that Reform Treaty .
As you know , under the Irish Constitution , the rights of children are seen as best protected in the context of the family .
We need to acknowledge the important role the family plays in protecting children 's rights and we need to look at measures aimed at strengthening families and supporting them where that is necessary .
There is also the question of the marital versus non-marital family and whether there are equal rights for children in both of these situations .
There is a significant increase in the separated and divorced population in Ireland and an increase in cohabitation of couples : one in twelve families takes this form , with responsibility for 50 000 children .
We need to look at how the rights of those children are being protected under Irish law as it currently exists .
There is also an issue about the access of children to both of their parents and the invisibility of children currently under the Irish family law system , and that has to be addressed .
One last point : there was uproar in 2006 when the Irish Supreme Court struck down the law on statutory rape on the basis that it did not allow an accused individual to enter the defence of honest mistake over a victim 's age .
The case involved a 41-year-old man and a 12-year-old girl .
Today , ironically in the Dublin district court , sex assault charges against this individual were dropped .
We are to have two constitutional amendments in Ireland on the issue of the family and the case I just mentioned , and I think we need to see where the EU fits into children 's rights so that we vote in Ireland in the right way .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , today 's discussion is proof that the European Parliament wants to be involved in the creation of a European policy as regards children .
For this reason , the view of many Member States that consider that almost all of the regulation concerning the rights of the child belongs in the jurisdiction of family law , and therefore , almost by definition , is exclusively a national responsibility , is very worrying .
Such a narrow national approach puts the Parliament outside the principal decision-making process as regards the rights of the child and makes us , the Parliament , into a purely advisory body .
This is not a good approach in a Europe that is becoming increasingly unified .
An example of this can be the regulation concerning transnational recovery of maintenance claims , which the Parliament approved recently , in December , as a result of a consultation process .
The purpose of this regulation is to ensure that children who have been forgotten by one of their parents are no longer hungry and abandoned and that they receive the funds that have been recovered thanks to a new and more effective system .
For this reason I believe that the Parliament , which in fact is acting on behalf of all European children , has a moral obligation to be actively involved in making laws for their benefit .
To summarise , I would like to say : Commissioner , Parliament should be more involved in European regulations concerning children .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Roberta Angelilli , and the other rapporteurs for their work on this important dossier , and of course to thank Commissioner Frattini for his encouragement for the communication and for the work that has been done by the Commission in this field .
While recognising that these matters are primarily those for the Member States , there is also , I believe , a role for the European Union , and that of course is enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights , where , for the first time , the rights of children are embraced .
I believe that a society is best judged by the way it deals with its innocence and we are , as a European Union , a society .
The particular interest I have in this field is that of parental child abduction across frontiers .
I have handled many cases in this sphere and there are several hundred each year between the EU Member States and indeed between EU Member States and our neighbour countries and beyond .
While there are international conventions like the Hague Convention and , internally , the Brussels II Convention , there are still many deficiencies .
Recently I was grateful to the international law firm Freshfields for examining several cases under the Brussels II Convention and identifying some of the problems within our own Member States .
I believe that the work that has been done by the European Parliament and by the Commission needs to be seen in the context of international developments in law .
I think it is right that the old United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child , which puts the paramountcy of the interests of the child first , is absolutely crucial .
In the Charter of Fundamental Rights , the concept of the right of a child to both parents is also introduced .
That is vital and is now widespread across the world .
But there are two aspects which turn on the way in which a case is handled by a court .
Even though this point is not contained within the report in explicit terms , we should also remember the rights of children mature enough for their wishes to be heard by a Court , as in the case of my constituent , 7-year-old Jessica , at the High Court recently .
Secondly , where appropriate , independent legal representation for the child should be provided .
These are two elements which I think we need to develop in the coming months .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I thank the rapporteur for her excellent work .
The 20th century opened with children having virtually no rights and closed with clear and indisputable advances , yet there is still a long way to go and it will not be easy going , as pointed out in many parts of the report .
In the short time available , and on the basis also of personal experiences with UNICEF , I would urge the Commission to emphasise one aspect : we need a Community instrument on adoption , for at present the 27 Member States have totally inconsistent legislation in that respect .
It would be useful to adopt a legislative framework that would help improve the quality of the assistance provided by information services in order to sort out the various steps of preparing for international adoptions and address the procedure governing requests and family support services during the post-adoption stages .
Today we still encounter far too many abuses , deficiencies , delays and difficulties in this area , which the adopting families and , above all , the children really do not deserve .
( SK ) All Member States ratified the 1989 UN Convention on the Rights of the Child ; however , the Convention does not include any sanctioning mechanism .
There are several bodies that strive to improve the rights of the child ; their activities should be better coordinated and they should receive more publicity , for example through the creation of a shared website .
That way we could avoid the undesirable duplication of their efforts .
Another step could be to entrust the Fundamental Rights Commissioner with the protection of children 's rights .
I would welcome the Commissioner being involved , according to priority areas , in the fight against child poverty and against all forms of violence .
Violence against children should never happen .
Therefore , in my opinion , it is important not only to punish the perpetrators , but most importantly to prevent such inhumane activity .
To that effect , I support the rapporteur 's request for procedures to improve the extraterritorial prosecutions : in practice this should ensure that a person sentenced in one Member State will be registered as a perpetrator of violence against children in the other Member States too .
I think that this method will be an important step in the prevention of further abuse of children , such as sexual mutilation , sexual abuse , child pornography , kidnapping and trafficking .
As far as child pornography is concerned , I am very much in favour of the European Commission 's initiative , in cooperation with some banking institutions and credit card companies , to try to exclude pages that sell child pornography from online payment systems .
This activity could help in the creation of a database of child pornography traders , from which information on the creators and propagators of this repulsive form of trade would be available to the police of the relevant Member State , Europol and Interpol .
Because I am aware that this is a very important area , I am in favour of the necessary human and financial resources being set aside for the protection of the rights of the child .
It is a question of the future of our children , which means our future .
( EL ) Mr President , I in turn would like to give my congratulations to Mrs Angelilli , who has indeed provided an integrated framework for consolidating the Charter on the Rights of the Child .
I would like to focus my comments on three issues , beyond those which have already been discussed here .
First , there must be a prompt diagnosis and response to the problem of violence and abuse against children , with the establishment of a special record-keeping system , which will progressively contribute towards effective prevention of the problem .
Second , the adoption by all the Member States of the Protocol to Prevent , Suppress and Punish Trafficking in and Sexual Exploitation of Persons , where , amongst other things , it will be necessary to review the question of issuing temporary or non-permanent permits for residence within their borders .
Lastly , the issue of substantial management of the problem of criminality among minors , with measures for prevention and social integration of minors , and measures of judicial and extrajudicial intervention .
Mr President , this is the Year of Intercultural Dialogue , and we must maintain the connecting bridges between all cultures and all religious views .
I think paragraph 127 of this report cannot be accepted .
( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the destiny of Europe is affected significantly by whether it is capable of developing societies that include and support children .
Supporting and protecting children 's rights is crucial to the future of the European Union .
The development of child-friendly societies in the Union cannot be separated from the further deepening and strengthening of European integration .
A comprehensive EU strategy is needed to promote and ensure the effective enforcement of children 's rights both inside and outside the Union .
Children deserve special provisions and appropriate legal protection .
The Member States are responsible for supporting parents in their child-rearing duties in many ways .
A safe and inclusive Europe can only be built using these instruments .
Our policies should constantly bear in mind the diversity and different needs of children , paying particular attention to poverty , social exclusion , and negative discrimination both at Union and at global level .
I consider it important that the recommendations of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child be consistently and systematically taken into account within the framework of bilateral agreements concluded by the EU with countries outside the EU .
The PSE Group would like a separate vote on amendment 127 .
Mr President , I welcome the decision to incorporate children 's rights as one of the objectives of the EU Treaty of Lisbon , providing a new legal basis for children 's rights .
Ms Angelilli 's report deals with many important issues relating to children 's well-being and protection .
However , I want to emphasise acknowledgement of the fact that , for children , the poverty and social exclusion of their parents represent serious obstacles to exercising their rights .
I support the report 's demand that the EU work in cooperation with the relevant UN agencies , international organisations and research centres to improve the gathering of comparable statistical data on the situation of children in the EU , with a view to developing and including a larger number of indicators relating specifically to children , child poverty and social exclusion .
Child poverty is a neglected issue , yet one in five children in the EU lives on the brink of poverty .
Will this not condemn 20 % of the EU 's future adults to never fulfilling their true potential ?
If the political will is there , then let us work together across Member States to share best practice and learn from one another .
We have witnessed the EU-wide campaign to make poverty in the developing world history , so why can we not have a similar campaign , across the EU , to make child poverty history ?
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the initiative that has been put before us concerning a strategy on the rights of the child is a signal not just for Europe , but for the whole world , as to how the rights of the youngest members of society should be protected .
For this reason I would like to give my appreciation to Mrs Angelilli for an excellent report .
Unfortunately , instances of violations of the rights of minors often occur in certain parts of Europe - in Europe , where we are so proud of our highly developed system for the protection of human rights .
For this reason we must ensure that children who are experiencing various humiliations know that there is someone to whom they can turn to for help and who will give them this help .
I would like therefore to support the call of the author of the report for the creation of more effective monitoring , as well as the European Commission 's idea for putting into place a telephone helpline for children in need of assistance .
Another important issue is that of children from poor , immigrant or refugee families .
They are suffering for reasons that are outside of their control and , as a result , are often condemned to a worse life than that experienced by their contemporaries who have not had to flee their own countries .
For this reason I would like to support the proposal to grant them full rights , whatever the legal situation of their parents , and also give them equal access to education .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I thank all the speakers , and I am also glad they have recognised that the Commission and Parliament are , for the first time in Europe and even before the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty , jointly formulating a genuine , horizontal European policy in all areas for the protection and promotion of the rights of the child .
That is a political achievement on an issue that was not on the European agenda until two years ago and it is , therefore , also a response to those who were aware of the need for practical results .
Europe is moving forward in this area .
I was very pleased with what Mr McMillan had to say .
One of the main criteria for evaluating the degree of civilisation of a country is the way it treats its youngest members , its children ; the Member States of the European Union and all of us Europeans aspire to lead the world in terms of the way we treat children and the opportunities we offer them .
Many issues have been addressed , and some already feature in the proposal I submitted and in the very useful recommendations set out by Mrs Angelilli , yet I believe there are other points that need to be looked at in more detail in the coming months .
Let us make 2008 the year of further progress with this European strategy .
Mrs Gál and Mrs Sinnot , addressing the role of the family , made it very clear that many of the problems we encounter stem from a view of the role of the family that is outdated and not what it ought to be .
We looked into that last year , as you will remember , in relation to violent video games ; a statistical survey in Europe showed that only 20 % of respondents were interested in how their children used the Internet and came across or used video games .
That means that 80 % of parents surveyed were not aware what type of electronic games or Internet sites their children were visiting .
That shows why the family , as has been said , is the key place where we must promote the rights of the child .
Mr Catania and others spoke on the question of child labour .
You will remember that , in the proposal I put forward on imposing severe penalties on those who exploit the illegal work of legal immigrants , I particularly condemned the use of migrant children , who are both vulnerable because they are migrants and exploited because they are working illegally ; they are particularly vulnerable because children should not work but should go to school .
If that proposal , which is on the table , is adopted it will become a European directive and will , therefore , legally compel Member States to introduce rules of a kind we unfortunately do not yet have .
The question of unaccompanied migrant children is an important one , and we are discussing ways of financing targeted projects , for we have discovered situations that really are tragic , in addition to those that have been mentioned .
In the Canaries , for example , the Spanish Government has discovered very worrying cases , which we must obviously address , of the arrival of large numbers of children who are unaccompanied because their parents have simply sent them off alone .
That is quite shocking in itself .
We must strengthen European legislation to combat violence against children , as Mrs Segelström made quite clear .
There is one very serious issue that concerns me personally .
There are rules to ensure that one of the two parents is effectively granted custody of a child in the event of separation or divorce .
In fact , in many Member States the rules in force are not applied in practice ; that is not to say that the governments are not applying them , but often the magistrates and courts are scarcely aware of them .
There are cases where one parent actually steals the child from the other parent .
In some cases it proves impossible to enforce the decisions , which is why we must put much more emphasis on this question in the context of allocating the custody of minors .
Sex tourism is another area to be addressed , including cooperation among public authorities and private individuals , tourist agencies and credit card companies , to help us to identify people who buy child pornography material on the Internet .
Clearly the paedophiles do not pay cash , they pay by credit card .
If we have that cooperation , which we are making a start on , then we will also be able to reduce and put a stop to the tragedy of sex tourism .
A new area is the right to grow up in a non-polluted environment , the environmental rights of the child .
We must focus on it closely because it is not just a new area but one that we must quite clearly all address .
Mrs Harkin was one of those who raised the question of the effect of the Lisbon Treaty .
That Treaty does not introduce a specific legal basis , but gives the value of a European policy to the strategy we are discussing here today and which hitherto was based on a common political resolve .
With the Lisbon Treaty , we can now regard the strategy for the protection of children as truly European , which is a quite extraordinary step forward .
In conclusion , over the coming months we must work on this subject and it is clear that in this way Europe is investing in its future .
It is investing in its young people , investing for children .
However , I see another area in which children could be actively involved in one of the European Union 's most important policies : the policy of integrating immigrant communities .
If we placed our trust in children , in the smallest children at school , and made them ambassadors of integration - given that they find it much easier to play or learn side by side with children from different cultures and backgrounds - we will have given children the job , as someone said , not of being mini-adults , but of being genuinely actively involved in integration policy .
For if that policy is not based on integrating children at school it will never be a genuine policy of integrating immigrants who come from other countries .
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all let me once again thank Commissioner Frattini for reiterating the European Commission 's serious commitment to the sector of the rights of the child .
I thank him also for calling on Member States , in his opening statement , rapidly to activate the child helplines , for the delays here are indeed unjustifiable .
I am also grateful to him for pointing out that not all Member States have to date introduced a national guarantee in relation to the rights of the child , something we also noted and deplored in the report .
I am also grateful to all my colleagues who played a part in the drafting of this document , and to those who have spoken , for I believe we are all agreed on the concept of the higher interest of the child .
Obviously , I support that and share the concerns that have been expressed in the Chamber today .
We must force our Member States to move more quickly from words to deeds and obviously Parliament and the European Commission must do their part too .
Let me say a few brief words on some of the issues that were highlighted .
On the environment , let me confirm to Mr Frattini that it is true that we could perhaps have done more in the report , but we did make it clear that the right to a healthy and clean environment must be one of the main rights guaranteed to minors .
I was pleased to find that one of the issues that will be addressed at the next European Forum on the rights of the child will be the question of international adoptions .
In that context I also want to point out that aside from the enormous and often entirely bureaucratic difficulties of international adoptions , there also is the tragedy of children who are fought over by their parents following separation or divorce .
That is indeed a major European problem , which has obviously also grown as a result of opening up borders .
Let me conclude by saying that I am of course very pleased with the work that has been done , and although I believe the result is certainly not perfect , it can be a very good point of departure provided , I repeat , that serious and responsible practical action is taken promptly .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - Educational segregation is one of the most harmful forms of discrimination faced by Roma children .
As a basic human right , education is crucial for the attainment of other human rights , and investment in early childhood education for Roma is a policy that functions on multiple levels and benefits more than the children it aims to educate .
The benefits of early education include : the promotion of social equity , increased individual and broader social productivity , reduced levels of poverty , and the elimination of discriminatory attitudes and social exclusion .
As Roma children become more educated , they increase their chances of becoming productive members of the workforce .
While they earn money and contribute to the national budget through taxes on both income and consumption , they begin to influence the way in which non-Roma view them , thereby affecting broader social issues .
Also , as Roma become more productive and their poverty level decreases , they also become contributing members of society instead of beneficiaries of public aid .
The combination of the increased contribution and the decreased benefits paid out by the government is the net budgetary benefit to the national budget .
A program that supported these developments would benefit all Europeans and not only the Roma .
in writing . - ( FI ) One of the most fundamental structures underlying common European values is our duty to protect innocent souls , by which I mean children .
On few matters can we be so unanimous .
It is vital that children 's rights are protected more effectively than is the case at present , and that also applies at Community level .
The Commission 's communication on establishing a strategy on protecting the rights of children was very welcome .
Parliament 's report on the strategy is an excellent one .
I would like to raise a few points on this broad issue .
Firstly , the status of families is directly connected with the rights of children .
The family is indisputably the best environment for a child .
The family and the protection of family life are , in fact , children 's rights , and these are realised when a family is managing well .
The strategy should also include measures to promote the well-being of families .
A child 's right of access to both parents should be protected at all costs .
Children are exposed very early on to horrific , violent and sexual forms of entertainment , with disastrous consequences .
The proposal in the report , for example , to create a uniform classification and labelling system in the EU for the sale and distribution of audiovisual content and video games intended for minors is a worthy one .
The polluter pays principle should operate in violent forms of commercial entertainment because the damage done is enormous .
Thirdly , determined efforts should be made to eradicate child pornography .
Priorities for the Commission are to strengthen cross-border operations to close down websites that oppress children and to improve cooperation between public authorities and the private sector .
Regrettably , children 's rights do not escape the general spirit of the relativity of values that tends to exist in society .
We need to say out loud what is definitely not relative .
The rights and protection of children lie at the heart of human values , which is why we still need to remind people of the dire consequences that await wrongdoers .
in writing . - ( HU ) The European Union has a special responsibility to protect fundamental human rights , above all the rights of children .
Despite this , 19 % of children in the Union live with the risk of poverty , and this number is higher than for the adult population ( 15 % ) .
Worldwide , 40 million children under the age of 12 are subject to some kind of act of violence .
Nearly 6 million are in forced labour ; one and a half million become victims of human traffickers .
Against this background , a European strategy of zero tolerance that aims to protect the rights of children is of very great importance .
I feel that a key role in this can be played by better legal regulation , including an investigation into the impact on minors of the new and existing rules .
I do not , however , support the creation of a separate parliamentary body with responsibility for children 's rights .
Any tasks of such a body can be performed by the children 's rights coordinator appointed by the Commission .
I do , however , support the creation of a post of Commissioner for human rights and minorities , who would also be responsible for protecting the rights of children .
It is important to note that the majority of children living in disadvantaged circumstances are of Roma origin , or belong to the minority living in Europe .
It would also be advisable to implement European institutional reforms under which the children 's rights coordinators reporting to the Commissioner would provide links between institutions , NGOs and governments , to give continuous dialogue and cooperation .
With regard to the fact that there are already many European organisations and institutions within the Union that deal with children 's rights , we must place the emphasis on uniting the old ones and making them operate more effectively , rather than creating new ones .
Besides the protection of children 's rights , the issue of education is becoming more and more topical .
Attentive education allows uninformed young offenders to grow into informed , law-abiding citizens .
I would be making an omission if , in the context of this debate on children 's rights , I did not speak about the case of Shaun Attard , which broke the hearts of the people of Malta and Gozo .
This Gozitan child was taken from his father in a manner that surely had a psychological effect on him .
It is possible that the law is being observed in this case and that the European directives are being respected .
However , there are considerable doubts as to whether what is taking place is really in the best interests of this child .
I regret to say that from what I can see , the British authorities are making it difficult for the child 's father to have a fair hearing of this case .
Even the few contacts between the child and the father are full of obstacles .
I would like to appeal that , while the law is to be observed , Mario Attard is given a fair hearing and , moreover , serious consideration is given to Shaun 's best interests .
in writing . - ( PL ) Today 's debate concerning the rights of the child raises many fundamental questions concerning the proper development of our young people .
The future of our children , ensuring they can develop properly , is the issue that determines the future of our continent as regards proper interpersonal relationships .
The rights of the child must be respected .
The rights of parents to bring them up in accordance with the values they believe in must also be respected .
To speak about the rights of the child and to leave out the issue of their right to be brought up in natural families , where there is a father and a mother , is a violation of their rights .
Surely a decision about a child 's adoption , where the child is handed over to a couple of the same sex , and thus deciding about the child 's future destiny , and , in a way , forcing a sexual orientation on them is a violation of the child 's fundamental rights .
We cannot remain silent on this issue , just because it violates EU political correctness .
Disturbing situation regarding waste in the Campania region ( debate )
The next item is the statement by the Commission on the disturbing situation regarding waste in the Campania region .
Member of the Commission . - ( EL ) Mr President , honourable members of the European Parliament , the refuse which has been accumulating in the streets of Naples and neighbouring towns since 21 December , as the media inform us , is estimated to have exceeded the huge quantity of 100,000 tonnes .
This , in combination with the negative - I would say catastrophic - effects for residents and the environment , is a cause for grave concern .
The crisis in recent days in Naples did not come from nowhere .
It is the culmination of deficient enforcement of European legislation on refuse over the past 14 years , for which Italy has been repeatedly condemned by the Court of the European Communities .
Beyond the role of organised crime which is emphasised by the press , a direct cause of the present crisis appears to be inaction and lack of will to adopt the measures necessary for solving the chronic problem of waste management .
When the Commission was first informed of the crisis in the refuse collection and disposal system in Campania , in the spring of 2007 , proceedings were initiated against Italy for contravention of Community legislation on refuse .
Since then , the Commission has been observing developments at first hand and has already come to an initial on-the-spot assessment of the situation , at the request of the Italian government .
A further meeting with the competent Italian authorities is due to take place in the next few days .
It is the responsibility of the Italian authorities to take immediate measures to clear the refuse from the streets .
But as this new crisis shows , it is not enough merely to remove the refuse from the streets .
Any short-term measures must be supplemented by the adoption and , most important , the effective implementation of long-term strategic measures .
For example , an adequate network of waste processing facilities fully complying with the standards laid down by Community legislation .
This must be accompanied by an integrated long-term strategy of waste management with the aim of promoting recycling and sorting of refuse upon collection .
Legislative Decree no .
61 , issued in May 2007 to solve the refuse crisis , did not achieve its aim .
The emergency plan announced by Prime Minister Prodi on 8 January is a more ambitious effort in this direction , but a crucial element remains the timing of the measures , which must be swift and effective .
We shall continue to monitor closely the implementation of the measures in practice by the Italian authorities .
The Commission will continue to exert pressure on the Italian government to end the crisis , and intends to proceed with the legal action against Italy .
The continual violations of Community environmental legislation in Campania must finally be brought to an end , as Community law requires .
Although the situation appears to be difficult , it is not impossible for the Italian authorities to comply with Community legislation on refuse .
I am sure that useful examples can be drawn , not only from other Member States but also from other regions of Italy , where solutions have been found for the controlled disposal of waste by a combination of different types of volume reduction , collection and disposal .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me say at once to the Commissioner that while I endorse what he said , I believe the situation is not so much difficult as dramatic .
I could confine my statement to quoting from the article in The Economist a few days ago .
' Garbage littered on city streets can be not only unhealthy but also politically hazardous .
It reminds voters of the fragility of civilisation - and can prompt them to turn on their elected representatives . '
That is the situation .
As everybody knows , Naples is famous for the film The Four Days of Naples , in which the local people rise up against the foreign invaders .
One newspaper wrote that the enemies in the land today are the people who sullied Naples ' good reputation in the world .
A whole civilisation is being consumed .
The tragedy of the waste in Naples and Campania did not strike overnight but has been building up for 14 years ; EUR 8 billion have been spent uselessly and TV pictures have shown Europe and the entire world how the city streets have become quite impassable .
The real tragedy began , as the Commissioner pointed out , on 21 December , when the municipal dust carts stopped their rounds because the tips were full to overflowing and there are no incinerators ; there are impending health risks , and absolutely nobody , Commissioner , is talking about separate collection .
There are , in fact , no incinerators in Campania and waste management is in the hands of organised crime , the Camorra .
The Campania region has not managed to tackle a problem that , in short , is a question of ordinary administration , such as cleaning the city , because it did not wish to do so , because the regional administration and its president are the slaves of the organised crime that controls all business .
Some of the political forces that form part of Mr Prodi 's government and all the opposition parties have called for the Regional Council to be dissolved and for the appointment of a commissioner with sweeping powers , as a reaction against the irresponsible Minister for the Environment , Pecoraro Scanio .
A mere 81 % of the EUR 200 million contribution under the European plan for the period 1994-1999 has been used ; there is no regional plan and so someone had to be sent in .
I hope the President will allow me to speak for a few moments more .
Under this arrangement contracts can be awarded without respecting the appropriate European regulations , which creates a vicious circle of illegality and inefficiency .
The real risk is of losing the EUR 330 million Structural Fund money .
The Commission has opened an infringement procedure against Italy ; that was , unfortunately , inevitable , for certainly Campania is light years away from complying with the rules imposed by the European directives , which those in charge even in the government have disregarded .
We ask the Commission to carry out an inspection at the end of the month and to take a strong position on enforcing the use of incinerators .
That is something Europe can do and we also call on Parliament to carry out an inspection , for a qualitative leap ( ... ) .
Before continuing the debate , I must advise you on the new procedures .
First of all I would ask Members to adhere to the rules on speaking time .
Secondly I would point out that under the ' catch the eye ' procedure Members who believe they have not used up their entire speaking time may ask to speak again .
Obviously they will be given the floor after it has been given to Members speaking for the first time .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first I want to thank you for your clear , precise and effective statement , for the concern you have shown tonight and over the past days and weeks , for your reprimands that we endorse , aware as we are that it is absolutely necessary to respect European laws .
We believe that the European Parliament must never turn into a sounding board for national diatribes , especially on such sensitive questions and dramatic issues .
Rather , we think that it is precisely because of the dramatic nature of this situation that we must call for serious analyses , both of this specific case and of the issue of waste in general , which is not a concern only for Naples and Campania but something every community has to tackle .
It is an issue that calls into question a development model that often sacrifices man and the environment to the logic of profit , an issue that is often addressed in terms of ideologies and the false opposition between soulless industrialism and environmentalism that puts a stop to development .

We must not forget that Italy was one of the first countries , in 1997 , under the government of Mr Prodi and with Mr Ronchi as minister , to pass a modern law that is consistent with what the European Union has been saying for some time : environmental education , separate collection , security measures , use of advanced recycling and reuse methods that are safe for people and the environment .
That law has also been applied excellently and has also been a source of economic growth and employment .
That has not been the case in Campania , however .
What went wrong ?
What did not work ?
There is no doubt that political responsibility for what happened can be assigned as much to the right as to the left , especially as regards management by those put in charge .
It is not up to us at this moment to ascertain whether the responsibility might also be of a different kind , and severe penalties should be imposed if that is the case , but we would not be honest if we blamed politics alone .
In Campania , many other factors played a decisive , negative role , such as organised crime , a weak civic sense , a historical lack of infrastructure .
The Italian government is responding to the immediate situation , taking important decisions and endeavouring to restore responsibility to local authorities , moving away from the system of sending in special commissioners and ensuring self-sufficiency in waste disposal .
Those decisions will allow us to look more confidently to the present and the future - I 'm just finishing , Mr President - and I believe that they will also make it possible to give a convincing response to legitimate European concerns .
We must now support those decisions ; we must restore dignity to a city , a region and a country , to Italy , which , in Mr Napolitano 's words , is not short of positive energy , of forces of innovation .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we must resist the temptation to exploit this issue and instead let objectivity and intellectual honesty prevail , without disregarding the disputes surrounding it .
The problem is this : the interest of organised crime and its infiltration into waste management , which has resulted in countless illegal dumps scattered over the Campania region ; the constant acceptance of dangerous and toxic waste from other regions , especially northern Italy ; the weakness of the local authorities ; the cultural backwardness of the population in its approach to waste as a resource ; the vetoes relating to the siting of various waste disposal plant , even by representatives of the local Catholic Church ; the divisions not only in political but also in scientific circles regarding , for example , disposal methods ; the inadequate technology chosen for the planned end-disposal plant following a European call for tenders in Campania in 1998 .
Today we have massive state intervention .
Politicians , all politicians , have finally understood that more needs to be done ; for over the past 14 years , whether as a member of the government or the opposition , whether at local , regional or national level , none of the political parties has managed to come up with firm , determined and coherent answers .
We therefore appreciate the great gesture of solidarity several Italian regions , including those from the centre-right , have made to support Campania at this extremely serious time , helping it to restore the image it deserves in terms of the attractions of its culture and landscape , productive resources and talents .
This is not the moment for those who bear primary responsibility and are to blame for the entire policy to evade or deny it .
It is the moment to assume responsibility , which is why I appreciate the approach Commissioner Dimas took in his statement , a constructive approach that sees Europe as not just imposing sanctions , confining itself to sanctions , but as also helping a Member State to resolve a crisis .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the waste problem in Campania is no longer just a health and environmental disaster , but is becoming an economic and institutional whodunit .
While the judiciary will shed light , we hope , on the economic whodunit , we need further enlightenment as regards the institutional whodunit .
On 11 September 2007 , the Commission , in reply to a question from me , said it was concerned but hopeful that the urgent measures taken by the Italian authorities would help to resolve the situation and also said that it would take the measures set out in Article 226 of the Treaty if the investigation under way brought to light infringements of the law .
On 2 January 2008 , however , the Commission 's spokesperson said that infringement proceedings against Italy had been opened in June 2007 .
Where does the truth lie ?
In what was said in reply to me on 11 September or in what was said by the spokesperson ?
Why did the Commission make no mention of these infringement proceedings in its reply ?
The fact that some European political groups , close to the Prodi government , have come out against a joint resolution on the health and environmental disaster in Campania which should have concluded our debate opens up another whodunit .
When there are more coincidences than might normally be expected , it is highly likely that an interest is being defended , and when the political interest , however unconsciously , espouses other interests , which coincide , moreover , with those of the ' eco-mafias ' , the question is no longer one of left or right or merely of political incapacity .
We strongly suspect that the European institutions have been intentionally misled for reasons connected with partisan interests .
The high levels of dioxin in the area , the persisting illegality of the situation , the keenness for Parliament to abandon its responsibility for a joint resolution , are bound up with the political choices of the Italian Government , the Region of Campania and the Naples local authority which , coincidentally , come from the same political mould .
We call for urgent action by OLAF to monitor the use of the funds appropriated up to now and to ensure that future funds are correctly managed .
We call on the Commission to explain to Parliament , within thirty days from now , where the responsibility for this disgraceful and tragic emergency that is no longer regional , but national and European , lies , and to whom it can be attributed .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should very much like to thank Commissioner Dimas for the action that he has taken in recent weeks and months , action that many environmentalists would also like to see on other occasions , firm and visible action that is to be welcomed by all those working to defend Community legislation .
In my view , that has not always been the case , and I would point out that , as regards the application of Community legislation , a number of infringements have also been opened by his institution in previous years - especially during the term of the government preceding that in office today - which have unfortunately gone largely unheeded and which have in particular been treated as mere routine .
I should like to cite the infringements in respect of unauthorised waste dumps - of which there are over 4 000 - and a whole series of other questions connected with the definition of waste and so on .
All this led to the situation in which we find ourselves today .
Clearly , when a Member State and when a government which , at the time , had a majority of a hundred or so , failed to do more , as regards legislation on waste , than simply breach Community directives in its attempt to find loopholes , there is a much greater likelihood of maladministration , mismanagement , crime and a total lack of compliance .
I am therefore very grateful to the Commission for its action , and I hope that it will press on with its monitoring work , because I believe that that work will be necessary ; I also think that a shift away from crisis management is an absolute prerequisite if this situation is to be resolved .
I am also of the view that the question as to who is responsible is an important one .
There , I concur with those who say that the Commission should also introduce methods through which funds that have been spent and are to be spent can be monitored , because I believe that for us all as European and not just as Italian citizens , the issue of how funds can be used in a clear-cut way is an absolutely key question which concerns every one of us .
Nevertheless , I take the view that the Italian Government 's measures , especially those announced for the next three or four months , must be supported , although the rules of the game have to be clear and also have to be respected .
In my view , it would be very sad indeed to find ourselves in a situation where crisis is met with crisis , infringing the rules , because it is such infringements that have brought us to the point at which we now find ourselves .

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I agree with the substance of what Commissioner Dimas has said , reminding us all of our responsibilities and pointing us in the right direction ; he reminds us that the way in which the problems should be addressed is one of compliance with European rules , moving away from crisis management approaches which create new crises .
For that reason , this debate is important because it can and must help us to try to resolve the appalling waste problems facing Naples and Campania .
What is urgent is not so much political polemics , but the removal of the waste which creates hazardous conditions for local residents .
The government is taking steps to do so , but an effective solution will then need to be found and it will be vital for that solution to be based on European rules .
European rules , as the Commissioner has pointed out , are clear , have been consolidated over many years and are confirmed in the new framework directive which we are discussing .
When tackling the issue of waste there is a hierarchy , and according to that hierarchy , reduction comes first , followed by separate collection , then re-use and recycling , and disposal only as a last resort , where it is absolutely necessary .
Italy is trying too hard to stay within these guidelines and in Naples and Campania the situation has worsened .
However , there are problems elsewhere as well , as can be seen from the infringements : too many instances of the authorities sending in special commissioners , too much confusion between the regulations on waste and on energy , leading to unacceptable practices , for instance the practice under which the energy produced from waste has for years been considered in Italy as renewable energy with enormous incentives - EUR 30 billion over ten years , under a measure known as CIP 6 - which have seriously distorted both energy policies and waste policies and have also led to somewhat paradoxical situations where , for instance , there are seven million tonnes of waste fuel pellets in Campania which , even if the incinerator which should dispose of them were to open , could not be burnt in it .
Too many derogations from European environmental laws .
I cannot say too often that the crisis has brought about new crises .
We must now bring the situation into line with the rules , and I truly believe that the government is keen to do so , and those rules are European rules , from assessment of environmental impact to the hierarchy of waste .
For that reason , today 's debate cannot be a platform for polemics , but an opportunity for dialogue with the Commissioner to promote such a relationship between Europe and the Member States .
I repeat : first the hierarchy , so that jointly agreed rules can be applied in the best possible way .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , what right does the Italian left , egged on by the European left , have to make us talk about the disgraceful waste crisis in Campania for which the centre-left has been responsible for decades without voting on it .
The same left that is inflicting global warming on us and cannot be bothered to ensure a high-quality environment and a decent life for millions of residents of Campania ; to top it all , I have heard talk of a national interest to be defended !
It is those same supporters of the national interest that a couple of years ago brought Italy , its government and the forces of order into disrepute with the debate and vote on the legendary Lampedusa case .
I hope at least that this House becomes more aware and better informed about a question which is not just Italian , and unreservedly condemns what is happening by voting in line with my request , as head of Azione della Fiamma as well , to apply all possible sanctions against the regional and the national government which , although responsible , seem utterly incapable of resolving this long-standing issue and are failing to take the dignified route of resignation .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the situation in Naples is serious largely because time has been wasted rather than trying to do something about the guilty verdict handed down by Court of Justice and thus ensuring that waste is managed in line with European legislation , something which we greatly regret .
If we want to prevent the crisis in Campania from spreading to other regions , action has to be taken by applying the European rules , building waste to energy plant - despite the barely credible resistance from some pseudo-environmentalists such as Minister Pecoraro Scanio - and promoting separate collection .
Campania does not , however , mirror the whole of Italy , and fortunately many regions such as Lombardy have made considerable progress and have set up efficient waste collection and disposal systems .
In other regions , however , there is much cause for concern .
The public is worried ; and that is certainly true in Rome and Lazio .
Some figures : quantities of waste are greater than in Naples and Campania ; 4 500 tonnes of refuse are collected every day in Rome in comparison with 1 000 in Naples , with a figure of 450 kg per capita in Campania in comparison with 617 kg in Lazio , well above the national average of 539 kg for an Italian .
All this is contained in a question which we have just tabled with Rome 's other elected parliamentarians .
However , the regional waste plan has never got off the ground and two infringement procedures have already been opened .
Alarmed residents are putting their trust in the European institutions , especially Parliament and the Commission .
For that reason , Commissioner , we entreat you to ensure , at the meeting of 28 January , that the Commission obtains data and information on the situation in Rome and Lazio , giving prior notice of an inspection , we hope by Commissioner Dimas , and also proposing an inspection by a delegation from this Parliament , to assess whether the measures for 2008 , I am concluding , are adequate .
Action has to be taken , Commissioner , before it is too late .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , never mind , Mr President , it is not the first time .
Commissioner , on 28 January , when , as has been pointed out , you will be in Rome for discussions with our government , it is essential for Italy - and I believe for Europe - for the Commission to take a very harsh stance in support of the workings of European justice .
You have pointed out , I remember , that Italy holds a record : that of judgments against that pile of rubbish that is Italian justice , with twenty years of futile reprimands .
There is only one problem : we have a torrent of illegality which necessarily means lives destroyed and even worse destruction , not just in Italy , and what I therefore hope , Commissioner , is that the Commission will bear in mind that there we have the proof that Italy , as in the 1920s , is taking a new and different path , is becoming a threat to the whole of our Europe , that country which ( ... ) .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the current waste crisis in Campania is a tragedy that has long been coming , and those mountains of refuse that can be seen in the streets are only the tip of an iceberg made up of inefficiency , waste and mismanagement .
We are unhappy that this crisis is damaging the reputation not just of the Region of Campania but of Italy as a whole , but keeping quiet again about who is responsible and turning a blind eye would do little to resolve a problem which has worsened because of silence and intrigue , and although people should not used as political pawns , nor do I think that the do-gooder attitude that is also creeping round this House this evening is acceptable either .
We can no longer stay silent or justify , and neither did the Court of Auditors , the fact that millions of euro , of European , national and local funds have gone up in smoke .
To whom should people turn for compensation for the damages caused by this environmental disaster , for the tarnished image and for the waste of public resources ?
In particular , what action does the Commission intend to take actively to force the Italian State to take adequate measures , bearing in mind that the children of Naples and Campania have not gone to school today either ?
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank the Commissioner for his lucid analysis .
In Naples , and in large parts of Campania , the waste situation has now deteriorated and the consequences can be seen by all , but there are problems in other areas as well , as can be seen from the number of infringement procedures that Italy has collected in the environmental field in recent years .
Among these , I should like to cite the notorious CIP6 under which the energy produced from waste has been considered to be renewable energy with the result that enormous incentives have been diverted away from policies to develop renewable energies and handed out to the powerful industrial lobbies , leading to serious waste management problems .
What is making the situation in Campania even more dramatic are the 14 years of intrigue and irresponsibility culminating in the first proceedings against businesses and representatives of the public institutions , and ultimately the proceedings against Impregilo at the European Court , for environmental disaster .
If the crisis is to be resolved there has to be a new style of government of the area : no more derogations , but applications of European laws .
Europe has set a clear-cut hierarchy in the new framework directive on waste .
Disposal is to be used only as a last resort and comes after separate collection , recycling and so on .
Now , however , we have to find a way out of a situation which may well be reaching a point of no return in Campania , and it is for that reason that we need to mobilise all the available resources and call upon the solidarity of the Italian regions and on aid from the EU so that immediate action can be taken in the next three or four months to eliminate the dangers faced by residents and to return Naples to Europe .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , from Padania the situation in Campania seems like science fiction , from a Padania where separate collections are made , where taxes on waste are paid .
The fact that the left in government in our country , with a green environment minister , moreover , has to put the former chief of police in charge of waste , seems like something from another world .
We tell you plainly that Campania is no longer in the European legal space , dominated as it is by a shameful connection between politics and the Camorra which we have long denounced .
Commissioner , no more funding , suspend all funding , do not send a further cent to the Camorra , to the criminals .
Take the hard-working and honest North as an example !
Free the honest people of Campania from the thrall of the Camorra , in which various parties are caught up !
We want nothing to do with this , we are against this domination of politics by the mafia .
Federalism is what our country needs , if these people are to be helped !
There has to be change , the situation has to change !
Free those honest working people of the South from the yoke of the mafia !
That is what honest Padania has to say !
( The President cut off the speaker )
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I consider that Italy has no wish whatsoever to abide by what are European laws .
This is borne out by the fact that it was the only country whose government , with a green environment minister , abstained from the approval in Council of the common position on the recent waste directive .
I should like to ask a question , because over and above the disaster of a green minister who is utterly irresponsible and lacks any certainty about his actions , there has also been little interest in monitoring by the European Commission , because we received funds in 2000-2006 and the Regional Operational Programmes in Campania have obviously been implemented without the monitoring committee carrying out its tasks in full , otherwise it would have blocked funds which had had no effective impact in the area .
Perhaps it is unnecessary to point out who was President of the European Commission at that time and who is now Prime Minister of Italy , with a green minister ?
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , congratulations on this new form of democracy .
Firstly , congratulations on the Commissioner 's lucid analysis which we hope will be followed by concrete action , action in which Parliament - and we also call on the President of Parliament here - will also be involved , because the waste problem in Naples does not just have to do with the minutiae of disposal , the environment and any other matter , but , in our view , is becoming a national and European problem .
Some very short points : the amount of waste which is now being collected from the streets is well below the amount being put on the streets ; the measures that the government is taking are therefore completely inadequate .
The mass of waste , the overall quantity of waste grows by the hour , making the situation ever more dramatic .
Secondly , a political point .
Mr Pittella said that Parliament should not become a sounding board for national diatribes .
In this evening 's debate , the centre-left seems to be doing exactly that .
Let us take note of his comments .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have asked to speak because I am very concerned about the direction the debate is taking in Italy and to some extent here , and also about the information that is being given to citizens , because it now appears that a magic solution is the only way out of this crisis : force and militarisation , on the one hand , and incinerators , on the other .
The public is hoping , therefore , that someone will come in from outside to resolve this problem ; the information they are being given does not focus on the fact that there will be no solution unless waste is reduced and sorted and civic behaviour changes .
That is the responsibility of the local authorities because they thought that the problems could be solved by delegating them to a firm called Impregilo .
They have passed the buck and have connived with and are in the thrall of that power .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , waste to energy units are operational in Italy and the rest of Europe .
Separate collections are made in Italy and the rest of Europe .
Recycling takes place in Italy and the rest of Europe .
Only in Naples has this not been the case for at least the last 15 years , under the noses of all the institutions which should have acted : those institutions include Europe and the Commission .
I take the view that little has been done and more needs to be done , by the Commission as well , because the initiatives taken up to now , including in recent days , by the government are completely ineffectual and unfit for purpose .
Sending the chief of police to Naples for only four months will not resolve any problem unless Naples complies with all the European laws , and if the Italian Government is unable to make it comply , let the European Commission do so with all the instruments that it has available .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am of the view that harking back to the past is helpful only if the future is used to put an end to the problems that the past has caused .
This does not seem to be happening , however , because here , as is usual , the cut and thrust of politics means that everyone is taking the position that best suits them .
My view is that the only serious step we can take is to ask the Commissioner to insist that the real problem is finally resolved , i.e. the problem of separate collection , with instruments that enable it , rewards for those who carry it out and an extraordinary plan for the collection of board and other materials .
CONAI , the body which brings together producers and users of packaging , which is responsible for re-use of material other than wet waste , ends up by collecting the price in the South and then paying it to the North , which as usual profits from the situation to drain funds from the South and send them to the North .
Let there be an end to it !
We therefore ask the Commissioner , whose initiatives we greatly appreciate , to insist that the special commissioners in Campania do not hark back to the past , but once and for all look to the future .

( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am an elected member of a political group which , when it was in government in Italy , before the current government , had to deploy the police force before it could start building normal waste disposal units in Campania , urgent works , which were at that time obstructed by opponents , Mrs Frassoni , who are now ministers in the government of Romano Prodi .
Mr Prodi 's recent statements on the waste crisis in Campania bear witness to the total collapse of the government which he leads .
Naples offers proof of a State which does not guarantee the law and tolerates a situation which is hazardous for the health of citizens , damaging for tourism and for Italy 's image and therefore for the Italian economy and Italian exports .
The severe problems being faced by the people of Campania are nevertheless limited to only one of Italy 's twenty regions , and political and administrative responsibility can be readily attributed to certain administrators , and we therefore call for their resignation .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all I should like to clarify that the responsibility for implementing Community law correctly lies primarily with the Member States .
The Commission has no powers under the Treaty to substitute Member States ' authorities in their planning activities and in their decisions , for example on whether or not to construct waste-disposal installations and where those installations will be .
The role of the Commission is that of monitoring the application of Community law .
Where this is not satisfactory , as in the current case , the Commission can launch infringement procedures , but the solutions must always be found and put in place by the Member States .
We are concerned that the waste situation in Campania is worsening , despite the actions taken by the Italian authorities in 2007 .
It is essential that the Italian authorities , besides taking immediate measures to tackle the current crisis , intensify their efforts for putting in place a structure enabling the Campania region to ensure long-term sustainable waste management that is fully in line with European waste legislation .
I am convinced that , this time , crisis management must lead to a real turnaround in waste management policy in order to avoid further risks to human health and the environment .
Therefore , any action to be taken for the future will have to lead to an effectively implemented strategy focusing not only on establishing a sufficient network of waste-treatment facilities .
It is of equal importance to provide the necessary structures for separate waste collection , recycling and the avoidance of waste , fully respecting the waste hierarchy within which the dumping of waste remains the least-desired option .
Any new waste-management plan in that sense must not remain on paper , as we have seen in the past , but needs to be strictly implemented .
The present waste disaster could be taken as an opportunity to demonstrate Italy 's capacity of turning the Campania region into a best practice example of proper waste management , and other Italian regions , such as the area of Milan , have shown that this is possible .
The Commission , as the guardian of the Treaty , will continue the infringement procedure against Italy - started in June 2007 - for a breach of Community waste legislation .
It is ready to take further legal steps , should the current breaches of Community legislation continue , using all available measures under the Treaty , including the possibility of imposing fines under Article 220 of the Treaty .
Apart from this , however , my services are ready to assist Italy in any manner deemed necessary and helpful for finding and implementing a long-term sustainable solution to the current waste-management problem .
( Applause )
The debate is closed .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time ( B6-0001 / 2008 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Commission .
Part one
Madam President , could you offer the House a little guidance , in view of the time , so that those of us who have tabled questions know exactly what the procedure will be ?
Will you be dividing the items up equally into three parts , or into two half-hour parts ?
I ask because those of us involved in a potential third part need to know what is likely to happen , given the time at which we are starting .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the main purpose of the Community 's legal provisions and political strategies in the pharmaceutical field is to ensure that patients are supplied with safe , effective , high-quality medicines that are affordable and universally available .
On more than one occasion in the past , the question of the safety of medicines marketed through what is known as pharmaceutical parallel trade has been raised .
That has prompted me to commission a study in order to get to the bottom of this issue ; the study is to examine all aspects of sales channels and , in particular , questions relating to counterfeit medicines and parallel trade .
The aim of the study is to analyse the present situation and to develop political options with a view to plugging gaps , if necessary by amending the current legal provisions .
The study will also examine potential links between pharmaceutical parallel trade and the appearance of counterfeit medicines .
Regrettably , I must tell you that the first part of the study , devoted to parallel trade , which has now been completed , shows that such trade poses considerable risks to patient safety .
Several factors are to blame , including mistakes in repackaging or relabelling , the limited effect of product recalls , the more complex distribution channels , supply interruptions and , finally , shortcomings in the enforcement of applicable legal provisions .
The Commission is currently analysing the findings of the study with a view to developing a coherent strategy for the elimination of these safety risks .
The various political options are being examined for their foreseeable social , economic and environmental impact .
Given the significant implications of this issue for public health policy , the Commission gives it high priority .
Decisions on where we go from here will be taken shortly .
I should also like to inform you that the European Pharmaceutical Forum offers a platform for easier adoption and sharing of good practices with regard to the pricing of medicines and reimbursement of the cost of medicines .
Although these matters fall within the purview of the Member States , the relevant measures still have to be consistent with Community law .
The work of the Pharmaceutical Forum , in which patient organisations , members of the medical profession and leading figures in the industry as well as the Ministers of Health of all the Member States are represented , can help to resolve the major issue of affordable access to safe medicines .
Thank you , Commissioner , for your response , which is clear but alarming , because obviously there are problems about safety .
I would like you to outline the timeframe which will apply to your response , because I think people are not generally aware how at risk they might be from counterfeit medicines .
And could I ask you - in writing , perhaps - to address an issue which is of concern in Ireland in relation to vaccines which were legitimate vaccines but which damaged children and for which people are still waiting for some form of compensation after 40 years ?
Perhaps you could write to me stating how other Member States are handling that contentious issue .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) I shall gladly do so .
In answer to your first question , let me say that I have already decided that parallel trade in counterfeit medicines will be treated as a matter of priority .
I have amended the workplan of the Directorate-General , and we shall be making legislative proposals during the current year .
I believe that can be done shortly after the summer recess .
As for your other question , I am grateful for your recognition that I cannot answer it without prior examination .
I shall have that examination carried out , and you will receive the requested written answer in the coming days .
- ( LT ) I would like to ask about prices .
In Germany , nasal drops cost 1.5-2 times less than the same medicine costs in Lithuania .
We take care to ensure that all countries , even the developing ones , have access to medicine .
Could we take care to ensure that our citizens , EU citizens , pay at least a similar price for the same medicine ?
Could we do anything here in Europe ?
( ES ) Madam President , health services form a recurring topic in European Parliament debates .
Each time we discuss the Services Directive there is a bid to include them in it , a bid which we have hitherto opposed , and health services have remained outside its scope .
The supply of medication is a health service .
There are some States , such as the Spanish State , which have an established group of sites - pharmacies - which are the only places where medicines may be dispensed .
I would like to ask the Commissioner whether , as part of the investigation carried out by the Commission , any differences have been noted between States where pharmacies are a restricted , monitored trade and the others , with regard to the counterfeiting of medicines and inferior quality .
Member of the Commission . - ( EL ) Madam President , the Commission has to date been managing the problem of carbon dioxide emissions due to its activities , through the Eco-Management and Audit Scheme , better known as EMAS , and has been complying with the rules of that scheme .
Since 2005 , the Commission has been enforcing EMAS in five of the departments in Brussels and in eight of its buildings .
During this time , it has recorded a clear reduction in the growth rate in consumption of , amongst other things , electricity by those departments , a development which is undoubtedly positive .
Overall CO2 emission reduction targets have not yet been set for the Commission , but within the framework of EMAS , the Commission is examining and analysing the total volume of its CO2 emissions , and will set overall emission reduction targets within the year 2008 .
In particular , as regards its vehicle fleet , the Commission has already set a target of reducing CO2 emissions by an average of 26 % between 2006 and 2012 .
The Commission will be making some major announcements on Wednesday , and I expect that people everywhere will be asking then whether we practise what we preach .
So to hear that only five DGs have currently signed up to EMAS is not very encouraging , although I cannot say that Parliament can claim to be much better .
It would certainly fail such a test , although action is now being taken to address the issue .
Does the Commissioner accept that his arguments in favour of the ' big picture changes ' that must be made by Member States if we are to tackle climate change could be undermined if the Commission is not seen to be acting on the fine detail - on its own implementation of these improvements ?
Member of the Commission . - Yes , I agree with you .
We should practise what we preach , and this is what we are going to do in 2008 .
I expect the Commission and its services will target a reduction in emissions to at least the same level as we are requesting of the Member States .
As you know , we have set a 30 % reduction target , provided that other developed countries follow , or a 20 % target if they do not sign up to an international agreement on reducing emissions .
We will set ourselves the 30 % target , and I expect that , in so doing , we will show by example that we mean what we are asking others to do .
By the way , we will have to conduct a study to determine the exact quantity of emissions from the Commission , before setting targets and a timetable , and also establishing an action plan to combat emissions .
( DE ) There is something I would be interested to know .
We have this 30 % reduction target imposed from the top down , and it does seem to be widely endorsed .
As you quite rightly said , others must follow suit if these targets are to be achieved .
My own question to you is this : do you yourself have a plan for achieving this 30 % reduction personally in your own sphere of activity ?
( DE ) As we know , the European Parliament has set a reduction target of 30 % by 2012 on the basis of EMAS , and we are keen to see what specific measures are adopted by the European Parliament and its decision-makers .
Commissioner , you said that the application of EMAS would mean less electricity consumption .
It would interest me to know what specific measures have been taken , what specific measures are planned for the coming years , and what role renewables are to play .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , the Commission is concerned about privacy and security problems in the information society , in particular when these put consumers at risk .
The use of spam , spyware and malicious software is in clear breach of the European privacy legislation , and in some cases it is even a criminal offence .
This is why we need vigorous enforcement by competent authorities .
Last December , Commissioner Reding ( whom I have the pleasure to replace here ) welcomed the fast and effective intervention by the Dutch regulator , which imposed a fine totalling EUR 1 million on three Dutch enterprises for illegally installing ' spyware ' and ' adware ' on more than 22 million computers in the Netherlands and elsewhere .
She has called upon other regulators to follow this example .
On 13 November 2007 the Commission adopted its proposals on the Telecom Reform , which include provisions that further strengthen the security and privacy regime underpinning the information society .
In relation to spam , the proposals introduced the possibility for internet service providers to take legal action against spammers .
This provision is expected to become an important tool in the fight against spam in Europe .
Also , the effectiveness of anti-spam enforcement will be strengthened by including this in the scope of the Regulation on Consumer Protection Cooperation , which provides for a network of public enforcement authorities throughout the Community and a minimum level of investigation and enforcement powers to apply this regulation effectively .
More generally , the proposals include the provision for customers of electronic communication services to be informed of possible actions that a service provider may take to address security threats , or in response to a security or integrity incident .
By introducing the concept of breach notifications , users of electronic communication services would be told about breaches of security when this has resulted in personal data being lost or compromised , and about precautions that they may take in order to minimise the economic loss or social harm that could result from a security breach .
To ensure compliance with these requirements , national regulatory authorities will be given the power to issue binding instructions to operators on the measures that are required to secure electronic communication networks and services and to oversee proper implementation .
The proposed European Electronic Communications Market Authority will have as one of its core tasks network and information security and will assist the Commission in implementing measures on a European level where appropriate .
Thank you , Commissioner , for that comprehensive answer .
I do not know what the digital equivalent of ' epidemic ' is , but following this Christmas season we now see an epidemic of this kind of behaviour . All the independent organisations have said that .
I do not want to belittle anything the Commission has done ; I think it has made this a priority .
What I would ask , though , is that examples like the Dutch example of encouraging prosecutions , encouraging ISPs to be free to go after these people - none of this , I feel , is coming back to consumers .
Is there something simple that the Commission can issue for MEPs , to tell our consumers what you are doing and how effectively this is being measured ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - I could not agree more .
I have already said that proposals are in place and are currently under consideration by Parliament and the Council .
I expect these to enter into force , and we will then have all the necessary requirements in place .
The current legal situation allows action to be taken against such violations , although this depends on the case .
In the case of a criminal offence , people can ask for the support of the police , or can take other legal action .
As I have already mentioned , the example set by the Dutch regulator OPTA has been welcomed by the Commission in a press release .
I have the full text here .
If you wish , I can hand it to you after Question Time so you can read what we have already done .

( EL ) Madam President , the Commissioner Mr Reding is absent , of course , but I am sure the Vice-President of the Commission , Mr Verheugen , has sufficient breadth of knowledge to answer my question on a supplementary matter : whether the Commission has evidence or clues linking the source of unsolicited e-mails - spam - to the companies offering services and products for protection against such unwanted intrusions .
I would like to connect the first question by Ms McGuinness on protecting consumers from counterfeit and sub-standard medicines with the question by Mr Moraes on protecting consumers against spam .
One of the huge problems I , like most others , have is the amount of medicines advertised in spam , along with all sorts of products that enhance all sorts of bits of the body which some of us do not even possess !
I wonder , with reference to the parallel market study you referred to , if there are any studies under way on the whole issue of the internet , spam and counterfeit medicines , and in particular on sub-standard medicines that offer no guarantee of safety or efficacy for consumers and patients everywhere .
There is horrific growth in that particular area .
Member of the Commission . - The first results of the product safety stocktaking were released on 22 November 2007 .
These indicate that the regulatory framework is fit for the purpose , if properly applied and when properly applied .
The Rapex system is working efficiently to ensure that dangerous products are recalled from the market throughout the European Union .
The stocktaking report nonetheless identifies scope for improvements , both in preventive actions and in international cooperation , such as enhanced enforcement .
Some envisaged improvements are already at an advanced stage towards becoming concrete actions , notably as concerns the revision of the Toy Safety Directive .
The Commission is also in the process of preparing a temporary measure requiring warnings on magnetic toys , pending revision of the standards , to address the risk those toys could pose .
The Commission is assisting the Member States ' market surveillance authorities to identify and share best practices with a view to improved controls .
In October 2007 , Member States reported on initiatives for better cooperation with economic operators and on specific surveillance campaigns on toys .
The Commission intends to publish comparative enforcement capacity data in the consumer scoreboard for 2008 , in what is a new and , I hope , very helpful initiative .
The Commission also continues to concretely reinforce the market surveillance capacity of the Member States by participating in the financing of well-designed joint market surveillance projects .
Those projects received EUR 1.3 million in Community funding in 2007 .
In addition to actions to improve protection within the EU , various actions are under way to strengthen protection at borders .
Recent major changes to EU customs legislation will assist in identifying high risk consignments for controls .
Secure customs exchange mechanisms will also enable rapid action to be taken when information becomes available on new types of dangerous products .
Information available in the Rapex system will be distributed using this mechanism , in order to alert the competent customs authorities of specific , potentially dangerous cargos .
The Commission also agrees that traceability is an issue for further improvements .
Statistics show that products of unknown origin notified through Rapex were , for the first time , down to 3 % in October 2007 , as compared to 17 % in 2006 .
The Commission is currently analysing , with the help of the Member States , how to ensure that this improvement is not only temporary , and how to make it sustainable .
The Commission has already included , in the legislation under the internal market for goods package , a provision requiring economic operators to have available the identity of their supplier .
This should be helpful for market surveillance intervention once that legislation enters into force .
The Commission has also asked what China could do about traceability , and welcomes the initiatives taken in China to require bar coding , at factory level , of certain categories of high risk products .
Finally , the Commission has highlighted the responsibility of the economic operators concerned , and welcomes the commitment from industry to work on measures to build consumer confidence , in particular through what we are calling a ' safety pact ' .
The Commission will also send experts to carry out a study of business safety measures in the supply chain , and will report further on this in the first quarter of 2008 .
( FR ) Thank you for your response , Commissioner : I am glad that the Commission intends to take a series of measures to reduce , in so far as possible , the risks associated with the circulation of imported toys , particularly those from China .
One important aspect here , which the Commission has highlighted , is the traceability of toys from producer to consumer - and you did refer briefly to that in your reply .
A major question remains unanswered , however .
In the event of hundreds of thousands of toys being withdrawn from the market , as happened last year , can you tell me please , Commissioner , what becomes of those toys ?
What proof do you have that they are removed absolutely from the market ?
I have heard reports - which prompted me to ask my question today - that they are being put back onto the market , for sale to other children .
All children , throughout the world , are entitled to benefit from the same approach on our part : I think none of us will argue with that .
Does the traceability system enable you to follow these toys all the way to their destruction ?
Member of the Commission . - I think that your question is absolutely valid and very humane .
We have to pursue our goal : these dangerous toys must not reach not just the European market , which is our duty , but any market , and we have some well-developed tools to help us .
We can conduct a market surveillance , we have controls and our Rapex system , which is a system through which we can get information through the market and not only when the dangerous goods are stopped at our borders .
However , what is also important for us as a global leader in the safety process is not to allow these dangerous goods - especially toys - to reach other children - in China as well .
It is not enough just to preach for the safety of European kids , which is part of our duty .
I have asked the main producers several times openly and clearly to destroy the toys and I have also invited them to the Commission in Brussels , where we discussed how to ensure that the toys are destroyed .
They all committed to this .
In particular , I urged Mattel , as the major industry with more recalls than any other , to comply , and it has agreed to this obligation .
It is not legally binding : I cannot make them destroy their factories .
But I think we are facing a time when the legislative framework is just a framework and there are things that are beyond and outside the framework .
We need to vigorously pursue measures that are above the absolutely necessary from a legislative point of view .
I had an opportunity to discuss this issue with UNICEF and the Americans during the TACD dialogue .
I am fully aware of your concerns and , believe me , I will not spare efforts to make it public and to pursue the goal of destroying these toys .
Nevertheless , I do not have a legislative base outside Europe .
( DE ) Commissioner , you have indicated that a great deal is being done to remove dangerous toys from the market .
That is an important step .
The fact is , however , that some of these products are being marketed here with generally recognised certification marks , including in some cases the familiar CE mark .
Under any rules of good practice , if a toy is not demonstrably safe or is actually dangerous , such labelling is not only abusive but downright fraudulent .
Is there scope to envisage criminal prosecution in such cases ?
Thank you , Commissioner , for your detailed response .
In relation to Ireland , one item purchased there over the Christmas period actually exploded , and the name of the manufacturer was not identifiable .
Is it possible to have legislation introduced in all countries to make it illegal to sell an item on which the manufacturer is not clearly identifiable ?
I think that is the way forward , and I would ask if that could be done .
Member of the Commission . - I know that this question is very important , and I would like to assure you that the Commission does not monitor shops during periods of higher consumption , nor does it collaborate with the national consumer organisations on this specific question .
So we very much rely on national efforts .
However , the Commission does intend to improve its tools for monitoring the functioning of the internal market from a consumer perspective .
The single market review set out the Commission 's plans for a consumer scoreboard and for more detailed price monitoring , but I would like especially to stress that this is about monitoring .
Published Eurostat data show that prices of milk , cheese and eggs in Greece are 38 % higher than the average prices of the same group for the European Union .
The average prices for this product group over the period 1996-2007 grew by almost 52 % in Greece and only by 24 % in the EU .
However , this development appears to be structural rather than seasonal .
Since 2005 the prices of dairy products for Greece do not appear to reveal seasonal fluctuations .
( EL ) Madam President , I would like to say thank you very much to the Commissioner , and thank you very much for the information .
I shall also consult Eurostat so that we can see the whole scoreboard , because it is significant , of course , and important for my country - which you have mentioned - but I believe there are similar situations in other countries and it would therefore be interesting to see how your Commission is going to handle this issue generally .
Either with a recommendation or with a Directive which will cover all products and not only consumables .
Member of the Commission . - The Commission is undertaking measures at different levels aimed at reducing increases in food prices .
One initiative is to begin monitoring prices , which I mentioned earlier .
This is one of the objectives of the consumer market scoreboard on which we are working and which I believe will be supported by the Commission pretty soon .
The Commission has also proposed a number of measures within the framework of agricultural policy . A reduction of obligatory set-aside land , already in force for the 2008 crop season ; an increase in milk quotas for the year 2008-2009 adopted by the Commission and proposed to the Council , if adopted , will be in force from 1 April 2008 onwards , and a reduction of import duties in the cereals sector to reduce increases in cereal prices and also in the future of the price of meat .
This measure came into force from the beginning of January 2008 .
This is a kind of inventory of what we have done .
But , through the consumer market scoreboard , one of the main topics of our investigations will be prices and part of this basket will be about food prices .
So we will duly inform you ; we will consult as to what the next step will be after the data monitoring and we can take action to see what is behind this - of course , hand in hand with the national authorities .
It is interesting that when food prices are rising , the Commission will act to look at it and I would urge the Commission to come up with statistics that show us the share-out of the final retail price between producer - and I mean farmers - and consumer , because that information is not available .
I think that it is also fair to say , on the record , that the era of relatively low food prices is over and that I think that the Commission should not fool people by saying that we are going to go back to lower food prices .
Perhaps what we need to do is to educate people about buying quality food at a fair price .
- ( LT ) Last summer , prices started rising in all EU Member States .
We then raised the question of whether there were any cartel agreements .
In my country , Lithuania , it was found that milk processing companies agreed on raising prices .
Now the meat sector is being scrutinised .
Are such studies carried out in other EU countries ?
Now a new term has appeared - ' the end of cheap food ' .
Don 't representatives of the food industry use this new term , and how can consumers protect themselves ?
Member of the Commission . - The price of food fluctuates because of the seasonal character of agricultural production .
Those fluctuations are not completely passed on to consumers because the cost of raw materials has , until recently , been decreasing and because of warehousing technologies catering for those seasonal shortages .
Recently , more systematic food price increases seem to be taking place , and the principal reason seems to be growing demand from emerging large economies , like China and India .
We have already discussed the fact that in India last year there were five million more people with a new diet that is based much more on milk , milk products and meat .
Last summer the situation worsened owing to adverse climatic conditions in many producing regions , and this has been the main reason for the exceptionally high increase in food prices in the European Union since September 2007 .
The Commission and the national competition authorities are carefully monitoring the market .
Anti-competitive practices have been discovered in the dairy sector in the United Kingdom and in Greece , and fines have been imposed on firms involved in those anti-competitive practices .
I feel that , if the Latvian national authorities have been informed , then they will be working on the case you mention , especially as it is high on the public agenda .
What we really need is a sectoral investigation to see whether there is any kind of cartel behind it , which has already happened in two EU countries .
Member of the Commission . - I would like to thank the Honourable Member for her interest in the single market review .
Alongside our Communication on the single market for 21st century Europe , we adopted a package of measures to improve the competitiveness and efficiency of retail financial services markets .
Integral to that package are initiatives to improve consumer confidence and empower them to seek out the best product for their individual needs .
Although the Commission focus on empowering consumers is not recent , current financial turbulence certainly highlights the importance of this matter .
I would like to address all three areas mentioned by the Honourable Member : education , inclusion and redress .
Financial education is best delivered as close as possible to the citizens that need it , namely at the level of national and regional authorities , non-governmental agencies and the financial services sector .
At the end of 2007 , we adopted a communication on financial education to raise awareness of the need to increase consumers ' level of financial literacy , promote the provision of high-quality financial education in the European Union and provide some practical tools to help achieve these goals .
It includes some principles to guide financial services providers and announces some practical initiatives .
These range from publishing an on-line database of financial education provision and research in the EU , to an enhancement of the existing Dolceta on-line educational tool to help teachers incorporate financial matters into the school curriculum .
Today , having a bank account is a prerequisite for being able to fully participate in social and economic life , and all EU citizens should have access to a basic bank account .
We are currently carrying out a study to identify and analyse policy measures taken by Member States to prevent financial exclusion .
Based on this information , which we hope to receive at the end of this month , we will reflect on how best to ensure that all EU citizens have access to a basic bank account .
Finally , when buying financial services , consumers need to know that in the event of a problem they can have easy access to redress .
While out-of-court dispute settlement bodies exist in many EU countries , not all of these are members of the Commission-run FIN-NET , the aim of which is to facilitate consumer access to redress in cross-border cases .
With this in mind , we are working to ensure that all existing out-of-court dispute resolution bodies are part of FIN-NET .
We are also reflecting more generally on how to encourage the creation of alternative redress systems where these do not already exist .
Those initiatives will not create confidence and empower consumers overnight , but they are a complement to the initiatives we are taking in other related areas , such as information and advice .
( DE ) I appreciate that Mr McCreevy has a tight schedule , but others have pressing engagements too .
I merely wanted to ask whether or not my question to Mrs Kuneva will still be heard , in other words whether I can go to my Group meeting now or whether I should wait here .
It is unlikely that we will get to your question .
It is regrettable that we are in the situation we are in .
Your question will almost certainly be answered in writing .
Commissioner , I want to ask you a little bit more about financial education , which is the new buzzword .
I think you will agree that there is a real imbalance in power between financial institutions and consumers , not least because , firstly , consumers need access to credit , and , secondly , regardless of the level of financial education , how many people are going to read the 25-page document that accompanies , for example , their insurance policy , and refer to it every year ?
You said that this issue needs to be addressed at local and regional level , but would you not agree there needs to be greater cooperation between the major stakeholders , such as financial regulators , governments , consumer organisations and financial complaints bodies so that , working together , they can highlight some of the problems and issues , and at least act as an early warning system for the consumer ?
Member of the Commission . - What we have been attempting to do here in financial education is to get this on the agenda and to make everybody aware , particularly in Member States , that it would probably be a better investment than in lots of other areas if , from a very early stage in the school curriculum , some basic financial literacy was taught .
Because , going through life , whether one ends up as the chief financial controller of a major institution or whether one has a very ordinary job in one 's local area , you are definitely going to encounter - at some stage you are going to have to deal with - some major financial transaction such as the buying of a car , a house , a washing machine or whatever .
I think that from an early stage it would be far better if people had a little bit taught to them in the school curriculum programme so that they would know some basic information .
What Ms Harkin was speaking about goes on to a higher level as to what type of information should be given to a consumer , because she is correct : the amount of information that is given to them and the 48 pages that they get to read in very small writing is there for the sole purpose , in my view ( and it has always been my view ) , of satisfying lawyers , so that if there is a case , they can charge bigger and bigger fees for telling you that you have either won or lost .
I have absolutely no faith in that at all .
Some of that particular area is directly under my own responsibility .
I often recall a particular case when I was in Scotland about two years or so ago , meeting with some of the financial educators who were talking about the Perspectives Directive in the UCITS area .
They said there were 81 pages in the Perspectives Directive and 78 pages in the simplified perspectives to do with a particular product .
So , in the Consumer Credit Directive , which I think is being dealt with at present in Parliament , Ms Kuneva will make some improvements as to what type of basic information consumers should be given .
Ms Kuneva is dealing with those particular aspects .
But in the whole area of financial education , the place where I have been trying to up the agenda is for Member States to include , from an early stage , some basic financial education as part of the core curriculum programme .
I think everybody would be far better off doing it like that than having pages and pages of small type that no one ever reads .
( DE ) Commissioner , I am sure you are right when you call for a start to be made at the level of school education in order to put consumers in a better position ( a ) to know their rights and ( b ) to exercise them .
The problem , however , is that we still have a generation , indeed more than one generation , of people who think differently , who have heard that financial services and the financial market are subject to particularly stringent government supervision and who act on that knowledge , believing they can rely on such government supervision .
In actual fact , much has changed in recent times as a result of market deregulation .
Are there not perhaps one or two things that can yet be done in the realm of state supervision ?
Madam President , could I suggest to the Commissioner that , not only does the information satisfy lawyers , but it bamboozles consumers ?
And that is why it is there .
Like a lot of information , it is like the instructions for the washing machine . We read it when it breaks down and it is too late .
Could I suggest you look at the role of credit unions in educating consumers , because I think that is an issue in Ireland in particular ?
And , can I gently remind you , as you mentioned redress , of the absolute lack of redress for Equitable Life policyholders .
I am sure that Ms Wallis will support me on this and perhaps in a quiet moment you might come back to us with a written response as to what has happened since our report was voted on and supported by you .
Member of the Commission . - The Commission does not keep consolidated records of the number of European investment firms or the number of investment firms in Greece .
However , Member States are required by MiFID to keep a record of all investment firms registered within their territory .
The Hellenic Capital Market Commission should therefore be able to supply the data for Greek companies .
With MiFID , the trading monopolies for exchanges have been abolished , investment firms have better access to providing their services across the European Economic Area using the MiFID passport and consumer protection has been strengthened .
This leads to increased competition across borders and between trading venues , which will in turn increase liquidity and the depth of the financial markets , for the benefit of both the industry and consumers .
Our expectation that cost of capital would decline is based on a rigorous study carried out by London Economics in 2002 .
This study modelled the impact of financial integration , of which MiFID is the cornerstone , in terms of its impact on the then EU-15 .
The main conclusions from the study were that financial integration would lead to a reduction in the cost of equity capital of an average of 50 basis points across the Member States , and a reduction in the cost of market debt for non-financial issuers of 40 basis points .
The study estimated that the combined effects of financial market integration to the EU economy would result in the following : an increase of EU-wide real GDP of 1.1 % in the long run ; an increase of 6 % of the total business investment ; an increase in private consumption of 0.8 % ; and an increase of 0.5 % in total employment .
Figures compiled informally by the Committee of European Securities Regulators in the run-up to the implementation of MiFID suggest that only very limited numbers of firms were at that time making use of the passport for investment services under the then Investment Services Directive into or out of Greece .
We expect this to change in the future as Greek markets open up as a result of MiFID , and as Greek firms see more opportunities in other Member States .
The Federation of European Securities Exchanges keeps statistics on foreign equity trading , as well as on the percentage of shares owned by investors .
As of December 2005 , 41 % of the shares traded on the Athens exchange were held by foreign investors .
In November 2007 , the foreign equity trading turnover on the Athens exchange was EUR 970 million .
( EL ) Madam President , I thank the Commissioner for his answer , and I would like to ask in addition whether the Commission has data on the volume of credit intermediation in the European Union , and specifically what percentage of the European GDP this credit intermediation represents .
Member of the Commission . - The Commission sent a letter of formal notice to the Irish authorities following a complaint on 29 June 2007 .
This letter requested information on restrictive conditions set out in a number of Irish county development plans .
The Commission raised questions regarding the compatibility of certain requirements to obtain building permission with two principles of the Treaty , namely the freedom of establishment and the free movement of capital .
Indirectly , such restrictions could also affect the free movement of workers , but this issue was not raised .
Following an agreed extension of one month to respond , the Irish authorities sent their response at the end of September .
My services have been examining its content and are planning to contact the Irish authorities in order to hold a meeting at a technical level to further clarify and discuss the position of the Irish authorities .
Following these discussions , the Commission will be in a position to assess whether or not there are grounds to pursue this infringement procedure .
The response from the Irish Government was lodged on 28 September 2007 .
I understand that the response has not been made public .
This is a very important issue which affects 22 local authorities in Ireland .
I am just wondering if the response can be released at this stage now that it is before the Commission and it has had time to consider it ?
Maybe the Commissioner might outline the timescale when a decision will be made by the Commission on this matter .
Member of the Commission . - It is not our practice to make responses available to the public , but then again those responses often end up in the public domain .
I can confirm that we received a response on 28 September 2007 , as the Honourable Member has stated .
As I said in my reply , we intend to have a meeting with the Irish authorities about this matter .
We will see how we proceed from there .
I should point out , also , that Ireland is not the only Member State where there are difficulties like this .
My services are hoping to meet the Irish authorities in the very near future , and we will then have to consider what they say and take further steps , if these are required .
I should just like to ask the Commissioner - with regard to the rule of subsidiarity , and in particular the issue of planning permission - is this an area that the Commission should be involved in , when the operation of planning and the right to build a property is separate from the right to own property and exploit that property ?
Member of the Commission . - On 17 November , the Commission sent a reasoned opinion requesting that Ireland abolish the exemption in place for the Irish Voluntary Health Insurance ( VHI ) from certain EU rules .
These rules , notably the first non-life insurance directive of 1973 , as subsequently amended , aim at harmonising certain requirements for the commencement and conduct of direct non-life insurance business , and therefore also pertain to private health insurance .
The first non-life insurance directive exempted the VHI , among other institutions , from its rules .
However , this exemption is applicable only as long as the capacity of the exempted institution is not in any way amended by a change of its statutes or by any change in the relevant national law .
Accordingly , upon extension or change of capacity , the institution becomes subject to the full set of rules of Community law which otherwise apply to non-life insurance .
These rules , for example , require insurance undertakings to seek official authorisation before taking up their business ; to adopt a certain legal form ; and to establish adequate protective provisions which have to be sufficiently matched by the undertaking 's assets in order to retain an adequate solvency margin .
One of the main objectives of these provisions is to protect the rights of those who have subscribed to an insurance policy , thereby making sure that the exercise of freedom to provide services is not to the detriment of consumer protection .
In addition , these rules guarantee a level playing field between insurers .
Given its initial exemption from the first directive , and as long as its capacity remained unchanged , the VHI did not have to comply with these rules .
The Commission , however , takes the view that the VHI 's capacity has indeed changed .
Several amendments to the relevant Irish law in 1996 , 1998 and 2001 extended the VHI 's scope of business far beyond what it was when the VHI 's exemption was first granted .
Therefore , VHI 's initial exemption from the EU 's rules for insurers is no longer applicable .
The Commission expressed this view in the reasoned opinion that was sent to Ireland on 14 November .
It has asked Ireland to take , within two months , the necessary steps to subject the VHI to those supervisory and prudential rules of Community law for which it formerly enjoyed the exemption .
The Commission considers that this reasoned opinion is a decisive step towards putting all competitors in the Irish private health insurance market on an equal footing under European insurance legislation .
This serves the interests of policyholders as well as of fair competition .
The Commission will closely monitor the steps taken by the Irish Government and will , failing appropriate action , pursue legal proceedings before the European Court of Justice .
Madam President , may I thank the Commissioner for taking the question .
Could I ask him if he has any indication of the timescale involved in obtaining a reply from the Irish Government in relation to the VHI in particular ?
Could I ask him whether this will have any implications for equalisation ?
The VHI continues to dominate 75 % of the market in Ireland , but they claim that they need risk equalisation to protect them from being left holding all the older , and therefore higher-liability , clients .
Will the issue raised by the Commissioner have any implications for equalisation ?
Member of the Commission . - The Commission uses all the instruments available to ensure the effective enforcement of consumer rights across Europe .
A new consumer-enforcement network was established at the end of 2006 in the regulation on consumer protection cooperation .
It provides a framework for joint market surveillance and enforcement exercises , such as the sweep on air ticket sales sites , carried out in September 2007 .
That was the first ever exercise of its type .
The Commission coordinated this exercise , and provided the results of the first phase of the investigation in November 2007 .
At this stage , the disclosure of the names of the sites on which certain irregularities were detected , as suggested by the honourable Member , would be premature and would not respect the legal framework in certain Member States .
I quite understand your impatience , because we would all like to get things done , and in the right way .
However , the right of reply , which means the right to defend oneself , is recognised across the EU Member States .
It is the competence of the national authorities and courts to apply that right , and we are awaiting the outcome of court decisions in some countries .
The Commission will , therefore , present the outcome of the investigations and enforcement actions presently ongoing in the Member States once those proceedings have been completed .
I have held talks with the authorities on the basis of the consumer enforcement network , and they are committed to going further and to providing this data , but court procedures - in at least two countries - prevent us from having a full picture and from announcing it publicly .
I think last July we all applauded the Degutis report when at last we said we were going to have transparency in relation to charging , that all taxes and fees levied would be upfront in all advertisements .
And then we read , in The European Voice on 31 October : ' Air ticket sites faced EU shame : Commission threatens to reveal the names of the hundreds of websites which allegedly mislead consumers ' .
I am at a loss to know why these big commercial operations are not named , why they are not shamed .
They continue to flout the rules and regulations and the undertaking .
They continue to mislead the consumer .
Last week , for example , Ryanair - give them credit for what they have done - published this in all Irish newspapers : ' Buy one flight , get a second absolutely free .
Pay no fees , taxes , levies or charges ' . So I booked my flight , and it cost me EUR 153 .
And then the one that was supposed to be free is as follows : credit card fee : EUR 12 ; taxes , fees and charges : EUR 39.96 ; insurance : EUR 14 .
Total price : free flight EUR 67 .
What more evidence do you want ?
Member of the Commission . - Cases like this one were the main reason to step up and to have this enforcement action .
But I must reiterate : in many Member States it is only possible to publish the names of the airlines after the investigations and enforcement actions are finished .
Since cases differ , the time needed to deal with them can take longer in some cases than in others .
Currently the Commission is discussing with Member States how much time is needed to finish these actions and the Commission will publish - I already have this commitment - these names as soon as it is legally possible , otherwise the Commission could be sued .
If Member States can close the cases as originally foreseen , the names can be published in the coming months .
Initially I thought that we would be able to do it in February , but after more detailed discussions , comparing the legal system and how much time it takes from the legal point of view , I believe there may be a delay of one and a half months .
But I think that you are absolutely right and , if you allow me , I will use your case as one more reason for the need to step up .
We have , since the beginning of this year , unfair commercial practices and while trying not to go too much into cases , I think this is a good example of a breach of the unfair commercial practices legislation as well .
( EL ) Madam President , Madam Commissioner , I was one of the first , if not the first , to ask this question before the November issue came up , and before the announcement .
In your answer , you told me that within reasonable time , about two months , we would have the names or the results of your research .
Afterwards , in an interview you gave , I saw that you said four months .
Also , when the name of Ryan was announced , or rather appeared in the newspapers - as our colleague Mr Higgins has quite rightly said - as one of the companies , and according to your research there are 433 airlines and tourist agencies which have this kind of low-priced ticket , finally Ryan said it was not the only one .
Some other large , well-known companies used their name , which I would not like to use in Parliament , and you closed your eyes to this issue .
I therefore think it is advisable that you should give the names soon , so that public opinion , and competition among companies , large or small , can be allowed to cool down .
Member of the Commission . - I will not deny that I have drawn inspiration from Parliament and its Members many times , so I am glad that in this case it is regarding the specific investigation on air tickets .
We actually picked air tickets for our first sweep quite deliberately .
I do not want to sound defensive .
I am doing what I am required by law .
I have taken the advice of the Commission 's Legal Services and can go further before the Court procedures are over in certain Member States .
If the procedure in one Member State takes four months , I cannot do anything .
Acting before that procedure is concluded would be in breach of national legislation , and would endanger the reputation of the Commission .
That is why I am waiting until these procedures are completed before the names are published .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
I should like to thank Commissioner Kuneva for waiting .
That concludes Question Time .
Madam President , I apologise to you , and to the interpreters for delaying them further .
I just wish to place on the record my objection to the way that Question Time again has been messed around .
Those of us who use it as a political tool to try and get answers from the institutions are left without any words as regards how badly we are treated as Members of this House .
I will be raising this matter at the Conference of Presidents , but I hope that the Bureau will take it on board as well and try and make sure the working of the Chamber on a day-to-day basis does not encroach every single time on our Question Time .
Thank you , Mr Crowley .
I think you will be aware that today has been a difficult day for one reason and another .
We have had almost an hour and a half , and we have done our best to accommodate everybody 's wishes .
As you will know , we are also hoping to improve matters with the reform working group , but thank you for your comments , and thank you to our interpreters .
( The sitting was suspended at 19.45 and resumed at 21.00 )

Adult learning : It is never too late to learn ( debate )
The next item is the report by Doris Pack , on behalf of the Committee on Culture and Education , on adult learning : it is never too late to learn .


rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , the title of the Commission 's communication and action plan on adult learning , ' It is never too late to learn ' , and its German title , Man lernt nie aus ( ' You live and learn ' ) , are both universally familiar sayings , but when you read between the lines in the present context , they actually imply an acknowledgement of past omissions in the field of European education policy .
None the less , we are pleased that the Commission , with this communication and this action plan , is entering an age marked by growing awareness of the need for lifelong learning , an age in which new demographic challenges must be faced .
Economic and social changes in the EU require significant adjustments to vocational skills and qualifications .
The challenges of the labour market must be met , by which I mean that the employability of individuals must be one of the foremost aims of adult education .
Education , however , and especially adult education , is also a factor in people 's personal development , in their self-esteem , their civic involvement , their social inclusion and their engagement in intercultural dialogue .
Several sets of research findings have shown that learning has important non-economic benefits such as promoting good health , fostering participation in the life of society among all age groups and , of course , reducing crime rates .
It is therefore my political priority to increase people 's motivation to engage in lifelong learning .
Media campaigns , information and advice centres and adapted forms of communication for disadvantaged groups are very important .
Special phone numbers and websites have also proved highly successful in some countries .
In this context , great importance also attaches to efforts to reconcile work , family life and lifelong learning .
Let me list in shorthand just a few means to this end : adaptation of working hours , flexitime , distance-learning programmes and informal learning paths .
The use of new technology must be constantly perfected , especially through the creation of wider Internet access to encourage recourse to such new learning methods .
There must be continued growth in the number of public and private day nurseries and company crèches .
Another important factor , in my view , is solidarity between generations and between cultures .
Adults and senior citizens who pass on knowledge and technical know-how to younger people , particularly expertise in a trade or in business practice , can play an effective supporting role .
They can provide practical guidance , and there must also be scope to form networks for this purpose . In this way , I believe , each can learn from the other .
There is also , however , a family-based approach to learning .
Parents are motivated to start learning again in order to help their children at school .
In addition , adult education also depends on voluntary helpers , who enrich it by lending their experience and providing skilled instruction .
The special needs of migrants must also be taken into account , which brings me to the subject of language courses .
We need these language courses to enable migrants to learn the language of their host country , but we also need language courses to enable adults to learn the language of a neighbouring country or another foreign language , which is something we have always advocated .
Access to institutions of higher education must also be made easier for adults with practical vocational experience .
One very important message is that the quality of existing adult-education centres and the education they offer should be improved .
There is a need for well-qualified trainers in adult education as well as specific programmes of courses in adult education .
I can only speak for Germany , where there is a university course that leads to a degree in adult education .
I believe we must all remind course providers that they can obtain funding for their proposed courses from the European Social Fund , for example , or from any of the structural funds .
I naturally expect the Commission to offer the present Lifelong Learning programme in both the Grundvig and Leonardo programmes in order to ensure that we too can do our bit to launch the action plan .
I believe there many ways of performing good work in this field , and we should waste no time in doing so .
Let me stress one final point : performance in adult education must be made measurable , otherwise no one will know who is doing what .
There are very many players in this field , and they must all be taken into account , be they private , university-based or public educational establishments .
There is , in short , a great deal to be done , and I suggest we get down to work .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would very much like to show my appreciation of this report and to congratulate the rapporteur , Ms Pack for her commitment , efforts and contributions and also Mr Andersson from the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and Ms Flasarová from the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality .
I am very pleased that our two communications from 2006 and 2007 received a very concrete and strong response from the European Parliament .
The first was on adult learning and the second , on the European action plan on this matter , adopted in September .
As you have recognised , the importance of adult learning is clearly increasing .
First of all , global competition is a reality .
We need to invest in education at all stages of life and at all levels , and the skills and competences of adults need to be continuously upgraded .
Secondly , demographic changes mean that people need to work at least some years longer and they need to maintain the relevance of their skills to do this .
Thirdly , adult learning helps to combat social exclusion .
Too many adults with low education levels risk being excluded from the labour market .
So adult learning has a vital role in lifelong learning strategies .
I welcome your support for many reasons , particularly for improving the quality and accessibility of adult learning , including through better childcare and e-learning , and in particular for groups with special needs , as well as for speeding up the assessment of skills and valuing informal learning , for investing more in general and also for adapting to the needs of women , migrants and the ageing population .
Last but not least , for developing reliable and comparable data to measure adult learning , as Ms Pack mentioned .
We will follow up all these elements in implementing the European action plan .
As you suggest , these are all kinds of good practices in the Member States which we will use in our cooperation .
We will support these best practices via peer learning activities and studies , through the Lifelong Learning Programme and the European Social Fund mentioned earlier , in order to share knowledge and experience .
In implementing the action plan with the cooperation of Member States , we will analyse the effect of national reforms on adult learning , especially in the light of the recently adopted European Qualifications Framework .
We will also develop standards for adult learning professionals and quality assurance mechanisms based on existing good practice .
We want to encourage Member States to set targets for increasing the skill levels of adults and to speed up the process of assessing and recognising non-formal and informal learning for groups at risk .
Last but not least , we will propose a set of core data to improve monitoring of the sector .
I look forward to the debate but in particular to continuous support in this direction .
rapporteur for an opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs . - ( SV ) Mr President , Commissioner , I thank the rapporteur for an excellent report .
It follows from the entire strategy that we have in the EU and the entire Lisbon process that training should be the key , not just to ensuring growth and employment in the future , but also to combating social exclusion .
For the EU countries to hold their own in global competition , training and , not just more jobs , but better jobs , as well as people with a high level of skills , play a vital role .
We therefore welcome this report .
I have a few more comments to make .
It is important that we make use of all the resources available in order to facilitate training for different groups .
An example of these is childcare .
It must be possible for both men and women who are the parents of young children to take part in training .
Hence there must also be a strategy for childcare .
It is important that we look at special groups , for example the elderly .
There are very few elderly people in the workforce today .
This is to a large extent due to the fact that they do not have access to continuing training and adult education .
We must concentrate on that group .
Another group are people starting with a low level of education .
If we consider the training situation today , looking at continuing training and adult education , we notice that it is those who are already well educated who get the most training .
It is important that we have an equality aspect in training as well .
Since my speaking time is short , I will merely point out in conclusion that it is important to have good cooperation and to include the social partners in this process .
draftsman of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the report by my colleague Mrs Pack and I congratulate her on the way in which she has dealt with the topic .
I would like to stress the need to pay attention to the education of women , the socially vulnerable , immigrants and minorities .
I would like to mention one other aspect of education .
In a world where most things are subordinate to finances , trade , advertising , careers and competition in the labour market , education often appears to be merely a stepping stone to a better social position .
If education achieves this practical aim and makes a person better prepared for work , and if that person can keep up with the competitive environment , that is certainly a good thing .
However , the most important aspect of education is that it makes a person richer on the inside and better equipped to distinguish good from bad .
Society is experiencing a crisis of values .
Instead of traditions and authorities , we have the individual freedom for which we have been striving throughout our modern history .
However , it is also the freedom to know or not to know , the freedom to see and the freedom to keep one 's eyes closed , the freedom to form one 's own opinions and the freedom to accept the ideas of others .
Education on its own will not solve our problems , but it can encourage us to think about them .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
Commissioner , the European demographical situation makes it necessary to reorganise pension systems and raise the age limit , and we are hearing more and more about controlled immigration instead of realising the hidden potential of our own over-50s .
Well organised adult education enables experts who have worked for several decades to refresh their knowledge and adapt to the changed circumstances .
It also enables adults who are excluded from the labour market but not of retirement age to be engaged and undertake work , through retraining , language , IT and other professional training .
This function of adult education is particularly topical in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , where the employment indices fall well behind the average for the EU-15 .
In addition to its bearing on the labour market , adult education also has a third , social and personal dimension , since Internet language courses , dancing classes or cookery courses organised for elderly people contribute to improving their quality of life and to their positive frame of mind .
There are two things that I consider to be particularly important for effective adult education : on the one hand , improvements to information and access , the presentation of successful projects and the sharing of experiences with those concerned .
Let us not forget that a tiny proportion of elderly people in the new Member States use the Internet , and we must use conservative , traditional methods that they can access .
A prominent role in this falls to local governments , who have detailed knowledge of the local conditions and needs .
On the other hand , assessing needs is an important task , that is to say , Member States should reach agreement with economic players , businesses and employers when designing their adult education programmes .
The economic needs of the country in question must be taken into account so that the amount spent on adult education is not money needlessly squandered , but bears demonstrable value to the individual , to society and to the economy .
I would like to congratulate Mrs Pack on her important and timely report . Thank you for your attention .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Pack , on an excellent piece of work and on her cooperative attitude towards our suggestions .
I wish to highlight the opportune timing of this report at a time when the scale of socioeconomic changes , the rapid transition towards an information society and the demographic trend associated with an ageing European population all require significant effort in the education and training of adults and lifelong learning .
They are key aspects of attaining what we refer to as the objectives of the Lisbon Strategy .
In the report itself I would like to draw attention to the need to foster motivation in people to continue learning .
I believe , however , that to be effective , this should be accompanied by active policies which above all help to make learning compatible with family and working life , particularly for women .
These measures should take the form of incentives for going on training programmes and more particularly for broadening public childcare and education services , as well as care for the elderly , in short for dependants , so as to release families from burdens which in many cases still fall on women .
Moreover , I am convinced that it is appropriate to foster a learning culture which acknowledges merit and improves the employment prospects of poorly qualified people , helps increase social inclusion and personal development .
This approach is particularly important for ' at risk ' groups .
I also view it as essential to modernise higher education systems and make them more flexible so that they become more responsive to people 's growing and diverse social needs while improving the quality of education and broadening supply .
Finally , I wish to refer to the importance of broadening the supply of training in digital technologies to reduce the digital gap which also exists within our societies between sexes , between generations , and between the populations of different geographical areas .
In short , I welcome the Commission proposal and I hope it takes account of Parliament 's proposals so that we can jointly help raise the awareness of the Member States to the need to act as soon as possible in this area , not only so as to remove barriers to adult involvement in learning , but to encourage it , recognise its economic , social and cultural value in all countries and exchange national data which enable the progress being made to be compared and measured .
Lifelong learning is becoming more and more important in modern society .
It is gratifying that the significance and necessity of adult learning is being analysed more and more actively and is better acknowledged in all EU Member States and the main institutions .
Adult education experts in Lithuania are also actively putting forward proposals for this communication .
The government programme plans to extend the provision of informal adult education services in municipal educational institutions , to try to ensure that educational institution buildings and the adult education environment are modern and attractive and that centres are provided with modern teaching aids .
I would also like to emphasise that adult educators and their organisations need a more active voice and that politicians must listen to this and support it in order to achieve advances in the area of qualitative changes in adult education .
Not only must we discuss the problems that arise , but we must also solve them appropriately , because this will determine how adult education is developed over the coming years .
The problem in Lithuania is pressingly relevant in this context - the integration of vulnerable groups in society , and the disabled in particular .
Moreover , the possibilities for adults raising pre-teen children to learn after working hours have not yet been solved .
Often parents cannot learn simply because they have nowhere to leave their children .
There is also a lack of flexibility in the adult education system .
Sometimes people who have not finished secondary school and are still under the age of 18 want to continue their studies under adult education programmes , but they cannot do so because such education is allowed only from the age of 18 .
Certainly , insufficient funding is also an important problem .
I would agree with the President of Lithuania , Valdas Adamkus , who said that more and more people in Lithuania understand that learning is not just a young person 's duty .
Today , lifelong learning is becoming a challenge for our country and its citizens .
We need to grasp this opportunity because we will be able to show the rapidly changing world that Lithuania is creative , open to innovation and not afraid of setting ambitious goals when opening up possibilities and ways of learning .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I would also like to begin by thanking Mrs Pack and congratulating her on her report - because of her willing attitude most of the amendments tabled by our Group were also incorporated into it .
I would like to say that adult education has always been one of the best ways both to effect social and economic development and to contribute to better wealth distribution .
Now , in this changing information society where we must continually update our knowledge , the initial basic education of adults , and subsequent ongoing training , is a need of the first order .
Adults must adapt to the continuous change imposed by globalisation and take decisions in order to be able to survive while maintaining an adequate quality of life .
However , most educational systems do not respond sufficiently to people 's requirements in such a way as to be able to keep sufficiently abreast of the changing society in which they live .
In contrast to previous eras , the role of education is not to obtain lessons to be applied in a known world , but in a world of continuous change which may produce unforeseeable circumstances .
The point is therefore to provide a system of education which can respond to the needs of adults in a society undergoing permanent change .
In short , education must prepare people for looking ahead and for innovation and must no longer concern itself with just fitting in .
We are in transit between an industrial and post-industrial society , and the type of society towards which we are moving will form the framework for adult education ; on that point I have congratulated the rapporteur and would also like to congratulate the Commission because I believe that the current report is in that vein .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , lifelong learning is something the UK has always excelled at .
Our Open University was the first establishment of its kind in the world , founded in the 1960s and based on a concept dating from the 1920s .
Hundreds of thousands of so-called ' mature students ' have graduated from the Open University , many of them graduates returning to their studies .
Therefore I think the UK is fine when it comes to lifelong learning and , with respect , I do not think we need to accept any more interference from this place in education , which is still a national competence .
However , just making it available is never enough for this place . The next step , of course , is compulsion .
After all , what is the point of providing something that is not used ?
But , then , you do have a history in this area of billions of euros and other currencies wasted by EU institutions , and nation states blithely following orders is par for the course .
But bringing this closer to home - specifically to bureaucrats and politicians in this House - it is now obvious to me that no matter how long you live , you simply do not learn !
You do not even want to listen .
You just carry on with the projects and to hell with anyone who might not agree or have a different point of view .
I am reminded of the old saying , attributed to Sun Tzu but famously used by Kennedy : those who make peaceful protest impossible make violent protest inevitable .
If you do not learn from your mistakes , you are doomed to repeat them .
( SK ) First of all , please allow me to thank Mrs Doris Pack for all the energy she put into the preparation of this report .
I would also like to thank the representatives of the European Commission for the initiatives that lead to the improvement of the existing situation .
As the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Culture and Education on the European Qualifications Framework , I consider the issue of lifelong education to be very important , primarily from two points of view .
The first is the improvement in qualifications , an increase in the ability to find work and overcome discrepancies in the labour market , as well as an improvement in geographical and professional mobility .
The second is the quest for lifelong personal development and integration into society .
Too few adults participate in education and vocational training .
I believe that focusing on improving the citizens ' motivation with regard to life-long learning is a positive step .
It is fundamental in this process to take into consideration the improvement of conditions for the reconciliation of working and family life , solidarity between generations and cultures , language learning and an improvement in the quality of education and its prospects .
What is to be commended is the recognition and appreciation of non-formal and informal education .
The important objectives are to improve the qualifications of workers with few qualifications , who form one third of the European workforce - up to 72 million people - and , finally , the education of immigrants .
If we wish to achieve by 2010 the benchmark goal of 12.5 % participation in adult learning , which means the participation of a further 4 million people - one of the requirements will be to establish a connection between the education systems at European level and the National Qualification Frameworks .
I should like to reassure Mrs Pack that the Chair 's acknowledgements are a proper and institutional token of respect for rapporteurs and the opinions that they express , even when we are completely at odds with their content .
Mr President , ' a good priest learns until death ' says the Hungarian proverb .
In these days not only the priest , but all adults should learn during their adult years .
I welcome Ms Pack 's report and the Commission 's Adult Learning Action Plan as well .
Of course , it is very sad that only 9.6 % of our adult citizens participate in lifelong learning .
It is not easy to start learning when you have grown up .
The harmonisation of family life , working life and learning is a hard task , but in the longer term both the family and the professional career may benefit from adult learning .
In Europe we have millions of unemployed people and at the same time millions of empty jobs requiring skilled employees .
The low level of qualifications implies a high risk of unemployment , but continuous training and learning may help both the person and the economy .
I agree with Ms Pack that not only should lifelong learning be promoted , but economic tools are also needed to encourage employers to hire older workers .
There is only one solution for the challenge of our ageing society : to respect older workers and provide proper jobs for the older generation as well .
Of course , for these we need lifelong learning and also lifelong vocational training .
( RO ) We are aware that Member States recognise the extremely important role of lifelong learning , as it contributes to the citizens ' welfare , self-confidence , social integration , and intercultural dialogue .
Nevertheless , the access of adults to lifelong learning programmes remains limited , despite the European Union 's aim of achieving 12.5 % participation by 2010 .
This is why the implementation and promotion by Member States of effective European programs for the education and training of adults , especially the elderly , the disabled and migrants , could lead to their more successful integration in society and increased mobility on the labour market .
As a member of the Committee on Education and Culture , I believe that the development of volunteer programmes concerning solidarity between generations and the involvement of government , private enterprise and individuals is a key point for taking up the new challenges posed by demographic change , poverty and social exclusion .
By virtue of the right to literacy and education , and of the Member States ' obligation to provide quality training for their adult citizens , I believe , Mr President , that we too are responsible for the development of sustainable tools for funding and supporting lifelong education and training .
Mr President , if the Commissioner were to ask people where they learn , they would tell him where they went to school .
But most of the learning we do is outside this experience of formal education .
The challenge in lifelong learning is not only to offer opportunities to adults to gain new and more qualifications , but also to find a way to recognise and capitalise on the very valuable learning many adults have gained informally through life and work experience .
A constituent of mine has pioneered the successful handling of some of the most difficult fish varieties and also the environmentally friendly fish-farming techniques that they require .
He has no college degree , so when the Commission gives grants in this field , they do not go to him .
Instead , the grants go to academics with no experience , who then come to him to find out how he does what he does .
He is tired of this rip-off , and the fishing industry will be the poorer for this .
I urge the Commissioner to look at this as there has to be a better way .
( CS ) Mr Chairman , Commissioner , the greatest obstacles that prevent adults from taking part in education are lack of time due to work or family commitments .
Another negative factor is the lack of information and lack of motivation : according to general opinion , education later in life is not valued enough and not rewarded enough .
An important aspect of adult education is its effectiveness and fairness .
The educational systems of the EU Member States focus primarily on the education and professional training of young people .
Only a little progress has been made in changing this situation and that progress has so far been of little significance .
The general objective must therefore be to make maximum use of the various providers of education in the adult educational system .
It is our aim to enable access to good and timely information on the possibilities of adult education and to explain the entry requirements and costs , not to mention the advantages of completing such education .
I agree with the view of the rapporteur that the Member States must introduce quality consultation systems and financial incentives targeted at individuals .
They must also support the development of local partnerships .
In addition , it is important to introduce a system for the recognition and verification of the results of such education in the context of national qualifications , taking into account the European Qualifications Framework .
The advantages of investing in adult education are also confirmed by the research done by the OECD .
The public and private benefits include higher employability , increased work productivity , lower unemployment benefit expenditure , lower social benefits expenditure and lower early retirement .
This report invites us to reconsider the stated policy priorities in the field of adult education and take concrete steps .
I congratulate our rapporteur .
( ET ) Ladies and gentlemen .
Enlargement in 2004 increased economic growth in the European Union by an amount which engendered unjustified confidence .
However , today the cooling of the economy is causing social tensions even in the new Member States .
I am referring to the bill on employment contracts which is currently causing controversy in my home country , Estonia .
In anticipation of redundancies , Estonian businesspeople are trying to make people who are to be made redundant bear the brunt of the social effects of the disappearance of employment .
Perhaps those who are more vulnerable , namely employees who have lost their jobs , are once again at a loss as to what they are being punished for .
In the absence of effective steps , both secure flexibility and lifelong learning are reduced merely to empty words in whose shadow the more vulnerable in society are left without the support they need .
Raising the retirement age in line with the rise in average life expectancy means that a 45-year-old worker has yet to reach the mid-point of his career .
It means a new beginning in middle age .
Yet discrimination on grounds of age and sex is an undeniable reality in work places the world over , including the European Union .
The trend towards having children later in life means that women find it twice as difficult to return to the labour market .
The Lifelong Learning Programme is an opportunity at least to a certain degree to compensate for the injustice which prevails today .
Similarly , employers should be encouraged to invest in people with experience of life .
Employers should be persuaded that knowledge and skills learnt in other areas of life , yes , even in home economics , are extremely valuable .
I wish to stress once again that the lifelong learning system is merely a supplement to the social pledges , not a replacement for them .
Drivers , no matter how experienced , should always fasten their seatbelts .
I thank and congratulate the rapporteur on a fine piece of work . Thank you , Mrs Pack !
( SL ) Man is a most adaptable creature , which is why many adults have already accepted the fact that one should keep acquiring knowledge even in mature years and in old age .
In future , those people who have never stopped learning will certainly have an advantage in adapting to the rapid changes with which we are faced on a daily basis .
It is also important for the well-being of the elderly for them to continue participating in the shaping of society by using their knowledge and experience .
This gives them the satisfaction of knowing that they are useful and needed in society .
Because the population is getting older , new occupations best suited to the elderly will have to be created .
A friend of mine , who has ten children and no grandmother to help bring them up , asked me : " Do you know where I could buy a granny for my children ? ”
I also often recall the story of a doctor who asked a retired teacher to teach a badly burned boy in hospital .
The boy was not expected to survive .
Due to the teacher 's persistence , patience and experience , the boy started responding to her questions .
He started believing in life .
Why would doctors send a teacher to work so hard with a boy whom they did not believe would survive ?
An elderly person 's knowledge saved a young life .
The young have many abilities and advantages in learning which sometimes they do not fully exploit , but older people must find willpower and receive encouragement because it is never too late to acquire knowledge and they can compensate for things for which , perhaps , there was no time or money in their youth .
Acquiring knowledge means enjoying life more fully .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in this century it is surely not difficult to convince anyone that general and vocational education can no longer be confined to school and the immediate post-school years but has to be updated and extended throughout people 's working lives .
Changing demographic trends , for example , provide sufficient evidence of this requirement .
In this context , Mrs Pack 's excellent report puts forward a host of good ideas and very successfully conveys the need to create a culture of learning , particularly among adults .
To this end she lists a number of measures that should be taken at various levels .
Adult education is , of course , primarily a task for the Member States .
For this reason the EU cannot prescribe action ; instead , we must make suggestions and request , encourage and invite the Member States to offer a range of measures that will bring more people into adult education .
Like the rapporteur , I firmly believe - and I say this as vice-chairman of the Committee on Regional Development - that many Member States are not fully aware of the significance and use of the European Social Fund and other structural funds as instruments in the pursuit of lifelong learning .
They should monitor the structural funds with this objective in mind as well as ensuring that more resources are made available for those whose need of lifelong learning is greatest .
In short , the report calls clearly on the Member States to make active use of instruments such as the European Social Fund and on the Commission to reinforce specific programmes in the field of adult education .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am very pleased to speak this evening in a House which , I have to say , is well attended .
The report on adult learning ' it is never too late to learn ' has been presented to us today by Mrs Pack with her customary intelligence and expertise .
I am pleased to see the representatives of the Commission , including Mr Figel ' , who is among the most active and enthusiastic in his work , because there is a real need for commitment , since this issue - that is , the education and learning of younger , working or older people - is one that could really bring citizens closer to Europe .
I should like to say something about a group of adults who could benefit from this learning : because there are adults of the first , second and third ages .
By third-age adults I mean those who have stopped working , enteredretirement and can finally settle down to study the subject which they have always wanted to study , but have never had the time to study in any depth .
I , for instance , would study astronomy , others might study physics or geography .
In my view it is right and important for Europe to smooth the transition from work and working age to non-working age , during which people are just as entitled to learn and to be educated .
For that reason I am very content with this report and this initiative by the European Parliament to promote learning among older people as well .
- ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , when fighting unemployment , the objective at the heart of the strategy is to make it easier for employees to adapt to the labour market , and this can be achieved through lifelong learning .
The objective was that by 2010 at least 12 % of people would take part in adult education .
We are now aware that the target will not be reached .
However , I would like to note that there are some countries , such as Holland and Austria , that have already achieved the Lisbon objective thanks to significant incentives , such as the division of time and financial expenditure between employees , companies and the State .
The Danish experience is also valuable .
Here the rotation of workers facilitates the development of qualifications .
When an employee is undergoing training , his place is taken by a person who at that time is unemployed .
These countries , and others , prove that it can be done , that flexibility of the labour market is the way towards innovations that create new jobs .
The result is the lowest level of long-term unemployment : long-term unemployment in Denmark is only 0.8 % .
I would like to believe that the situation will fundamentally change even in the new countries on the back of examples and huge incentives provided by the European Social Fund .
I welcome the Commission communication and the report by Mrs Pack .
( RO ) Indeed , it 's never too late to learn .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on her handling of this topic , which is an essential one at European level and beyond .
Unfortunately , many citizens still believe that education is something one acquires in the first part of one 's life .
We must encourage access to European funds available for adult education , particularly in Member States that have recently joined the Union .
The degree of absorption of funds is rather low in these states , and the number of people involved in professional retraining and lifelong learning is very low .
I believe it is essential to change the mentality of young people still at the initial stage of their education , so as to prepare them for a Europe on the move .
By developing new , European-level programs , we should instil in them the idea that training does not end once you 've obtained your first qualification .
It 's important to be aware that anyone , anytime , can acquire new skills and competences , irrespective of their age , ethnicity , gender , or location .
Taking all these into account , a fundamental precept emerges : we must be able to learn .
( SK ) Ladies and gentlemen , the very rapid changes in the structure of the labour market require highly-qualified workers .
People with few qualifications remain on the fringe of social and economic progress .
Creativity and innovation are the key factors of the modern age .
The more inventive a man is , the more creative a source for the economy he is .
Prosperous economies are those that invest in people ( and that means in education ) , in the basic technological and language skills of the workforce .
It is important to awaken , through lifelong learning , the abilities that are lying dormant in people of all ages and waiting to be used .
I believe that this wonderful report by the rapporteur , Doris Pack , ' Adult learning : It is never late to learn ' , will not remain mere words ; I believe that we will succeeding in converting it into action .
Commissioner Figeľ , thank you for your personal involvement in the field of lifelong learning .
( RO ) I join my colleagues in congratulating Mrs Doris Pack on her work as rapporteur .
The topic is very important for today 's Europe and especially for tomorrow 's Europe .
The development of a new society as well as social cohesion are intimately linked to education , and by education we should not think only of formal education , but we should also encourage non-formal and informal education highly focused on the individual .
I would like to draw attention to the importance of migrant education .
I believe we have seen in practice that education for migrants is necessary for their social integration , for tolerance , stability , performance , and for overall European development .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Pack , and also the Commissioner , who is carrying out his duties in an excellent manner , also with regards to his work for the European Institute of Technology .
Today , however , we are discussing something else . I would like to draw attention to one particular issue .
At the beginning of the 20th century Europe was fighting illiteracy ; by the second half of the 20th century all Europeans could read and write .
Today 's illiteracy is lack of computer skills and lack of Internet access .
I would like to propose that there be an even greater emphasis on this issue .
The digital divide also affects the generation gap .
The issue is that we should know in how many years , five years or ten years , every European will know how to use a computer , whatever their age , and will have Internet access .
Internet cafes could be used for this in very remote parts of Europe , where several computers are put into a single room , and all the inhabitants could use this location .
This is the challenge of the 21st century .
Member of the Commission . - ( SK ) I think that many of the contributions made are indeed an incentive to get involved in the issue of adult education .
Following this philosophy , and as has already been pointed out , it is never too late to learn .
The second document says that there is always a good reason or a good time to learn .
I would like to say that I see the report of Doris Pack , and the numerous initiatives that have been mentioned here , as a complement or an addition to what the Commission itself suggested .
This philosophy is therefore very valuable and welcome .
I would like to refer back to some of the specific measures , because they are helping and improving what is important to the approach as a whole : the importance of motivating adults to get involved in education ; the need to ensure a better reconciliation of work , family life and life-long learning ; the need for inter-generational and inter-cultural solidarity ; the importance of language learning or teaching ; respect for the specific requirements of vulnerable groups and the importance of high-quality teachers , which has been discussed recently : it is one of the key factors for educational success ; and a better approach to higher education and creation of comparative statistical data or information .
The Commission will also reflect on your invitation to assess the career prospects linked to adult education and the subject of the financing of adult education .
These are very precise questions , which also fall within the remit of the Member States .
Finally , one the outcomes not only of this report but also of the Commission 's documents will be the discussion of the Member States and conclusions of the Council of Ministers in February .
I believe that they will be sincere and support adult education that is accessible and of a high quality .
Please allow me one thought in conclusion : it is not only appreciation and gratitude , but also an appreciation of inspiration .
As a Commissioner , a politician as well as a father , I am convinced that education - and I mean accessible and high-quality education - is the most important factor for the political , economic , social and cultural development of individuals and society as a whole .
Moreover , education is the great equaliser , which means that it is an equaliser of those issues that are necessary for the equality of all .
Thank you very much and I look forward to our cooperation .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , first of all may I thank everyone involved for the flowers they have presented to me .
I would be happy to give a few blooms from this bouquet to Jan Figeľ .
After having campaigned for adult education since 1993 and having seen the first fruits of these efforts , I am gratified that we have now achieved the great breakthrough in that the importance of adult education is recognised in every sphere of political activity .
I am particularly keen that every possible incentive be created to motivate adults to re-enter the education process .
Many have never had the opportunity , and many need to be motivated .
There is also a need to overcome these people 's inhibitions and remove barriers .
This is why I also believe that the numerous adult-education centres , foundations and charitable organisations which , as we know , are already doing outstanding work in this field should be supported and that these providers ' high standards - and I see no reason why they cannot become even higher - should be maintained .
As I said before , we must ensure that the quality of adult education is further improved .
I was delighted to hear that a working group had already been formed in your area of the Commission , Mr Figeľ .
I am pleased that it can perhaps be linked with Grundvig too so that we can light the fuse , as it were , for the national governments .
Let us therefore make a start .
The many fine words really must now give way to deeds , and our task is simply to disprove the venerable saying ' You can 't teach an old dog new tricks ' .
In the context of adult education that is as wrong as anything can be , which is why I hope that we can now try , by dint of our own efforts and with your help , to hoist the national governments into the saddle so that they can start trotting , for it will take a while before they are ready to gallop .
The debate is closed .
The vote on this item will take place on Wednesday , 16 January 2008 at 12 noon .
Witten statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( HU ) I would like to congratulate the rapporteur and the Committees for their successful and eminently social work .
At the same time , I was sorry to note that there was not a single reference in it to the question of developing information and communication skills .
We should just think of how much legislation we have created over the years that recognises new rights for European citizens and in how many cases we have prescribed that workers , consumers , pensioners or even tourists should have the relevant information and channels on the Internet .
All these things make sense if the beneficiaries can access the information .
The development of ' eskills ' in lifelong learning and in general basic education will assume vital importance , as the foundation stone of a knowledge-based information society .
Another key task for Member States will be promoting equal opportunities in IT and electronic inclusion .
I am delighted that every Hungarian party agrees on this , even if they do not agree on many other things .
Modern information and communication technologies in themselves present an unprecedented opportunity to really promote cohesion and equal opportunities , but we can only use this opportunity if we guarantee the conditions to include everyone throughout their lives , so that , even for ' eskills ' , the title of the Committee 's opinion will inevitably be true : ' It is never too late ' . Thank you for your attention .
Commission measures in 2008-2013 to make use of CAP remote-sensing applications ( debate )
The next item is the report by Friedrich-Wilhelm Graefe zu Baringdorf , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation on the measures to be undertaken by the Commission in 2008-13 making use of the remote-sensing applications developed within the framework of the common agricultural policy - C6-0273 / 2007 - .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , before going into the content of the report , I first of all want to thank the rapporteur , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , and the members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , for the work that they have been doing on the evaluation of the Commission 's proposal .
I would first like to make a few more general remarks to place the Commission 's proposal in the right context .
The Commission 's proposal concerns the agro-meteorological system utilised to prepare the crop yields forecast and to monitor the development of crops within the European Union .
This system was developed throughout the 1990s and has been fully operational since 1998 .
I must say that I consider this to be a very useful tool .
This system provides the Commission 's services with accurate information on the situation in the crop sector and also assists the Commission in taking timely decisions in the framework of the common agricultural policy , and therefore I find that it is quite natural that it is financed by the guidance funding .
Let me say the following on some of the proposals in the Committee on Agriculture report .
You have concerns about the use of the data that are collected .
I want to be very clear on this .
Control is not the aim of this system and it cannot and will not be used for any control of farmers within the European Union .
When we look at it from a technical point of view , the resolution of the remote-sensing images generated by the system is far too low to allow any controls , and this system - it must be clear as well - has nothing to do with our Integrated Administration and Control ( IACS ) System .
The rapporteur also states that there is no consensus that the proposed system actually works .
Work to develop the system started in the late 1980s and , as I said , since 1998 , when it became operational , the system has actually provided yield forecasts on a regular basis to the Commission services .
We use this information on a daily basis , for example in our analysis of supply and price developments within the cereal sector .
Last year , in September 2007 , the Commission provided an assessment of the system in a report to the European Parliament and to the Council that actually demonstrated the usefulness of the system .
The system is also implemented at national level in several Member States , and other countries are using or developing similar tools , so on this point I am not totally in line with you .
Finally , I welcome the principle of setting up an inventory of projects and initiatives in the field of space and remote-sensing .
However , this proposal is not the right place for this .
This would indeed fall under the European initiative of Global Monitoring for Environment and Security .
So we are not exactly on the same page , but I look forward to listening to the comments of the Honourable Members .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , in the coordination committee of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development we pondered whether to produce a report on this matter or to let it pass without a report .
I had the task of examining this question in greater depth , and we subsequently decided that we would draft a report , which means that the two of us can discuss the matter again this evening - a useful thing in itself .
We did stumble over a few points , however , and this is reflected in the amendments we have formulated .
Firstly , the Commission 's report said that the proposal was largely uncontested in the Council as elsewhere .
Our enquiries , however , have revealed that some countries , particularly in northern Europe , cannot do much with this satellite data because everything is still covered in snow there when the images are captured .
Secondly , the data is collected by private companies , which make it available to the Commission , and these private companies ' main customers are in the gas and oil industries , an area of business that involves a degree of speculation .
What we must ensure - and this is why we want to invoke our parliamentary powers of scrutiny - is that this collected data is truly unconnected with any private speculative ambitions but that is actually used , as you have said , for the sole purpose of harvest and yield forecasting .
As you are also aware , however , this very data is used for speculation in commodity futures on the stock exchange , and such forecasts could be used for that purpose .
Before going any further , let me emphasise that the Commission and Parliament do share a common interest here , but Parliament has a scrutiny function , and so it makes sense for us to talk about that and to request reports from the Commission which show clearly what has happened to this data , how it is recorded and what purpose it serves .
It is essentially a matter of calling you to account in the coming years .
Then we were somewhat puzzled , of course , to learn that the financial basis for this data collection was suddenly to be changed .
Hitherto we have had a dedicated budget heading under which increases in appropriations and proposals for their retention have had to be discussed .
Now these activities are to be transferred to the Guarantee Fund , over which Parliament has less power of scrutiny .
Now we can assume that , when the Treaty enters into force at the start of 2009 , the Guarantee Fund will no longer exist and these matters will therefore pass into full budgetary sovereignty of Parliament .
This approach was at least proposed , and when we received the report it was not yet clear when the Treaty would materialise .
So we said no , we did not want to make any changes now ; it should stay as it was , namely in a budget line which could then be scrutinised by Parliament on the expenditure side .
All in all , Commissioner , I certainly believe we have more important problems to discuss and try to resolve concerning the health check than the subject of our deliberations here this evening .
Farmers , however , are very sensitive when there is any suspicion that they are being spied upon .
You have made it clear that this is not about surveillance or spying .
I shall gladly pass on that message , but you must understand us .
We as a Parliament must also ensure that you do .
It is because of our accountability to our voters that we have discussed this matter and are making this point .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , good evening , another evening discussing agriculture .
As the Commission notes in its report , in recent years remote sensing has shown how we can cope correctly with the management needs of the Common Agricultural Policy .
The traditional statistical and agricultural forecasting systems are beginning to become obsolete with the new technology which is invading all aspects of our lives .
It has also made possible improvements in the accuracy , objectivity , speed and frequency of observations as well as achieving savings in follow-up costs and monitoring of agricultural expenditure .
Remote sensing is , therefore , most welcome in the Common Agricultural Policy .
The draft report which will be put to the vote tomorrow generally endorses the European Commission , except on one point which I consider to be important as it concerns funding for the measure .
In the Agriculture Committee I supported the rapporteur 's proposal to establish a specific budget for remote sensing of EUR 9.2 million outside the European Agricultural Guarantee Fund to safeguard future Community support for the development of remote sensing in all Member States .
I therefore welcome the outcome of the vote of the Committee on Agriculture , whose report also sets out the need to use the computer facilities of the Joint Research Centre site in Ispra to compile data from space , rather than the idea of creating a new computing infrastructure as proposed by the European Commission .
We should therefore streamline both the infrastructures and the financial budget , and we in the House should therefore support the document which will be put to the vote tomorrow .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there is nothing technology will not do .
We have before us a proposal by the European Commission for extension of the programme that uses the most up-to-date technology to monitor our European agriculture .
After years of research , the scientists concerned can be justifiably proud of themselves .
Using satellites , it is , for instance , possible to monitor the use and condition of land , study the effects of climate change and even forecast harvests .
That means we can keep an eye on the situation and act in good time to predict and ward off problems , such as the failure of the grain harvest this year .
I was originally an engineer and I find this kind of practical application of principled technology to promote our well-being very exciting .
A ' tom-tom ' system for agriculture .
Who would ever have thought it ?
Now we have to consider whether we as a Parliament are in favour of further research into and use of this application .
How could we say no ?
I recommend that my colleagues in the Socialist Group vote for this directive , but I do want to make a couple of comments to the Commissioner who is with us at this late hour .
Firstly , I have my doubts about the inclusion of the budget and the programme in the Agricultural Guarantee Fund .
Up to now this project has had its own budget heading , which has allowed Parliament to monitor the situation and be kept regularly informed .
Despite the proven value of the programme , research is still continuing .
I would think it particularly unfortunate if the Commission no longer reported to us on the progress and results of the programme , or on the costs involved .
As a Member of Parliament and an interested party , I would urge that the separate budget heading is retained so that we are also kept informed in the future and can be involved in the consideration as well .
Secondly , I would like to see all the research results made freely available to other interested parties , such as universities and research institutes .
In the field of climate research particularly , the data that are coming to light thanks to MARS and LUCAS can be enormously useful .
Mr President , Commissioner , I shall conclude my maiden speech at this plenary with that appeal for transparency .
I am hoping for a positive response from Mrs Fischer Boel .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , I would first like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , for the excellent way he has prepared this topic for debate .
He has worked hard and highlighted the flaws and problems associated with remote sensing .
A cautious approach , an emphasis on transparency and a precise specification of the scope of application are all appropriate here .
At its best remote sensing is a way to obtain information quickly on the condition of farms , crop yields and growing conditions .
This information can then be used , for example , in research , the planning of agricultural marketing , and the administration of the common agricultural policy .
There are still many flaws in the methods used , as the rapporteur points out .
Conditions vary from one Member State to another and the data from Member States is not fully comparable .
For example , in my country , Finland , snow-covered parcels of land are often so small that determining surface areas from satellite images is not always successful .
This being the case , the amendment which states that the information obtained should be used solely for estimating yields and not for control purposes is fitting .
Farmers today are burdened with red tape , paperwork and constant monitoring .
Unreasonably harsh sanctions are imposed if they unintentionally make mistakes owing to poor advice .
As remote sensing methods develop , it is to be hoped that they will help reduce the bureaucracy which is a continual torment to farmers .
First , however , we need to obtain more precise results of research to ensure that the methods are actually reliable and that they treat all farmers impartially .
As new methods are introduced , we also have to ensure that the privacy of farmers is protected and that the entire process is a transparent one .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , in order to have a common agricultural policy that works properly , what is needed , above all , is precise and reliable data .
Remote-sensing techniques make it possible , among other applications , to monitor cultivation and to forecast harvests .
This becomes even more significant in the light of advancing climate change .
Using remote sensing we can identify , at an earlier stage , conditions that are unfavourable for plant development and , as a result , forecast more quickly and accurately which areas are threatened by drought .
These techniques provide data for econometric models , which we frequently use when considering the consequences of introducing changes into the functioning of the common agricultural policy .
With initial data that is more precise we can reduce the probability of errors in the scenarios forecast .
For this reason , I believe that it is vital to continue the MARS project .
Financing sources for the project should , however , remain unchanged , i.e. within the framework of a separate budget line , and not from the European Agricultural Guarantee Fund .
Since the project is financed from EU funds , i.e. from the taxes of our citizens , I believe that an investigation should be carried out on the efficiency of the MARS project and on its potential applications that have not yet been put into use .
As usual I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on an excellent report , and I fully agree with him that we must make sure that the system becomes more consolidated and , above all , more productive and more useful .
The final issue that I would like to consider is access to data .
Everyone should have the right to make use of this source of information , not just EU decision-makers but also Member States and research and academic institutions .
The data could even be useful at the level of the farm : for example , farmers could apply the information obtained from remote sensing in optimising agricultural treatments .

( PL ) Mr President , I would like to support the view taken by the rapporteur and emphasise that remote-sensing techniques can be useful to the European Commission : first of all , in helping to manage agricultural markets , secondly , by making it possible to monitor cultivation and at the same time to forecast harvests , and thirdly and finally , this forecasting should have an impact on the prices of agricultural raw materials , which will be particularly important in the next few years , in a situation where the prices of foodstuffs are constantly rising .
Even if some of the objectives named above were to be fulfilled , this would be sufficient to acknowledge that remote sensing is a method that provides important information that is helpful in the proper management of the markets of individual agricultural products .
At the same time as giving this method a positive assessment , I would also like to state that I share the view of the rapporteur that work in this area should be financed from a special budget line , and not from the Agricultural Guarantee Fund .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I was recently invited to a Rotary Club meeting , where a very interesting debate took place .
A Rotarian who is a fierce critic of the EU lamented that there was a great deal of fraud in Europe , that it went unchecked and that we had a particularly large number of problems in the realm of agriculture .
Interestingly , a few minutes later we had a farmer saying that he had just undergone an inspection which had been conducted with great rigour and precision and that he did not know of any area of activity that was subject to such thorough checking as agriculture .
I believe this shows very clearly what people need , namely information about what is actually happening .
This is why best practice and benchmarking are absolutely essential if we are to explain to the European public how much importance we attach to agricultural policy .

( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , this proposal for a regulation for the introduction of remote sensing via satellite is an interesting one .
Michel Debatisse , the French farmers ' leader , put forward a remote-sensing proposal in this Chamber back in the 1990s , the area of application in that case being stock rearing .
The idea was to fix microchips in the ears of cattle and sheep , as part of a system for monitoring premium payments and preventing fraud in certain parts of southern France .
There had even been a plan for electronic capsules , which cattle would swallow and which would then become attached in a pocket in the intestine , enabling the stock to be identified and counted via satellite .
What we have before us today is something different , although it dates back seven years , to the MARS and LUCAS pilot projects .
The concept here entails supplying information about land use and the condition of the ground or crops , in order to forecast crop yields and , at the same time , to manage agricultural markets and produce econometric models .
There is an obvious danger with this aim of gathering information , improving statistics , producing forecasts and , indeed , creating a website : I am tempted to call it the danger of a remote-sensing elite , for the technology will be accessible only to large farmers or very rich regions , and not everyone will be enabled to anticipate prices - a particularly useful facility when the price of grain is rising .
Obviously , the ability to anticipate prices several months in advance by predicting the harvest is a highly interesting prospect for the stock markets in Chicago or wherever .
Our rapporteur , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , is right to be particularly interested in the matter of who will benefit from the system , especially as it comes at a price - I believe some ten million euros are involved , albeit spread over five or six years - and these sums will come not from an independent budget line but from an agricultural guarantee fund .
The system is certainly worth trying out , or pursuing , Commissioner .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , it is true that we sometimes have the opportunity to sit here late in the evening and discuss agricultural issues , but I must say that I enjoyed , no matter how late it is , having an opportunity to exchange views on this - for those of us present here tonight , anyway - very interesting topic .
Firstly , it is clear that , in situations where the areas are covered with snow , it is not possible - and this applies to our Finnish friends - to collect the data on the crops , but it is possible to collect the meteorological data , which will be available no matter what the weather conditions are .
As this is also closely linked to the development that we are seeing in the discussions on climate change , I think that this information is also valid and important .
There have been some concerns about the availability of the data , and I can only say that the data is available no matter where you come from .
It is available either through the Member States or on the internet , so there is no secret about the data collected in the different areas .
Concerning the budget , I think that it is important , in a situation where we have a limited budget for agriculture , that we take care to spend the money in the most appropriate way and that ( I refer to Mr Martinez ) we can defend how we spend the money and ensure that no fraud is taking place .
I think that we have also been quite successful in explaining to the European Parliament how we spend the money and how the control is carried out .
However , it is equally important for me to say again tonight that the technology used in the system to register the field crops does not make it possible to use the same system for control purposes .
The technology is completely different and the picture is simply unusable for control purposes , so please do not make this link , because it is completely inappropriate .
However , I still believe that the money that we will spend in the future on this system is justified .
It will be approximately between EUR 1.5 million and EUR 1.7 million every year .
Especially in a situation where we have seen dramatic changes in the price fluctuations in the agricultural sector , it is important that we have valid data on which to base our forecasts .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , under the new system the rapporteur has the last word , and therein lies an insight into how the European Parliament sees itself in relation to the Commission .
As you know , we are not at odds about the next steps in this matter .
I am not suggesting that the system be scrapped ; I have merely proposed a few improvements - which I do not intend to recapitulate - to increase Parliament 's powers of scrutiny .
On the question of data that can be used for climate analysis , we have indicated that there are two pilot projects , entitled LUCAS and MARS .
This also demonstrates , however , that the data being collected does indeed transcend the domain of agriculture .
This is why I asked in the explanatory statement for the retention of a separate budget heading .
Let me conclude with a little anecdote that shows the sort of thing we must deal with .
A farm near where I live was visited by the supervisory authority , because the satellite system had allegedly enabled it to identify a gully , in other words a prohibited drainage system .
The inspectors said it must be over there in a particular spot where the system had shown it to be .
The farmer , however , assured them that he had done nothing .
And what had actually happened ?
A plastic mat was lying in the field - which should not happen either - and the grass had grown through it .
That was what the satellite system had picked up , and now the authorities had come to haul the farmer over the coals .
We politicians could surely come up with more little tales like that from our local areas - and no doubt , Commissioner , you have heard a few yourself - which illustrate what we have to deal with .
There is no point in denying our concern at the prospect of farmers being monitored in a way which the public cannot comprehend and which is no longer subject to parliamentary scrutiny .
I therefore hope you will appreciate why we have had to put this report through Parliament and discuss it and why we must continue to be vigilant in future .
Be that as it may , we do intend to support each other in these efforts .
I declare the debate closed .
Voting will take place on Wednesday , 16 January 2008 .
Status of elected MEPs in Poland ( debate )
The next item is the debate concerning an oral question to the Commission from Giuseppe Gargani , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs - B6-0002 / 2008 ) concerning the status of MEPs elected in Poland .
author . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the issue that we are discussing tonight has been examined in detail , on more than one occasion I may say , by the Committee on Legal Affairs , which I have the honour to chair , and that Committee has asked me , through this question , to open a discussion and to exchange views with the Commission .
The question relates to the status of MEPs elected in Poland , who are not in the same position from the point of view of elections and all the provisions that govern the elections of other parliamentarians in other Member States .
Elections to the European Parliament in Poland are in practice governed by the Act of 23 January 2004 , Article 9 of which sets out eligibility requirements : candidates must be aged 21 on the day of the poll , must not have been convicted of criminal offences , must be resident in Poland and must satisfy various other criteria .
Chapter 17 of that Act sets out the circumstances in which Polish MEPs may lose their seats : their eligibility , that is the eligibility requirements on the day of the poll , may be invalidated , giving rise to the possibility of forfeiture if these requirements were not met , and various other matters , which I shall not cite in order to get to the crux of the matter that I should like to discuss here .
On the basis of a number of combined provisions , as we lawyers say , an MEP automatically loses his seat - that is , an MEP automatically forfeits that seat - if he or she has received a criminal conviction ; in the case of members of the Polish Parliament , the law of 12 April 2001 - both as regards elections to the Sejm and to the Senate of the Republic - contains no provision of this type , with the result that these provisions relate to Polish MEPs but not to Polish MPs .
For that reason , we discussed the question and asked ourselves a question , a question which among other things has repercussions as regards requests for immunity ; as you know , we have - as Commissioner Frattini is very well aware - the power to decide on this question .
Clearly , if a member automatically forfeits his or her seat as a result of an event for which immunity cannot be upheld , there is obviously a further problem , a further uncertainty .
For that reason , we ask , and I ask on behalf of the Committee , the Commissioner whether or not he considers that the Polish legislation on elections to the national parliament breaches Article 10 of the Protocol on Privileges and Immunities , which states that during the sessions of the European Parliament , its members shall enjoy the immunities accorded to members of their Parliament in the territory of their own State .
There is therefore a clear inconsistency if provision is made for a Polish member to lose his or her seat , when members of the national parliament are not treated in the same way .
I would also ask the Commission if it intends to bring proceedings before the Court of Justice with a view to Poland amending this legislation and correctly applying the treaty , as it would seem that the treaty is not being applied as it should be .
As an exception is involved , and as the comparable and equal treatment of members from all the Member States means that this exception for members from the Polish state runs completely counter to what may be provided and is provided for all other members from the Member States , I would ask the Commission these two things and put this information before Parliament and ask whether the Commissioner can reply to these two questions and whether it is possible to find a remedy to the questions I have put .


Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the issue which Mr Gargani has brought up is undoubtedly an important one : it is important because two principles , both of which are relevant and important in my view , are at stake .
The first principle is undoubtedly that referred to in Article 10 of the Protocol on Privileges and Immunities and on the status of the members of the European Parliament , which specifies that in the States to which the members of the European Parliament belong , they must be accorded the same prerogatives as members of the national parliament of that country .
However , another provision is also involved - a provision which is also important in my view - and that is Article 13 of the European Act of 1976 relating to the election of members of Parliament .
That article very clearly states that when a Member State introduces national legislation covering the case in question here , that is the loss of the status , the loss of the position of member of the European Parliament , termination of the European parliamentary mandate in that country is subject to national law .
In other words , there is an apparent conflict , because the rules set out in the Protocol on Privileges , as cited by Mr Gargani , speak of equal prerogatives for members of the Polish Parliament and members of the European Parliament elected in Poland , but at the same time the European Act of 1976 on the election of members of the European Parliament , as regards the loss of the status of member of the European Parliament , apparently - or explicitly , I would say - governs the loss of the status of MEP and establishes that the loss of that status is governed by national law .
In my opinion , the problem here is more one of the infringement of a third guiding principle for the European Union : whether or not the principle of equal treatment is enshrined in Polish domestic legislation .
The principle , enshrined in the constitutional legislation of all the European countries , that establishes that similar situations must be treated in similar ways .
It is rather that general principle that is at issue ; but that general principle does not , however , allow the European Commission to establish the way in which the Polish legal order should change its legislation , because , as the issue is subject to national law , if it were wished in national law to govern the loss of the status of national MP rather than the loss of the status of MEP in a different way , that would be possible , the important factor being that the provisions on one are brought into line with the provisions on the other .
This is my personal opinion in that the Commission cannot now say ' we are turning to the Court for a ruling that Polish national law has to be amended in a particular way ' , but I am of the view that a general principle can be drawn .
The general principle is that the Polish legal order must act to amend this difference in treatment and that , I believe , is a matter for the Polish legislator .
As this is a question that has never arisen and is too delicate to be dealt with in any summary way , I believe that the first step is to reach an understanding : if the Polish legislator , as I believe , should remove this difference in treatment , that is a matter for the Polish Parliament .
Second : does Polish legislation comply with the provisions of the European Act of 1976 which I cited earlier ?
I can tell you , Mr Gargani , that I have commissioned a comparative study for the 12 new Member States to ascertain whether the legislation , not just Polish legislation , but the legislation of the 11 Member States which acceded to the European Union between 2004 and 2007 , whether the national legislation in those Member States complies with the provisions of the European Act of 1976 .
In conclusion , two tasks need to be undertaken .
First : a review , which I am undertaking , of the conformity of Polish national legislation , and not just Polish legislation , because the fact that Mr Gargani has brought up the case of Poland does not mean that there are not comparable situations in other Member States .
My view is that this review is needed for all of them .
The second task is to assess whether the Polish Parliament can , though legislation , remove what is objectively an apparent conflict , since there is an apparent discrimination between the status , regulated by law , of MEPs elected in Poland and Polish MPs .
There is an apparent conflict , and the only aspect that I believe would be difficult to accept is that it is up to the European Commission to ask the Court of Justice what action the Polish legislator should take .
Were Parliament to agree with this stance , we could simply point out that there is apparent discrimination in Poland between the status of two types of parliamentarian .
This is a very new exercise and we should try to make progress with it in a spirit of cooperation .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , Chairman Gargani presented the situation of Members of the European Parliament in the context of Polish law very clearly , as also their unequal treatment in this same context as regards Members of Parliament in Poland , and also with regard to senators .
I would agree with the argument put forward by Commissioner Frattini that this violates the principle of equal treatment of Members of Parliament before the law .
I would like to inform you that the present ruling coalition in Poland , the Platforma Obywatelska and the Polskie Stronnictwo Ludowe , has already begun work on changing this law so as to make it the same for Members of the European Parliament , Members of Parliament in Poland and for Senators .
This change will follow the same direction as the provision that is contained in the European Parliament 's electoral law , so that the same principle also applies to Polish Members of Parliament and Polish Senators .
However , in this context , as Mr Gargani said that we are opening a discussion concerning a problem that may be a wider issue , I wonder whether it may be worth thinking about a common electoral law , at least in terms of general principles , a common electoral law for the European Parliament for all Member States of the European Union , as today there are very different circumstances in the 27 Member countries .
It is difficult to disagree , and of course I accept all legal restrictions as regards MEPs , but it is difficult for me to agree with a situation where , on being sentenced to a fine in a case brought by the public prosecution service for a deliberate crime , or for being charged with such a crime , a person automatically loses their mandate to the European Parliament .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , today 's debate raises the issue of unequal treatment of Polish Members of the European Parliament and Members of the Sejm as regards election criteria , as well as that of loss of mandate .
In Article 9 of the Act of 23 January 2004 concerning the electoral ordinance for the European Parliament , we see that the right to stand for election to this institution is given to persons who , among other criteria , have not been convicted of a deliberate crime or charged by the public prosecution service , and Article 142 states that one 's mandate can be withdrawn as a result , for example , of the member 's election to the European Parliament being invalidated .
This means that the conviction of a Member ( this refers to a Member of the European Parliament , as has been mentioned earlier ) for a crime committed deliberately is equivalent to their automatically losing their mandate , while for members to the national parliament this does not act as an obstacle to them standing for election , nor does it result in the loss of their mandate .
As regards the privileges of Members of the European Parliament , Rule 5 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament states that ' Members shall enjoy privileges and immunities in accordance with the Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities of the European Communities ' .
In the Preamble , the Protocol states that it regulates the issue of privileges and immunities that are necessary to carry out responsibilities for the European Communities , and , in Article 10 ( a ) , states that , during the sessions of the Assembly , ' in the territory of their own State , its members shall enjoy the immunities accorded to members of their Parliament ' . Members of the Polish Parliament and the European Parliament are protected by the same immunity .
According to Article 11 , ' Representatives of Member States taking part in the work of the institutions of the Communities , their advisers and technical experts shall , in the performance of their duties and during their travel to and from the place of meeting , enjoy the customary privileges , immunities and facilities ' .
There is no doubt that a Member of the European Parliament is a representative of a Member State who is taking part in the work of the institutions of the Union .
Since Members of the European Parliament and of the Polish Parliament should benefit from the same immunities and privileges , then the rules as regards their eligibility to stand for election as well as for loss of mandate should also be the same .
In acceding to the European Union Poland assumed a responsibility to respect laws in force in the EU , especially those laws having a direct impact on the internal legal system in Member States .
I would encourage the fastest possible standardisation in legislation relating to the status of Members of the Polish Parliament and Members of the European Parliament in Poland , and I fully agree with the view taken by Commissioner Frattini in this regard .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , the Polish electoral law on elections to the European Parliament is truly unfair and undemocratic compared to the law on elections to the national parliament .
The forfeiture of a seat of a deputy to the European Parliament by laws of eligibility is an easy way to put pressure on political opponents and gives the opportunity to settle an account politically with those who have more authority .
Unfortunately , although being in the European Union , the law is still abused in many former Communist countries .
This is the case for Mr Tomczak as well .
As Members of the European Parliament , Polish MEPs represent not only the Poles but also all Europeans .
It is unacceptable that these people 's representatives are discriminated against by maintaining different legislation with regard to Members of the Polish Parliament .
A Polish MEP , if convicted , will be punished not only by Polish law but will also lose his seat as a Member of the European Parliament .
That fact clearly shows the discrimination of Polish Members of the European Parliament in comparison to members of national parliaments .
That situation is unacceptable and shows clearly how unjust and unfair the Polish electoral law is .
May I urge Poland to change its electoral law ?

Mr President , this oral question is a consequence of the debates in the Committee on Legal Affairs on the immunity of Mr Tomczak .
The immunity of Mr Tomczak was raised by Parliament a few years ago .
Recently the Committee on Legal Affairs received a request from Mr Tomczak to defend his immunity .
The committee discussed this request and a draft decision has been prepared .
Nevertheless , the adoption of the final decision was postponed as the committee received information that , in the event of his immunity being waived , the legal consequences for Members of the European Parliament from Poland and Members of the Polish Parliament would be different .
According to the Polish Act of 23 January 2004 , a Member of the European Parliament from Poland will lose his or her seat automatically in the event of criminal conviction .
For Members of the Polish Parliament this provision is not applicable .
Such a difference is in breach of European Community law , by maintaining different legislation with regard to members of the national parliament and Polish Members of the European Parliament .
This discrepancy between Polish and European Community laws needs to be clarified .
Therefore , I fully support the formulation of an oral question to the Commission .
I hope Mr Frattini will use all his influence to aim to eliminate this discrepancy between Polish and European Community laws .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner Frattini , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that democracy in Europe needs to be constantly developed , and we are seeing many attacks on our democratic system from outside Europe .
The Members of the European Parliament take decisions , of course , on very many issues that have a direct and immediate effect on the European public .
Members of parliaments do not take decisions for themselves but represent their voters .
For this reason the Members of the European Parliament must not be inferior in status to members of national parliaments nor , conversely , should national deputies have a lesser status than MEPs .
For this reason I believe that the Commission should examine the impact on Poland 's MEPs of the new statute that will apply from 2009 onwards and investigate what changes the statute will make and whether there is not some scope for its principles to be applied in order to remove these disparities .
( ES ) Mr President , as ever , Commissioner Frattini has performed an intricate legal analysis .
As he said , in the current circumstances there would appear to be no grounds for bringing proceedings before the Court of Justice directly .
However , after listening to Mr Zwiefka , who has been telling us about a proposal from the current Polish Government to amend the law , I would ask the Commissioner whether he believes that the Commission could in fact approach the Polish Government on the basis of the debate we are having in Parliament at present to see whether the Polish Government is indeed proposing to amend the law to harmonise the status of MEPs with that of members of the national parliament .

( PL ) Mr President , the proposal put forward by Mr Zwiefka to make the situation of Members of the European Parliament the same as Members of the Parliament in Poland does not provide a solution to the problem .
I believe that the best solution , which is in fact already part of Polish law , would be that in circumstances where a person is convicted of a deliberate crime , the court should also decide to deprive them of public rights , meaning that the person in question cannot stand for election .
This solution exists , for example , in France .
I would like to give you a specific example : our colleague , Mr Onesta , the Vice-President of the European Parliament , was sentenced a few months ago by a court in France to a suspended sentence of several months for an act that , under Polish law , would automatically mean the loss of one 's mandate to the European Parliament .
I see the present situation as being completely wrong .
I think we should go in the direction of the solution proposed by Mr Frattini .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , some further brief comments : I am pleased that the debate overall has recognised that there is a significant and thorny problem .
I should like , in particular , to thank Commissioner Frattini who , as the good lawyer that he is , has looked in more detail at the matter , which , as he rightly says , does not just relate to Poland .
There is a general principle at stake and I am therefore very content , as is the Committee , that you are undertaking an overall review to monitor compliance and to check whether laws are consistent as regards the national and the European question .
One fact is certain , however , there is not an apparent conflict since , as regards guarantees , the Polish law is contrary to the Treaty ; if a Polish MEP were to lose his seat , obviously the article of the treaty which provides for the possibility of taking part in the sessions would fall .
From the Committee 's own point of view , as you have heard in the debate just now from Mr Medina , and from me personally , the issue is not one of bringing proceedings , but of following up the question in order to resolve it .
If our Polish colleague , Mr Zwiefka , says that this matter has already been brought to the fore in Poland , some progress has already been made .
Comparability is what is needed , as that comparability makes Europe the guarantor of the unity of States that are working together , of citizenship and of equal rights from the point of view of freedom and everyone 's status .

( PL ) Mr President , just to add my support to the speeches , most of which I support , I believe that of course we should harmonise our regulations as soon as possible .
To illustrate how necessary this , is I would like to draw attention to the story of our colleague , an MEP , who is present here with us : Mr Tomczak , who has been involved in a criminal case in Poland for many years , which is now approaching a conclusion and could impact on his future as a Member of the European Parliament .
A case which does not involve much harm , and in which witnesses deny that the event took place .
A case that at one time was closed , which perhaps under the influence of some political turbulence has been reopened ; and now , Mr Tomczak , who has twice been elected ( our colleague became an MP in 2005 , and an MEP in 2004 ) , now , his immunity as well as his mandate may be removed .
This is something that is unbelievable , harmful and which should , as quickly as possible , be cut short and removed from this forum .

Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I feel that tonight 's debate has shown two things : the first is that there is a widespread view , which is shared , I would say , by all those who have spoken - and a view which I believe to be right - that the disparity of treatment between MEPs elected in Poland and Polish national MPs should be removed and that this analysis should be extended to all the other new Member States of the European Union whose compliance with the European Act of 1976 has not as yet been checked .
The second conclusion , and I refer to the proposal by Mr Medina Ortega , with which I agree , is to pass on the outcome of this debate to the competent authorities of the Polish Government , informing them that this disparity of treatment needs to be removed through national legislation .
I shall do that .
I can tell you that I shall certainly make formal contact with the Minister of Justice of the Polish Government in order to pass on the widespread opinion of this House - which I share - that while the Polish national legislator has sovereign powers over the way in which the elimination of this disparity of treatment is to be achieved , the objective of removing that disparity of treatment must be pursued .
That is the opinion that I put forward at the beginning : I do not consider that I can tell the Polish legislator how to proceed , but I do consider that I can spell out the objective , and that objective is to remove the disparity of treatment between the status of Polish national MPs and the status of MEPs elected in Poland .
I shall certainly pass on that information and I would add that I shall report back to this House , in view of the interest of Mr Gargani and the Committee on Legal Affairs , on the review of the other 11 new Member States so that the governments of other Member States that might be affected can then be notified accordingly .
The debate is closed .
Explanations of vote
The next item is clarification on the voting method .
( DE ) Mr President , may I ask that the temperature in the chamber be set at a humane level .
At times it is so cold in here that we almost need to put on our coats .
I ask the administration to ensure that we have a decent temperature in which to work .
Thank you .
I would ask the staff responsible for the heating in the chamber to increase the temperature .
It might go up anyway during this item of discussion .
Oral clarification concerning voting
- ( CS ) Mr Chairman , I welcome the fact that we gave the green light to the modern framework for further development of the automotive industry in Europe .
I am pleased that we have voted for objectives that are realistic and that make provision for the increase in the price of oil and for our great ambitions regarding safety and protection of the environment .
The objectives do not hinder Europe 's ability to compete .
Increasing requirements for safer and safer car designs and for more efficient engines that should emit one third less greenhouse gases are all objectives that already imply an increase in prices as well as an increase in the running costs of cars .
We are aware that these requirements in themselves are not the main motivation for the middle classes and for the less affluent to change their cars more frequently .
The elimination of old cars from the European roads is therefore the basic requirement if the CARS 21 is to prove its worth .
The key is to change consumer motivation .
Taxes and fiscal policies are not , however , entrusted to the European Union .
It will therefore be up to the Member States to carry the responsibility for setting the parameters .
It will be up to the Member States to determine whether and when safer and more environmentally-friendly cars will start taking the place of the old cars on our roads .
That would also be real proof of the effectiveness of CARS 21 .
Written clarification concerning voting
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the report by my Polish colleague Jacek Saryusz-Wolski , asking Parliament to approve the amendment to the Council Regulation of 2004 on the establishment of partnerships in the framework of the stabilisation and association process .
The change entails renaming the partnership with the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia : instead of a ' European partnership ' it is to be called an ' accession partnership ' in order to align this with the name of the Partnerships with the two other candidate countries , Croatia and Turkey .
In addition , Montenegro 's independence had to be taken into account .
As I compose this question , I am also thinking of Kosovo , in the hope that we may find a peaceful , European solution to the difficult situation there .
in writing . - ( NL ) In December 2005 the Council granted the status of candidate country to the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , and in June 2006 Montenegro was recognised as an independent state .
In an urgent procedure without debate , it is now proposed in Article 1 of the Regulation that Albania , Bosnia and Herzegovina , Montenegro and Serbia , including Kosovo , be granted a European Partnership and in Article 1 ( a ) that Croatia and Macedonia be granted an Accession Partnership .
The definitions of those two arrangements are more or less the same .
The rapporteur supports the Commission proposal and asks the Council to consult Parliament again if it intends to depart from that proposal .
It seems to me a real possibility that it will depart from it .
It is not specified how account is to be taken of the anticipated recognition of Kosovo as an independent state in the next few weeks .
It is also not clear whether that means that Macedonia will have to wait longer for the start of accession negotiations , or whether Serbia is being offered the prospect of accession as a priority .
It is well known that the Netherlands and Belgium are opposed to that for as long as the war criminal Ratko Mladić has not been handed over to the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia ( ICTY ) in The Hague .
I therefore expect that point to be put back on the agenda , but am not voting against the report .
in writing . - ( PL ) I would like to vote in favour of the report of Mr Liberadzki on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 95 / 50 / EC as regards the implementing powers conferred on the Commission .
Mr Liberadzki has prepared an excellent report .
I agree with the rapporteur , who is in favour of the Commission 's proposal , and would also recommend that the proposal should be approved without amendments .
Directive 95 / 50 / EC sets out procedures for checks carried out by Member States as regards the transport of dangerous goods by road .
For the purpose of these checks a list of infringements has been proposed , in respect of which vehicles may be immobilised and required to be brought into conformity before continuing their journey .
In addition , it is important that each Member State send a report on the application of the Directive for each calendar year .
in writing . - ( DE ) Tolls imposed on heavy goods vehicles , supposedly introduced in order to shift traffic from road to rail , have predictably failed to make rail transport more appealing but have been offloaded onto consumers .
Particularly on the busiest routes and in large conurbations , the focus on road transport will exacerbate existing problems such as congestion , noise , environmental pollution and particulate concentrations .
Another cause for concern is the cavalier manner in which some transport operations are carried out .
Weekly targeted spot checks on lorries in Austria have greatly improved the safety of road haulage operations and should accordingly become standard practice throughout the EU .
If the European Union cares about the health of its population and protection of the environment , it must waste no time at all in ensuring that major pollution sources such as commercial utility vehicles with ageing diesel engines are replaced , that piggyback rail services are made economically attractive and that the Alpine Convention is implemented .
in writing . - ( PL ) The rapporteur , Paolo Costa , has shown how discrimination in transport rates and conditions can be abolished .
It is true that one can quickly achieve significant benefits by introducing just a few changes into existing legislation .
As a shadow rapporteur I would like to note that a common approach was reached by the Council , the Commission and the Parliament .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the legislative resolution on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on airport charges , following the report of my German colleague Ulrich Stockmann .
At the point when European airports , which are mainly publicly owned , are being privatised , when users do not always wholly appreciate their consumption of services , and when companies are developing in a context involving many variables , it was quite natural to regulate the determination of airport charges .
I welcome the creation of independent national regulatory authorities to supervise this market , and I hope that European coordination will be rapidly established and that , in due course , an independent European regulator will come into being .
in writing . - ( SV ) The Commission proposals contain a long list of detailed rules on how airport charges should be collected .
It is one of the Commission 's responsibilities to monitor compliance with Community competition legislation .
The proposals in question , however , mean excessive bureaucracy and detailed regulation , which is disadvantageous to those Member States which have chosen to deregulate the aviation sector .
The European Parliament considers that the common principles on airport charges should only apply to airports with over five million passenger movements per year , or to those at which annual traffic amounts to over 15 % of the number of passenger movements in the Member State in question .
This position is preferable to the Commission proposal , which also includes smaller regional airports .
We are often called upon to decide whether to support common EU rules aimed at ensuring equal treatment of all interests participating in the internal market .
In this case it is clear that the Commission 's line involves unjustified bureaucracy .
On the basis of these arguments , we have voted in favour of the proposal of the European Parliament , but against the legislative resolution in the final vote .
in writing . - ( PT ) Although it includes some points that improve the Commission proposal , the report continues to reflect and is an integral part of the process of air transport deregulation in the EU .
An improvement in transparency in the method of calculating airport charges is certainly to be welcomed .
However , we disagree with a policy that seeks to deregulate and privatise a strategic public service such as air transport , in this case promoting ' a truly competitive airport market ' , or the incorporation of principles such as the ' user pays ' and profitability in a service that should be public .
What is more , efforts are even being made to remove its ' regulatory role ' from the public arena , creating ' independent regulatory authorities ' to that end .
The privatisations that have taken place in the sector have not added value to the services provided and have caused job losses and a deterioration in workers ' rights , and in some cases technical and operational problems .
We regret that our proposals have been rejected .
They sought to ensure that the directive included recognition of the constraints faced by regions that suffer permanent geographic and natural disadvantages , such as the outermost regions , and therefore established appropriate exceptions for fulfilling universal public service obligations .
in writing . - British Conservatives are very much in favour of larger airports being subject to extra scrutiny where they hold a dominant market position .
However , we already have a strong regulatory system in the United Kingdom and we therefore feel that this is an unnecessary interference which could have an adverse effect on regional airports , which have a vital impact on local economies .
We have tried to improve the measure in order to maintain an ' opt out ' on a national basis or at least to lift the threshold so that most regional airports are excluded , and although these attempts have not yet been successful , we will return to them at Second Reading .
In the meantime we will reserve our position .
in writing . - ( DE ) I did not vote for this report on the Airport Charges Directive , because what is being proposed here amounts to unacceptable discrimination against Luxembourg Airport .
This is no way to treat a small country .
The application of the directive to Luxembourg Airport , with its 1.6 million passengers a year , and the fact that its provisions do not apply to either of Luxembourg 's direct competitors , Frankfurt Hahn and Brussels Charleroi , which process more than three million passengers , is intolerable discrimination in a single market and is based solely on the fact that a national border lies between Luxembourg and these other airports .
The key factor in this directive must not be national borders but objective criteria if its purpose is to ensure that no airport abuses a dominant market position .
Smaller airports , even if they are the only air terminal in their country , do not run the risk of perpetrating such abuse , especially in the case of Luxembourg , where the aforementioned rival airports lie within easy reach and , moreover , are used by budget airlines .
Luxembourg is so small that three different countries lie less than half an hour away from the airport by car .
This proposal is an imposed infringement of the proportionality principle which cannot be accepted as it stands .
That is why I am voting against the proposal by way of protest .
in writing . - I welcome the report and what it seeks to achieve .
Through the introduction of greater transparency in the way airport charges are calculated I feel it creates a level playing field and stimulates competition in the sector .
The plans will help Scotland 's airports in competing with its British counterparts , especially by reducing the dominant position occupied by major travel hubs like London .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to say , as a Member of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , that I am in favour of the Stockmann report on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on airport charges .
I consider it advisable , however , to make some comments in particular as regards the link between airport charges and the costs of the services offered .
In this respect , the delegations from France and the Netherlands , with Italian support , called for a clear reference to costs .
It should be noted here that Italian domestic law makes provision for a specific relationship between the costs of the services supplied and the charges levied by the managing body .
The provision of paragraph 5 makes the Italian system more consistent with the scheme of the directive , enabling current procedures to be maintained , provided that the independent regulatory body provided for in Article 10 , which monitors the correct application of the charges , and the body which approves charging levels nationally are combined into the same authority .
That body , it has to be stressed , will have to be independent from both managing bodies and airline companies .
in writing . - While this report has a number of good ideas on making airport charges more transparent and bringing environmental considerations into the calculation for the first time , we must , as ever , be careful not to throw the baby out with the bath water .
In my constituency , Scotland , we have dozens of small airports , and air travel is not a luxury - it is a necessity serving fragile communities .
I have therefore supported amendments to exempt airports in the outermost regions from the new regime , and look forward to the production of a framework that takes account of the fragile nature of many communities .
in writing . - ( SV ) The big air transport companies have pressed for a specific EU arrangement to regulate the collection of airport charges by airports .
They think that the airports are local monopolies and exploit their monopoly position in order to impose unreasonable charges .
The Swedish air transport agency LFV and the smaller air transport companies , however , have misgivings with regard to new legislation .
For the smaller air transport companies new legislation and harmonisation are more of a threat , since they often choose to fly to competing airports which apply lower charges .
I have voted against the directive for several reasons .
Airports are already regulated by national authorities , and their action is limited by existing competition legislation in the EU .
Those countries which choose a business model that leads to higher airport charges resulting , for example , from investment or transfer of ownership must be allowed to do so as long as the charges are not contrary to existing legislation .
It is then up to the Member States to judge whether their charges are competitive or not .
The European Parliament has reduced the scope of the directive .
Along with others , I voted for the amendments limiting the directive to 67 airports ( compared to around 150 which would have been affected before ) .
However , I cannot support price regulation at EU level .
in writing . - ( FR ) In the first reading in the codecision procedure , I voted in favour of a legislative resolution on the proposal for a regulation on the export and import of dangerous chemicals , based on the report by my Dutch colleague Johannes Blokland .
I am delighted that a compromise has been found , since there is a fairly urgent need to regularise the legal situation ensuing from the annulment by the Court of Justice of the previous Regulation dating from 2003 , while at the same time improving the regulatory situation to take account of developments since that time .
in writing . - I have voted in favour of the compromise amendments agreed by the vast majority of the political groups , which are intended to promote joint responsibility between parties with regard to international trade in hazardous chemicals .
Rules adopted at EU level are vital for the provision of a high level of protection of the environment and public health , and we aspire to these rules being extended internationally .
Awareness of risks is paramount for exporters and importers .
Countries , by virtue of exchange of information and best practice and compulsory national decision-making on the acceptability of chemicals , can heighten such awareness while also making legislators and stakeholders aware of such risks .
The proposed legislation implements the Rotterdam Convention , the underlying principle being to help participating countries learn more about the characteristics of potentially hazardous chemicals and pesticides .
This provides countries with the information and the means to stop unwanted imports of toxic chemicals , putting the requirement and onus on the exporter / exporting country to comply with the laws of the importing country .
I very much welcome and support this legislation and the European Parliament 's compromise package .
in writing . - ( IT ) I welcome the implementation of the Rotterdam Convention , as it shows that Europe is well aware of its commitments to protect the environment and health of third countries and , in particular , developing countries .
From today it will no longer be possible to export hazardous chemical products to countries outside Europe without prior authorisation from the countries of destination ( the so-called PIC - prior informed consent procedure ) .
We had to put an end to the double standard that existed when a substance was strictly regulated in the European market to protect the environment and the health of European citizens , but could be freely traded with third countries without any precautions or any obligation to provide information on risks .
A measure of courtesy and solidarity especially towards countries with fewer information and risk analysis resources than the European Union .
in writing . - ( PT ) The Rotterdam Convention on the Prior Informed Consent Procedure for Certain Hazardous Chemicals and Pesticides in International Trade was approved in September 1998 and entered into force on 24 February 2004 .
Regulation ( EC ) No 304 / 2003 concerning the export and import of dangerous chemicals implements the Rotterdam Convention .
The Commission considered it necessary to bring an action against the Council and the European Parliament at the Court of Justice because it did not agree with the change in the legal basis ( environment rather than common commercial policy ) .
In its Judgment of 10 January 2006 , the Court of Justice annulled the Regulation on the grounds that there should have been a dual legal basis including both Article 133 and Article 175 ( 1 ) of the Treaty , and ruled that the effects of the Regulation would be maintained until a new regulation founded on appropriate legal bases was adopted .
The European Commission submitted a new draft regulation based on the above-mentioned dual legal basis .
In today 's vote , at first reading , the European Parliament approved a range of amendments to the European Commission proposal that will now be negotiated with the Council .
Hence our vote in favour .
in writing . - ( FR ) I welcome the agreement reached on this Regulation at first reading .
There are 75 000 different chemical products on the market and 1 500 new ones are added to that every year .
So it is difficult for governments to monitor and manage all the potentially dangerous substances that cross our borders on a daily basis .
The Regulation will help to ensure that these dangerous chemical products are used in a more rational way , by facilitating the exchange of information about them .
Importing countries will thus be properly equipped and informed so that they can identify potential threats and keep out those chemical products that they are not in a position to manage safely .
We do have to recognise the difficulties that exporting countries sometimes face in seeking to obtain explicit consent from the importing countries .
However , derogations granted to exporting countries awaiting consent may no longer be valid for more than 12 months .
I am pleased that we have adopted this measure , which aims to prevent uncontrolled imports of dangerous chemical products into third countries .
The Regulation will enable us to avoid repetition of the many errors committed in the past , which have caused damage to the environment and to public health .
in writing . - ( PL ) The rapporteur , Johannes Blokland , is right in noting that adequate rules should be adopted worldwide and at European level in order to provide a high level of protection for the environment and public health .
The development of a specific infrastructure in less developed countries could certainly combat the irresponsible use of chemicals which would otherwise damage the ecology , economy and working conditions .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the report .
I see the implementation of the Rotterdam Convention on Prior Informed Consent ( PIC ) as a positive step in this policy area .
Ensuring that prior consent is given from third countries receiving dangerous substances helps ensure that developing countries do not fall victim to the dumping of restricted chemicals in their backyard without their agreement .
Though this is an encouraging move in the right direction , the implementation of the measures needs to be closely followed by the Commission .
in writing . - ( DE ) Unscrupulous traders are trying to evade the special requirements that apply to the transport of chemicals and other hazardous goods , requirements such as specialised driver training , labelling and the like .
Vans belonging to parcel services carry highly corrosive acids , explosive liquids or ammunition , often without the driver even knowing .
If items are not labelled and waybills do not indicate the true nature of the goods , staff may be risking their lives in the event of an accident .
A fire would have unimaginably dire consequences , not only in the form of permanent damage to health but possibly of environmental contamination too .
It makes sense to simplify the requirements for the transport of dangerous goods without compromising safety .
There is also a need to think about ways of speeding up the switchover to double-hull tankers in order to reduce the incidence of environmental disasters .
Above all , however , more targeted spot checks on HGVs are needed throughout the EU so that the black sheep who drive with unsecured , unlabelled or dangerous loads , defective brakes , etc . , can be taken off the road .
in writing . - ( PL ) I voted in favour of the report by Johannes Blokland on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning the export and import of dangerous chemicals .
The report raises the issue of permitting transport without explicit authorisation .
From the economic point of view , the existing situation is unsatisfactory for European exporters of chemicals if they do not receive any response from importing countries about substances listed in the Annexes .
As a result of this regulation , European exporters of chemicals which are severely restricted in Europe can export these substances outside the European Union more easily .
This more flexible approach could result , especially in less developed states , in countries no longer enjoying any protection against imports of chemical substances .
In order to avoid the uncontrolled export of hazardous substances to third countries , and in order to protect those countries that are less able or even unable to assess hazardous chemicals , the period of tacit agreement should be shorter .
It is important that the Commission 's proposal should apply to the issue of introducing tools making it easier for customs authorities to carry out the provisions of the Regulation .
For the mechanisms proposed in this new regulation to function correctly and effectively it is vital to have close cooperation between customs authorities and selected national authorities .
The introduction of the new regulations should be preceded by drawing up guidelines concerning the use of computer products and documentation and providing training in accordance with EU standards , particularly for the new Member States .
in writing . - ( FR ) In the first reading in the codecision procedure , I voted in favour of the legislative resolution amending the proposal of the European Commission amending Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 1408 / 71 on the application of social security schemes to employed persons , to self-employed persons and to members of their families moving within the Community , on the basis of the report by my excellent Hungarian colleague Csaba Őry , which introduces technical amendments to the European Commission 's proposal with a view to making the Regulation clearer or easier to read .
He is pleased that this Regulation sets out to give an accurate impression of the evolution in the legal situation of national social security schemes , and hence to ensure appropriate coordination at Community level .
in writing . - ( PL ) With reference to the principle of the four basic freedoms in European economic integration , I would also like to draw attention to the meaning of Regulation 1408 / 71 , which aims to promote the free movement of workers in the European Union .
Whilst it is true that the report in question relates to strictly technical issues , these very issues , in serving to update the above-mentioned Regulation by making it take into account social insurance changes at national level , have a direct impact on the everyday life of citizens who are travelling , working or living in another Member State .
I would also agree with the rapporteur that , when implementing the principle of free movement in Europe , social conditions should be set out in a precise manner .
Finally , I would like to emphasise how important the proposed changes and the transparency of the guidelines are for thousands of Polish citizens who are living and working outside of Poland .
This is one of the principal reasons why I support Mr Őry 's report .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr Őry is right in acknowledging that , on the level of the European Union , effective coordination needs to be ensured between Member States as regards benefit payments .
This Regulation , by introducing updates that take into account the latest changes in certain Member States , holds out the possibility of guaranteeing to citizens who are travelling from one Member State to another the possibility of benefiting from social insurance .
in writing . - ( FR ) On the basis of the own-initiative report of my German friend and colleague Jorgo Chatzimarkakis , I voted in favour of the Resolution on a Competitive Automotive Regulatory Framework , following the Communication from the European Commission based on the ' CARS 21 ' high-level group .
I should like to begin by welcoming the method involving the holding of a genuine industrial audit with all the stakeholders , with a view to specifying an industrial policy for the automotive sector involving parameters as important as not only the impact on purchasing power , employment , safety , mobility , the environment and the regulatory burdens the industry has to shoulder , but also innovation , competitiveness , the problems of second-hand cars , disposing of old cars , etc . , in an internal market which is far from complete .
It is essential that , having created the internal market in the interests of consumers , the European Union should devote particular attention to manufacturers , implementing a European industrial policy with them .
The automotive sector , in which we have a great tradition , must be given support as it undergoes the major changes taking place today .
in writing . - While I do not disagree that it may be desirable to reduce CO2 emissions in an overall environmental context , it is not for the undemocratic EU to decide these issues .
in writing . - ( PT ) The European automotive industry , which represents around 3 % of the EU 's GDP and 7 % of its manufacturing output , is one of the most important economic sectors , producing around one third of global production .
It is also one of the EU 's leading export sectors and invests 4 % of its turnover in R & D. The sector is one of the largest employers , with over 2 million direct and 10 million indirect jobs , and is therefore a key factor in Europe 's economic , social and cultural life .
The sector is facing serious challenges , however .
Rapid technological progress , coupled with fierce international competition , means that it must change rapidly .
Furthermore , considerable social expectations weigh upon the sector , particularly in terms of the environment and road safety .
This close interaction between the industry , the environment , energy and transport makes it one of the EU 's most regulated areas - it is covered by around 80 directives and 115 UNECE regulations .
We cannot support all the proposals presented in this report , however .
Too much emphasis is given to defending the internal market and competition , while little attention is paid to social and labour issues and the development gap between Member States .
in writing . - ( FR ) The Chatzimarkakis report is supposed to be about the main factors that will make the automotive industry competitive in the years ahead , taking account of environmental constraints , product and safety standards , competitors in the international context , etc .
Yet , threaded throughout the text we find evidence of the ongoing urge to persecute drivers .
Surely curbing traffic in urban areas and the cross-border enforcement of fines for infringement of traffic rules have no place in such a report ?
Are Europeans now to be required , on pain of sanctions or higher taxes , to buy ' clean ' vehicles fitted with expensive safety-related technologies , while the reality in a country like France is that the high average age of cars on the road ( eight years ) is a reflection of people 's financial difficulties and low purchasing power ?
Why are private cars yet again castigated , when they are responsible , in France for example , for just 13 % of CO2 emissions , and that figure is certainly lower in countries that do not use nuclear energy ?
There is a basic paradox here in seeking to have a competitive automotive industry in Europe , when the overall thrust of European policies is to push up the price of cars and to impoverish consumers , while at the same time introducing new forms of persecution to dissuade people from buying and using vehicles .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the report proposing a competitive automotive regulatory framework .
It is a road map for making cars cleaner and safer and for simplifying the legal context for the development of European vehicle manufacturing .
We must make it possible to reduce the impact of road transport on air quality as vehicles currently in use are gradually replaced .
I welcome the adoption of the deadlines that Parliament has set , coinciding with the date of 2015 , to achieve an emissions limit of 125 g / km for new cars coming onto the market .
The date is the same as that for the entry into force of the Euro VI standards .
Additional measures ( involving alternative fuels , eco-driving or tax incentives , for example ) could contribute to this effort , and particular attention should be paid to biofuels and hydrogen .
CARS 21 recommends a holistic approach to road safety , involving vehicle technology , infrastructure and road users ( suggested measures include electronic stability control , seat-belt reminders and emergency braking systems ) .
The first requirement of effective legislation is that it should be realistic , and environmental concerns have long been central to policies within the industry .
in writing . - ( NL ) I have voted against the Chatzimarkakis report , because the Commission proposal is more environmentally friendly .
The rapporteur suggests a target of 125 g / km of CO2 in 2015 .
The Commission proposal suggests a maximum emission of 120 g / km of CO2 in 2012 .
I tabled an amendment to have that withdrawn , but it just failed to go through .
I wonder where the rapporteur has got the less environmentally favourable proposal from without being influenced by the motor industry lobby .
For years now there have been voluntary agreements between the Commission and the motor industry to reduce CO2 emissions .
The Commission target does not just come from nowhere and it is , according to the motor industry , technically achievable and from an innovative point of view an export product .
They will , however , make less profit temporarily in order to be able to stabilise their competitive position in the future .
It is wrongly argued that jobs will be lost .
I might point out that only 6 % of the production costs of new cars are staff costs .
The choice of labour cost savings is separate from the shift to 120 g / km of CO2 in 2012 .
If the motor industry decides to move its operations to low-wage countries , it will do that anyway .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the report .
I strongly believe that the CO2 target of 120g / km by 2012 is one that must be met and is essential in fighting climate change .
Though I acknowledge that Member States need to engage in the funding of research and development for the automobile sector in this area , I feel that the industry itself should also contribute and demonstrate a further commitment to reducing the effects of climate change .
I also approve of the directive calling for the information and consultation of workers on this issue .
in writing . - ( NL ) Together with my colleague , Mrs Liotard , I voted against the Chatzimarkakis report , because the original Commission proposal is more environmentally friendly .
The rapporteur sets a target of 125 g / km of CO2 in 2015 .
In the Commission proposal , the maximum emission was 120 g / km of CO2 in 2012 .
My group tabled an amendment today for that to be withdrawn , but it just failed to go through .
I wonder where the rapporteur got this less environmentally favourable proposal from , if it is not influenced by the motor industry lobby .
For years now there have been voluntary agreements between the Commission and the motor industry to reduce CO2 emissions .
The Commission target does not just come from nowhere .
According to the motor industry , it is technically achievable and can generate an innovative export product .
Certainly car factories will temporarily make less profit , which they see as interference with the strengthening of their competitive position .
It is wrongly argued that jobs might be lost .
Only 6 % of the production costs of new cars are staff costs .
Any lower labour costs are separate from the shift to 120 g / km of CO2 in 2012 .
If the motor industry wants to decide to move its operations to low-wage countries , a less strict rule will not prevent it .
in writing . - ( PT ) The future of the competitiveness of the European automotive sector is extremely important .
The EU should therefore continue to adopt a long-term approach based on investing in research and development and improving the operation of the internal market by means of the necessary legislation and by simplifying administrative procedures , making them quicker and less costly .
The report suggests that an integrated environmental approach should be adopted , allied to new engine technologies and the use of less polluting fuels , and that additional measures should be taken in the area of traffic management , driving behaviour and infrastructure so that greenhouse gas emissions are reduced even further .
I consider these aspects to be essential , and the investment required should be funded largely through public-private partnerships as a new tool for industrial research and technological development .
Finally , the international dimension highlights the need for urgent measures to be taken to improve access to markets , particularly in Asia , by means of multilateral negotiations and bilateral trade agreements .
I therefore voted in favour of the report on the CARS 21 initiative .
in writing . - I will be voting in favour of the Chatzimarkakis report , even though I believe that the car industry has to do more to reduce emissions from the vehicles it produces .
It is very easy on the one hand to pick out the motor car as the chief sinner in all things environmental , and certainly the motor car that we have at the moment leaves a lot to be desired in this area .
But we must work with industry and educate them on the need to produce more environmentally-friendly cars .
The motor industry is a big employer of people and contributes considerably to local , regional and national economies .
It therefore cannot be treated in a cavalier way , as some Members of this House believe .
One area that concerns me is in this report is the clear view that fiscal measures , and fiscal harmonisation , should be used as a way of promoting the Car 21 concept .
For me , this is a move too far , and the one area I cannot support .
However , I welcome this report and support it because overall it adopts a balanced and practical approach .
in writing . - ( DE ) The report entitled CARS 21 : A Competitive Automotive Regulatory Framework has my full support .
This report can help to enhance the competitiveness of the car industry .
Besides imposing new obligations on the industry in the form of environmental requirements , we also need to give it simplified procedures , to cut red tape and to apply the principles of better lawmaking .
In addition , the automotive sector must benefit from more research and development funding .
With regard to the achievement of the target CO2 values , it is important that we base the phased reductions on the parameter of vehicle weight rather than the ' carbon footprint ' .
The only physical correlation that exists is between the weight of a vehicle and its CO2 emissions .
The carbon footprint does not offer this kind of correlation , and its use would only serve to put the German car industry at a competitive disadvantage .
We have come out emphatically in favour of an integrated strategy that takes account of all possible means of reducing CO2 emissions .
We want factors such as individual driver behaviour , the creation of various incentives to drive environmentally clean cars , the use of biofuels and the promotion of new forms of vehicle technology to contribute to the reduction of emission levels .
This poses a challenge not only to car manufacturers but to all stakeholders .
in writing . - I voted against the Chatzimarkakis report , because the Commission proposal is more environmentally friendly .
The rapporteur sets as target 125 grams of CO2 per km in 2015 .
The Commission proposal suggests a maximum emission target of 120 grams of CO2 in 2012 , which was retabled as an amendment .
This amendment has regrettably been dismissed .
I wonder from where the rapporteur got the proposal , which is environmentally and technically inferior , without having been influenced by the car industry lobby .
For years there have been voluntary agreements between the Commission and the car industry to limit the CO2 emissions .
The Commission target does not come out of the blue and is , according to the car industry , technically feasible and , innovatively speaking , an export product .
They will , however , temporarily be making a lesser profit in order to stabilise their competition position in the future .
There is unjustified use of the issue of loss of employability .
I point out the fact that only 6 % of the production costs of new cars are personnel costs .
The choice of cost-cutting on labour is unrelated to the move to 120 grams of CO2 per km in 2012 .
Should the car industry decide to move to low wage countries , they will do this nonetheless .
in writing . - ( NL ) The transport sector accounts for one fifth of greenhouse gases .
Sustainable , efficient and clean cars can make a serious contribution in the fight against climate change .
Efforts to achieve that can make the motor industry considerably stronger in the future .
Unfortunately there is no sign of that message in the response to the CARS 21 document by the Commission and Parliament .
In our amendments , we have tried to note a number of core points .
Individual mobility and the motor industry need to be looked at in the broader context of sustainable mobility .
We emphasise that the escalating worldwide demand for transport fuels can lead to the exploitation of oil sources with serious adverse effects on the environment , such as tar sand and synthetic coal gas .
Steps also have to be taken to improve fuel efficiency in the sector .
The choice of biofuels can only be developed if the Commission establishes a binding comprehensive certification system with strict social and environmental criteria .
Finally , we would also like to remove , firstly , the paragraphs suggesting that motor sport and Formula 1 racing can possibly contribute to more environmentally friendly technologies and , secondly , the paragraphs that allow manufacturers to produce vehicles that emit extra CO2 if those emissions result from legally binding measures at EU level .
Most of our amendments have been rejected .
I am therefore voting against this report .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the European Parliament resolution on tax treatment of losses in cross-border situations , based on the own-initiative report by my excellent colleague Piia-Noora Kauppi in response to a communication from the European Commission on the same subject .
I am very concerned about the unfavourable repercussions of the large number of regimes applied by the Member States to cross-border losses on the workings of the internal market .
In the context of the recent decision of the European Court of Justice ( ECJ ) in the Marks & Spencer case , this is a particularly opportune time , since , in the absence of cross-border deduction of losses , compensation for these losses is generally limited to the profits realised in the Member State in which the investment was made .
This distorts the decisions of undertakings within the internal market .
It would seem to be essential to instigate direct coordination of Member States ' tax systems within the internal market .
However , this must be a temporary solution , since in the longer term we must adopt a common consolidated basis for taxation of companies that constitutes a global solution and eliminates the tax obstacles involved in cross-border compensation of losses and profits .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the Kauppi Report because there is a need for continued detailed debate on the various contentious issues that arise in this report .
It is necessary to ensure that different corporate tax regimes do not enable companies to evade their responsibilities to support society by a share of their profits through a fair corporate tax regime .
However particular attention needs to be given to the negative impact that a CCCTB could have on small countries such as Ireland , whose prosperity and employment levels depend to a large extent on its capacity to attract foreign investment .
in writing . - ( PT ) Unfortunately the amendments tabled by our Group were rejected , in particular certain positions contrary to those that were finally approved .
This included the opinion on the judgment of the Court of Justice of the European Communities in the Marks & Spencer case , which constitutes excessive interference in the right of Member States not to have their tax systems weakened .
In cross-border situations fiscal competence must be fairly distributed between the Member States concerned , avoiding the double offsetting of losses and risks of tax evasion .
There is also considered to be a risk that , by allowing cross-border losses to be offset , companies tend to ensure that their profits are taxed in low-tax rather than high-tax countries .
The possibility of offsetting cross-border losses can thus only be justified when parts of the same enterprise are genuinely interlinked , or , in other words , when those parts are economically and organisationally integrated .
Above all , the conditions for appropriate and equal tax treatment which avoids tax evasion and which also ensures that public services function and that income is apportioned and distributed more fairly must be safeguarded .
in writing . - ( SV ) The internal market is the EU 's greatest contribution to democracy and prosperity in Europe .
The intention of this report is said to be to make the internal market work better by bringing about the harmonisation of tax bases , in this case by the harmonisation of ways in which company losses are to be treated when several countries are affected .
However , the report rests upon a premise which has not been thought through .
Harmonisation of tax bases has very different effects in the different countries depending on differences in the structure of their industries .
In some countries there is a preponderance of heavy primary industry with huge long-range investments , whereas in others industry is dominated by service businesses and light engineering .
We therefore consider that the question of harmonising tax bases should be investigated more thoroughly before a report such as this is debated in Parliament .
in writing . - ( PL ) Ladies and gentlemen , taxes must be one of the most sensitive EU topics .
Whenever discussions on this subject take place in international fora , there is a chorus of critical voices , chiefly because Member States jealously guard their right to set taxes .
In the discussions concerning Mrs Kauppi 's report on Tax Treatment of Losses in Cross-Border Situations , the issue of taxes was thoroughly analysed .
The report draws attention to the major problems associated with branches of companies that benefit from different tax systems , frequently within the framework of a single company , but in different countries .
There is no doubt that the European Union needs competitive tax regulation .
This does not at all mean harmonised , but competitive .
This means regulations that do not create an excessive burden but , on the contrary , will provide an incentive to start a business .
I believe that the European Union should definitely not think about the harmonisation of taxes on legal persons , but it should coordinate taxes on the EU level so as to create real benefits as a result of tax competitiveness .
I am very pleased that the rapporteur puts forward the same view in the report that has been presented .
in writing . - In my view the tackling of the obstacles apparent in cross-border trade does not lie in harmonisation of taxation , which should fall under the remit of individual national legislatures .
I therefore , abstained from the vote on this issue .
in writing . - Mr President , sometimes I do wonder if the effort we put into reports in this place is worth it .
Taxation policy must remain a competence of member states and any moves from anywhere to extend Community competence to this policy field will be met with opposition by our constituents , national governments and businesses .
Accordingly , while I do not denigrate the hard work that has clearly gone into it , I disagree with much of this report and even question the need for it .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats welcome the Community strategy on health and safety at work and have therefore voted for the report .
It is important that targets now be set for the number of labour inspectors in Europe .
According to ILO recommendations the number of inspectors should be one per 10 000 employees .
It is to be deplored , however , that following cuts imposed by the Government Sweden no longer meets the requirements laid down by the ILO and now the European Parliament .
After the Government 's savings Sweden will only have 0.7 inspector per 10 000 employees .
Compare this with Denmark , for example , where the figure is a least two .
in writing . - ( FR ) On the basis of the report by my British colleague Glenis Willmott , I voted in favour of the European Parliament resolution on the Community strategy on health and safety at work 2007-2012 , in response to the Communication from the European Commission on this subject .
Every year , almost 500 000 people die or suffer permanent disability for work-related reasons , and we must applaud the European Commission 's goal of achieving an average 25 % reduction in work-related accidents in the EU .
I support the idea of increased activity by the European Agency for Safety and Health at Work in Bilbao ( Spain ) .
In this matter and , more generally , in the development of social Europe , I regret the fact that neither the report nor , moreover , the Communication from the European Commission stresses that it is essential to support the social partners ; we must always remember that under the existing Treaties , with Articles 137 ff. of the Treaty establishing the European Community ( TEC ) , and this has been confirmed by the Lisbon Treaty that is in the process of being ratified , legislative instruments are available to the latter to facilitate the development of European social law .
in writing . - This is a non-legislative report which has undergone substantial revision in committee as a direct result of our input .
As a result , there should be no automatic need to divide on party-political lines , though we have tabled a few additional amendments for the plenary session .
In its raw original form , it called for more prescriptive EU legislation in many areas .
It now welcomes the Commission 's greater emphasis on regulatory simplification and the reduction of administrative burdens , and the strong focus on helping SMEs .
It recognises the prime role of Member States in promoting the health and safety agenda .
We are proud of the role that we have played in significantly softening the original approach to make the report acceptable .
Safeguarding the health and safety of workers is a concern for us all .
in writing . - ( PT ) The report approved by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs covers significant aspects of the struggle for better living and working conditions , with greater protection of health and safety .
Unfortunately , however , on the PPE 's initiative , several proposals were amended and paragraph 59 , which stressed that permanent employment is an important contributory factor to health and safety at work , was rejected .
Hence our final vote to abstain .
Concerned that the number of accidents and illnesses at work is not falling uniformly , since their incidence is much greater than the EU average among particular categories of workers ( migrants , people on insecure contracts , women , the young and the elderly , for example ) and particular Member States , the European Parliament calls upon the Commission to give priority to activities and / or sectors that involve particular risks .
However , we welcome the approval of the paragraph that considers excessive working hours and insufficient rest periods to be a key factor in increased levels of accidents and illnesses at work , and that calls for a proper balance of work and family life .
in writing . - ( SV ) The June List considers that issues of health and safety at work are essentially a national matter .
Obviously everything , from phasing out asbestos in the workplace to the protection of health care workers who work with sharp instruments , is important .
But we have every confidence that the Member States are competent to formulate adequate national strategies on health and safety at work .
We would therefore question what practical added value EU ideas in this area can bring .
On the basis of the arguments made above we have voted in favour of the amendment to limit the strategy on health and safety at work and against the report in the final vote .
in writing . - ( RO ) I am in favour of this report and I support the proposal of using the Structural Funds to invest in mining infrastructure in order to prevent so many occupational accidents occurring in this sector .
The European Union cannot have a credible strategy of labour protection without providing financial support to the Member States .
Mining is Romania 's hardest hit industry , having the highest number of occupational accidents , but the insufficient national resources are available for improving working conditions .
The European Union can remedy the situation by the funding it makes available to the Member States .
I would also like to propose that part of the European funding available under the human resources operational programme should be used for the training and equipment of labour inspection departments .
It is important that all Member States should reach the minimum level specified by the World Labour Organization , of at least one labour protection inspector for every 10 000 workers .
in writing . - ( FR ) The aims of the Community strategy on health and safety at work for 2007-2012 - while undoubtedly laudable in themselves - are unlikely to be realised , just as the Lisbon strategy is unlikely to be realised by 2010 .
Moreover , such is the degree of disparity in legislation on these matters in Europe that they are not readily manageable at Community level , and the big risk is that health and safety standards will converge towards the lowest common denominator .
Instead of publicising the benefits and advantages it has to offer , Europe should be taking practical action and attacking the factors that actually place working people at risk , namely insecurity , unemployment and poverty .
When these have been addressed , and only then , questions of health and safety at work can , of course , be resolved in the ongoing process of common standard-setting .
Our leaders in Europe are mistaken : encouraging immigration is not the way to reduce levels of poverty or its prevalence , or to promote growth .
That much is plain from the fact that the last 10 years , with immigration at unprecedented levels , have seen lower than ever growth rates by comparison with the rest of the world .
The Community strategy for health and safety at work has not taken these parameters into account .
We shall therefore vote against the report .
in writing . - I found that the report was a very encouraging step towards ensuring a safer workplace .
The need for increased funding to guarantee health and safety measures are met in areas such as mining , steelmaking and shipbuilding is essential , especially in such high risk industries .
The call to protect health workers from blood-borne infections , and to introduce new legislation on occupational diseases , takes account of the profound changes in the dangers that workers now face in their day-to-day work .
I therefore voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - Mr President , I am delighted to congratulate our rapporteur on a balanced report taking account of an important strategy , as the EU has been instrumental in raising health and safety standards at work across the EU and the Community strategy to 2012 looks set to continue that work .
However , we must always be mindful that there does come a time when standards are sufficiently high and the focus must go to enforcement , not new legislative or regulatory burdens .
We must keep an eye on this area to ensure that a proper balance is struck , and this report takes us in that direction .
in writing . - ( NL ) Health and safety at work have an extremely important part to play on the European agenda and in the Lisbon Strategy .
Investment in them increases productivity and reduces social security costs .
The previous policy plan , for instance , already significantly reduced the number of accidents at the workplace .
For the new policy period ( up to 2012 ) , further efforts will be made to achieve a 25 % reduction , and the Commission undertakes to help SMEs implement the existing regulatory legal framework .
The Willmott report improves considerably on the Commission proposal .
It aims at a suitable mix of tougher and better labour inspections , effective prevention , appropriate incentives and sanctions , together with sharing best practice and increasing worker participation .
With a few ' green ' amendments such as greater attention to the group of agency staff ( women , migrant workers ) , temporary and poorly trained workers , and attention to the underlying causes of mental illness and to mental health , to addiction and psychological risks at work , such as stress , harassment and bullying , as well as violence , I fully support this report .
in writing . - ( EL ) The Community Strategy 2007-2012 on Health and Safety at Work does not deal with the actual causes of accidents and conceals the irresponsibility of capital .
The proposed measures are piecemeal , limited to management of today 's criminal reality at the expense of the working class and employees generally .
Accidents at work are the heavy price the working class is made to pay , within the scope of the barbarous spread of capitalism , all for the sake of profit .
Accidents at work each year are steadily increasing in Greece and in the other EU Member States , with the result that thousands of workers lose their lives and thousands of others suffer insurmountable problems .
The Εuropean Union , true to the anti-labour Lisbon Strategy , is shifting the weight of responsibility onto the workers , and is strengthening privatisation in the field of health and safety at work , proposing access to private external agencies , downgrading the role of public control mechanisms , and remaining silent about the responsibilities of enterprises .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
( CS ) Mr Chairman , I would just like to ask whether today 's special regime will be repeated or whether it was really only today 's extravaganza .
Can you give me an answer , please ?
As I understand it , this was an exceptional situation as regards the number of applications .
I hope that this situation will not be repeated .
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 23.05 )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9.05 a.m. )
Presentation of the programme of the Slovenian Presidency ( debate )
Ladies and gentlemen , today is a very special day .
It is a special day because for the first time in the history of the European Union the representative , the Prime Minister of this country , namely Slovenia , has the Presidency of the European Union . Slovenia is a country that joined the European Union on 1 May 2004 along with nine other countries .
And it is the first time that one of the former communist countries now living according to the basic principles of freedom , democracy and parliamentarianism , namely Slovenia , has the Presidency of the European Union .
I therefore warmly welcome the President-in-Office of the Council , the Prime Minister of Slovenia , Janez Janša .
Welcome to the European Parliament !
( Applause )
Today is also special for another reason , however , and I therefore extend a particularly warm welcome to the President of the European Commission , José Manuel Durão Barroso , because it is exactly 50 years ago that the first President of the European Commission , Walter Hallstein , convened his first Commission .
The 50th anniversary of the European Commission is another event for us to celebrate .
And so I also send the Commission , as an exception in this rather solemn context , all good wishes for this special birthday .
( Applause )
Ladies and gentlemen , it is a pleasure to listen to the report of the President-in-Office of the Council .
Many thanks to the President-in-Office of the Council , Prime Minister Janša .
It is wonderful that Slovenia has the Presidency .
The Group Chairmen will soon be expressing their affirmations , but I can say now , on behalf of the entire Parliament , that the European Parliament stands alongside Slovenia in creating a successful European Union and we are therefore sure that the Slovenian Presidency will be a great success .
Now I would like to ask the President of the Commission to speak to us .
President of the Commission . - Mr President , Prime Minister , Members of Parliament , my first word goes to the Slovenian Presidency .
Indeed , it is the first time a Member State of the last enlargement has assumed this very important responsibility .
Slovenia is a great example of the success of the enlargement .
It was the first country to adopt the euro .
The example of Slovenia demonstrates that the Member States which joined the European Union in 2004 and 2007 are now at the core of European integration .
It also shows the very important European credentials of Slovenia .
I wish to express to Prime Minister Janša my full support for the next six months for the very important task of being President of the European Council .
You , Prime Minister , dear friend , and your country , are symbols of the struggle for freedom , a fundamental value for Europe .
And thank you for reminding us of these great celebrations of Schengen .
I was very moved to be with you and with others on that border between Slovenia and Italy , and I will not forget the words you used at that moment , reminding us that , about 20 years ago , people were killed there by the Yugoslav Army when they were trying to reach freedom , to reach Italy , to reach the European Union .
It was indeed a very impressive journey that I undertook with Prime Minister Socrates and the President of the European Council , and at the end of December we visited Germany , Poland and the Czech Republic ; we were also on the border between Estonia and Finland , Slovakia , Hungary and Austria , and we saw the emotion expressed in the eyes of so many people .
I think it is important to remind ourselves about this , from where we are now .
Listening to you today , Prime Minister Janša , could only reinforce my firm belief that this enlargement of 2004-2007 , which united Europe in peace and democracy , is indeed one of the greatest achievements of European history , and we should be proud of it .
The Commission will work very closely with the Slovenian Presidency on central issues of its programme , such as the stability of the Western Balkans , Kosovo , and Bosnia in particular , but also enlargement , the European neighbourhood policy , asylum and immigration , cooperation with strategic partners and intercultural dialogue .
Let me concentrate on three issues that are very much linked with our responsibility .
I would like to focus on three priorities : the Treaty of Lisbon , the package on energy and climate change , and the renewed Lisbon Strategy .
The year 2007 leaves the European Union in good shape .
Progress towards the conclusion of a new Treaty met our expectations .
The Union followed the roadmap that was presented by the Commission in May 2006 : first the Berlin Declaration , which celebrated the 50th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome and outlined a vision for the future of the Union ; then the June European Council , where we agreed - under the German Presidency - on a precise mandate for the IGC ; and finally , the signature of the Treaty of Lisbon in December .
The process of reaching agreement showed a remarkable degree of consensus between Member States and European institutions on the way forward .
We have a credible and balanced Treaty , and I believe that it provides strong foundations for the future .
We have avoided much of the disunity and disagreements of previous institutional debates .
This leaves the Union in good shape to ensure we deliver our political priority for this year . The political priority for this year is the successful ratification of the Lisbon Treaty .
I call on all Member States to proceed swiftly and decisively to ensure ratification of this European Treaty .
Next week , the Commission will adopt the climate change and renewable energy package .
Our proposals meet the ambition set by all Heads of State and Government in last year 's Spring European Council , who called for precise and legally binding targets .
The Commission is now acting on that mandate .
I see with great satisfaction that this is also a priority , both for the Slovenian Presidency of the Council and for Parliament .
We will have to work hard to have the package adopted by the end of 2008 .
Our package will complement the proposals presented last year on the energy internal market .
A European energy market will give more options and better prices to European citizens , and it is essential to meet the three central challenges which the European Union faces in energy : competitiveness , sustainability and security of supply .
We knew from the very beginning that transforming Europe into a low-carbon economy is not an easy task .
But this is the moment to be serious , responsible and coherent with our commitment .
The Commission will follow a balanced approach to efforts asked of the Member States .
They start from different places ; they have different circumstances ; some are more able than others to finance investment .
We also need to minimise the costs of adaptation for European industry and to address the challenges faced by energy intensive industries .
The Commission is well aware of these realities , as our proposals will show .
But do not expect us to compromise on the European interest , which is to lead global efforts to fight climate change , to ensure energy security and to provide a competitive advantage to our economies .
Both our international credibility and the credibility before European citizens depend on the fulfilment of the targets established in March 2007 .
Bali was a great success in setting out a roadmap to agreement , but our package next week is a clear demonstration of our willingness to put our money where our mouth is .
The energy and climate change package should be seen as an opportunity for Europe in economic terms .
It will encourage innovation and it will increase competitiveness .
It is a mistake to set the fight against climate change against the competitiveness of European industries .
The Union should lead global efforts to tackle climate change , and European industries should continue to be world leaders .
At the same time , we will also create new markets and new jobs and will have the ' first mover ' advantage in many of those sectors .
It is true that our package aims at a more environment-friendly Europe , but it will also contribute to a more industry-friendly , a more job-friendly and a more consumer-friendly Europe .
It will be a win-win initiative .
Three years after the relaunch in 2005 , the Lisbon Strategy for growth and jobs is working .
It has contributed to a better performance of the European economy , in particular to the creation of 6.5 million new jobs over the last two years .
We expect the creation of five million jobs up to 2009 .
Structural reforms are also helping economic growth and improving the prospects for European long-term prosperity .
These are very encouraging achievements .
As we launch the next Lisbon cycle , we need to take ambitious decisions in the Spring Council on areas such as research , innovation , the business environment , professional skills and the qualification of labour .
The Commission is making proposals to turn the fifth freedom - the free movement of knowledge - into a European reality in order to speed up innovation and make it available to a higher number of European citizens .
We also need a Small Business Act for Europe to foster the growth of the small and medium-sized enterprises .
Those small and medium-sized enterprises create nine out of ten new jobs .
This is a priority for the Commission in 2008 .
Last but not least , Europe needs active labour policies : policies that give people the skills to realise their potential , and policies that allow our citizens to secure their employability .
Investing in people is the surest way to guarantee our citizens that they will remain employed in spite of moving from job to job .
We need to offer prosperity , not just for some , not even only for the majority , but for all .
This is why investing in people and modernising labour markets remains one of the four priority areas for the new Lisbon cycle .
We must promote the entrepreneur spirit of Europeans : the creation of jobs , innovation and competition are keys to European success .
Economic forecasts for 2008 and 2009 are already slightly less optimistic , and we should take these signals seriously .
We know that the cause of this is some financial instability coming from the other side of the Atlantic .
Yet we should fight negative discourses .
Our economic fundamentals are sound and solid .
We also know that economic downturn could blunt the readiness to pursue economic and social reforms .
It may be a natural reaction , but it would be the wrong lesson to draw from past experience .
Global competition and the prosperity of our citizens require that Europe continue its reform process to be a more competitive economy .
This is the only way to keep our model , our European model of social cohesion .
One of the keys to success in 2007 was the Commission 's ability to work well with Parliament and the Council .
We would never have had agreement on the Lisbon Treaty or solutions for difficult dossiers like the European Institute of Technology and Galileo without this partnership approach .
The triangular institutional partnership between Parliament , the Slovenian Presidency of the Council and the Commission will be crucial to our success in 2008 .
With a ratified Treaty , an agreed energy and climate change package , and a delivering Lisbon Strategy of growth and jobs , we will certainly have in 2009 a more confident and a better prepared Europe to face the future .
Finally , let me thank President Pöttering for his congratulations on the 50th anniversary of the first meeting of the European Commission .
Indeed , it has been a long journey since 1958 for this institution .
The European Commission has been at the centre of the European integration process as a source of dynamism and ambition , as a reference for all those who believe in the European project .
Today I am proud to be leading this institution at the beginning of the 21st century as we face new challenges and require new solutions .
The European Commission will remain loyal to Walter Hallstein and all the founding fathers who , 50 years ago , launched this great institution as a central player in our common project .
In close cooperation with Parliament and with the Council , we will continue to promote our common goals : a strong Europe , an open Europe , a Europe of freedom , prosperity and solidarity .
And we are quite sure that , working hand-in-hand with the Slovenian Presidency and with Prime Minister Janša , we will achieve concrete results for our citizens .
Many thanks , Commission President .
Walter Hallstein said on 16 January 1958 - I quote , because it is a short sentence addressed to the Members of the Commission : ' Your work will bear fruit , however , only when there is close cooperation with the other bodies , particularly the Council of Ministers and Parliament 's Assembly . '
End of quote .
Today we are the European Parliament and what applied then in 1958 also applies today in 2008 , and I have no doubt at all that , when the European institutions work together , they will also be successful .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the European Council , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , it is fortunate that the desire of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats for Europe in 2008 to be effective and able to respond to the concerns of its citizens coincides with the Slovenian Presidency of the European Union .
Slovenia , your beloved country , Prime Minister Janša , is indeed a country that works .
The macroeconomic indicators and nature of the political debate prove this .
Slovenians are in the vanguard of making people feel they belong to Europe .
Slovenians are among the most effective at achieving the Lisbon objectives .
During her journey to EU accession and since 2004 , Slovenia has achieved many successes .
What we have done , or not quite done , in 50 years , Slovenia has managed to do in 10 , while making the difficult transition from socialism to a market economy , without disrupting society .
A strong privatised economy , stable inflation , rising salaries , a relatively low unemployment rate and above all a strong currency that enabled you to join the euro in 2007 .
You have also joined the Schengen area and you are now the first of the new Member States to take the reins of the EU .
The Slovenian Presidency undeniably marks the integration of the new Member States within the European Union .
By taking responsibility for following through the ratification process of the Lisbon Treaty , by directing the efforts being made by the 27 Member States to meet the challenges Europe has to face in terms of energy and climate change , growth and employment , by continuing the integration process of the Western Balkans , by contributing through your initiatives to the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue , which will provide the chance to reaffirm the values of openness , tolerance and dialogue that are at the heart of the European project , the Slovenian Presidency is showing that the countries that have joined the EU since 2004 are now familiar not only with the EU 's institutional affairs , but also with its internal functioning and the way Europe asserts its interests at international level .
President of the Council , the PPE-DE Group will be alongside you , supporting the achievement of your priority objectives .
The future of Europe will be played out with the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Effectiveness is therefore vital if ratification is to be achieved so that new instruments are available by the time of the European Parliament elections in 2009 .
Our group will also support your efforts to launch the new cycle of the Lisbon Strategy effectively and to guarantee a prosperous , equitable and environmentally-friendly future for Europe and ensure our economy is in a good position to benefit from the opportunities offered by globalisation .
Therefore , to create favourable conditions for social growth , to make knowledge and innovation drivers for growth and to find answers for demographic challenges , energy supply and climate change , Europe must play a dominant role in negotiations with its global partners on a post-Kyoto system .
President-in-Office of the Council , concerning the Balkans and the prospects for the Western Balkans joining Europe , we will support your efforts to foster stability and cooperation in the region , because the security and prosperity of the whole EU depend on this .
The EU and your Presidency must play their part in resolving the issue of Kosovo 's status .
The bridging role between East and West that Slovenia has often played in Europe historically and geographically is an asset for the EU and its Member States .
At the crossroads of all the influences that have marked the history of our continent , Slovenia is a constant thoroughfare for people , goods and cultural currents of all kinds .
Slovenia will be the ideal promoter of dialogue between the different cultures , creeds and religious and spiritual traditions in the context of the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue .
Mr President , President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , this I say on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , I look forward to an effective Europe in 2008 , a successful Europe . The EU Presidency is undoubtedly a considerable challenge for a country like Slovenia , particularly in view of its human resources and the size of its government administration , as you have said .
However , President-in-Office , other EU Member States - Luxembourg , Austria - have proved many times over that European conviction , tradition and performance are not measured by the size of countries .
All the best to the Slovenian Presidency !
( Applause )
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to emphasise once again on behalf of my Group what I said to you , Prime Minister , on two occasions in Ljubljana : as the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , we are prepared to support your Presidency in any way we can .
It is - as you have rightly said - a historic Presidency .
The Presidency of a state that has emerged from a communist dictatorship - and this should not be belittled - with a Prime Minister who was himself a victim of this dictatorship , is in fact a Presidency that not only deserves the full support of all democrats , but also has a great opportunity to recapture the hearts of the people again because it gives us here in Parliament as well as in Europe the opportunity once again to show that change is possible and in the long run freedom always prevails and democracy will always triumph !
Your country is also proof of this : no dictatorship in the world will survive in the long run .
It may do so for 10 , 30 or 100 years , but in the end democracy always triumphs , and this is a positive sign .
Your introductions , refreshing in their objectiveness , should set the tone for the whole of 2008 .
I do not know what awaits us in the second half of the year , but we have at least discussed policy today and that is something we very much appreciate .
The fact that today we have been discussing policy rather than personal matters is perhaps the first difference to the second half of this year .
It is striking , however , that we have already established a few differences .
One difference I would like to expand on is that yes , the enlargement of the European Union is not over .
Yes , the enlargement of the European Union is currently under negotiation .
Yes , it is under negotiation with Macedonia , yes it is under negotiation with Croatia and yes , it is under negotiation with Turkey .
You have revealed that you are seeking negotiations with Turkey with the aim of membership .
The Council Presidency for the second half of 2008 does not want this .
What we want , however , is clarity from the Council .
Are negotiations currently taking place with Turkey with the aim of membership or not ?
This is one of the crucial points you will need to clarify first as best you can in the framework of the Troika during your Presidency of the Council .
The second difference - and we have listened very attentively to this - is that you consider the European institutions strong enough to organise the neighbourhood policy themselves by their own efforts .
Well said !
This is a clear rebuff to the separate institutions of the Mediterranean Union proposed by your heir presumptive to the office of Council President .
Very good - we support you in this , too !
( Applause )
We can therefore see a few rifts lurking in the Council , but you can rely on the fact that the Socialist Group at least is on your side , Mr Janša .
The President-in-Office of the Council has talked about the opening up of the Schengen borders .
This , too , is an important point and I thank you for this commitment to the great opportunity that the associated freedom of movement offers our citizens .
I thank you , too , for the clear declaration - from a state like Slovenia , a state with your country 's history - that you see it as an opportunity for the freedom of your people , because by it you are also sending out a signal against the far right in Europe , which abuses every one of these freedoms with its rhetoric of fear against Europe and makes people afraid of any imponderable developments instead of reassuring them of the opportunities that freedom brings .
( Applause )
I have a request for you , Commission President .
In Germany the relocation of Nokia is currently the subject of great debate .
You have just said that the strength of Europe 's economy lies in its small and medium-sized enterprises .
This is correct , but we also still have an enormous share in industrial jobs .
In my country the Minister for Economic Affairs of North Rhine-Westphalia is now asserting that this relocation of Nokia from Bochum in Germany to Romania would be financed by EU funds .
I don 't believe it , but please could you check it and clarify that this is not the case , because rhetoric such as this , as bitter and painful as it is , if not true , is also simply grist to the mill of those who are against the construction of a united Europe .
Clarification is therefore very important here .
( Applause )
One final comment to the President of the European Parliament and the President of the Commission .
Yes , Walter Hallstein was a great man .
As one of the founding fathers of the European Union and one of the Presidents of the Commission , he made a huge contribution , but the extent to which those who would imitate Hallstein have already removed themselves from his founding work can be seen in you , Mr President , 50 years on .
Mr Hallstein was a fervent advocate of Turkey 's membership of the European Union .
You are indeed somewhat sceptical of this , as are all your colleagues .
In this respect yes , Walter Hallstein was a great European !
( Applause )
Many thanks to my colleague , Martin Schulz .
Conventions in the House make it impossible - or at least not customary - for a proper answer to be given to the President on tongue-in-cheek contributions from Group Chairmen .
If I had been in another role , it would have been a pleasure to give you an answer , but I am grateful for Walter Hallstein 's friendly comments .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I should like to address some remarks to Prime Minister Janša .
President-in-Office , my group comes to you with one simple message : ' Europe expects ' .
It expects 2008 to be a year of progress .
We expect that progress to start now .
And we expect your Presidency to rise to the challenge .
I have no doubts you will .
Was it not a feisty Slovene who , raising his fist against a mighty empire , first declared : ' All roads do not lead to Rome ! ' ?
Well , neither do they lead to Paris , and this is not the start of the French Presidency .
It is an historic first for the countries which entered our Union in 2004 .
President-in-Office , your country may be small in size but we know that it is mighty in spirit , and we know too that Europe 's Davids often make better presidencies than its Goliaths .
True to form , your Presidency 's programme combines quiet ambition and a consensual style , which have the potential to unite our continent .
Such unity will be vital to the early ratification of the Lisbon Treaty and to mustering support for an interinstitutional agreement on how to govern Europe under that new Treaty .
On interinstitutional cooperation , we would welcome much dialogue with you and a greater presence of your Government in this Chamber .
We regret that your seat was empty yesterday when we heard from the first guest in our Year of Intercultural Dialogue .
Your programme speaks of the importance of internal dynamism - and that , Mr Schulz , is the way to create jobs and to maintain jobs in this continent : internal dynamism .
We rely on you , President-in-Office , to push forward the single market in energy , in telecoms , in health-care services .
The European Union has a hard enough time convincing its citizens that it adds value to their daily lives , so , in a clear-cut case for faster medical care , for lower bills , for greater consumer choice , we would be mad to push proposals for patients ' rights off the table just because they are controversial .
In other areas , you will have to flex your muscles a great deal more - particularly with your presidential counterparts who have a vested interest in promoting nuclear energy as the panacea of climate change .
Solidarity and burden-sharing are the key to success in cutting emissions and meeting renewable energy targets .
In 2008 , our Union must show , as President Barroso said , that it can turn fine words about combating climate change into action .
Progress in the Western Balkans is rightly one of your priorities and your experience and understanding of the area will be a bonus to our Union .
Nonetheless , I suspect that maintaining , as you do , that the situation in Bosnia-Herzegovina is worse than that in Kosovo does not reflect majority opinion in the Union .
Nor am I sure it is a good way to motivate the people of Bosnia-Herzegovina .
If it is designed to appease Serbia , it will not work .
Sweetening the pill of Kosovo 's independence with a Stabilisation and Association Agreement may be a way forward .
But , while Mr Đelić readies his pen to come to Brussels , my group reiterates - in the strongest possible terms - that there can be no Stabilisation and Association Agreement without Serbia 's full cooperation with the ICTY .
( Applause )
Serge Brammertz , the new Chief Prosecutor , has yet to see fresh evidence of cooperation .
None of us , President-in-Office , wish to see Serbia remain on Europe 's sidelines , and your Presidency 's courteous and constructive attitude may well bring it in from the cold and deliver Ratko Mladić .
But in the mean time , as you say in Slovenia , ' pray for a good harvest , but keep on hoeing ' .
( Applause )
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( GA ) Mr President , the Slovenian Government is taking over the responsibility of the EU presidency at a time of many challenges .
The European countries have to tackle ratification of the Treaty ; the spotlight is being trained on the Balkan region ; an agreement has to be reached at EU level on the energy package ; and new impetus has to be found in order to resolve the conflict between Palestine and Israel .
As has rightly been commented on by colleagues already , the list of what Europe needs to be doing is endless .
The range of topics and decisions and the areas of interest and of conflict that have to be dealt with are enormous .
Rather than give lectures to you on what you fail to do or on what others may fail to do in the future , I shall focus briefly on three areas .
Firstly , the Reform Treaty , the Lisbon Treaty : its ratification is essential for the onward development of the European Union .
Secondly , with regard to future enlargements : we must ensure that candidate countries feel they have an opportunity and a chance to become members of the European Union in the near future .
Thirdly and , in my opinion , most importantly , Kosovo and what is happening there , and a peaceful transition from its present status to whatever future status may emerge .
We have already seen tremendous success in Kosovo where joint police forces from both ethnic groups are patrolling jointly in each other 's areas , where there is no longer that idea of a single police force for a single people , but a joint police force for all the people of Kosovo .
Your experience , Mr Prime Minister , as a rebel in one sense , as an intellectual but , most importantly of all , as a democrat and as the voice of reason that could lead your country from the dark ages of Communism into the bright lights - sometimes dimmed because of energy crises - and future of the European Union , that kind of image and that kind of imagery is what is most important to the people of Bosnia , Serbia , Kosovo and , indeed , Turkey .
I look forward to working with you and with your Government .
Despite the fact that you may be small as a country , not only are you big in spirit but there is also great quality there .
As has already been proven by your own starting of this process , you are not afraid to stand up to the ' big boys ' when they try to bully you around the place .
But , most importantly of all , what you bring is the moral certainty of where you have come from .
What the European Union needs today is new heroes - heroes who know what it is like not to have freedom ; heroes who know what it is like not to have the freedom of speech , liberty and democracy .
That is the best light that we can shine in the dark corners of the European continent today .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , we are quite sentimental about Europe and what it has achieved as a model of peace and democracy and what it might achieve in terms of boosting people 's freedom and well-being and representing a centre of innovation and consistency in tackling global environmental challenges .
We are therefore delighted to welcome you here today , but we are a little sad that this experience might in some ways be a unique one , because , as you know , one of the reforms of the Lisbon Treaty is the election of the President of the European Council .
This is something that is of concern to us , partly because none of the candidates who have been put forward would in my opinion be able to advance the cause of Europe very far .
Having said that , however , I would like to mention some specific points that are especially relevant for the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance .
As the President of the Commission mentioned , during your Presidency the ' energy package ' is to be presented : this is the result of the work done by all last year and we know that there is a widespread commotion about it and manoeuvring and pressures are already in progress to diminish its value and impact .
We believe that a fundamental aspect of your Presidency will be to resist these pressures from both major and minor players to restrict and weaken the impact of these regulations .
We will also continue our battle on principle , on which I believe that we will be in disagreement .
In our view , a low carbon economy - here I am also addressing the President of the Commission - cannot be a nuclear economy ; funding and wasting time on a new nuclear future which does not exist yet or on expensive technologies of uncertain application such as carbon sequestration and storage are actually in direct competition with the true renewable energies which we should encourage and fund : sun and wind energy , and energy saving , this latter being the most promising prospect for innovation and employment .
Another important issue during your Presidency will be coordinating territorial and urban development , which will be highly important in view of the Spring Summit and which make reference to the follow-up to the Leipzig Charter : safeguarding the quality of our cities and the enhancement of territorial cohesion are perhaps less in fashion than other issues , but we believe them to be absolutely crucial in the battle against climate change .
Waste legislation will also probably be completed during your Presidency .
We are extremely concerned , not only by what is happening in my country , in Naples , but also because it seems to us that the lip service paid to the hierarchy of waste strategies , placing a priority on prevention and re-use , is actually contradicted by the text of this legislation , which once again gives priority to incinerators , which , in our view , are definitely not the only way of solving the waste problem .
There are two important issues relating to trade and data protection on which we would really like to see whether your Presidency will truly be a friend to this institution or not .
You will have to battle hard with some of your colleagues on the issue of Parliament 's assent to the economic partnership agreements with the ACP countries , which , following the strong disagreements with the African countries that emerged in Lisbon , we view as more vital than ever .
Then there is freedom of access to negotiating documents on the partnership and cooperation agreements with countries such as China .
Just think - the European Parliament has not yet been told anything at all about how these negotiations are going .
Everything is being done in total secrecy !
We believe that there ought to be an open debate on this issue and that this Parliament should at least be informed about what is going on .
Finally , President-in-Office , I would like to mention the data protection issue .
We know that the Council is planning to take a decision on this during your Presidency , but we would ask you to be courageous and request that implementation of this framework decision be postponed until after the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty , because this would enable Parliament to play a direct part in the reform ; my fellow Member will speak to you about this again later on , I ask you , President-in-Office , to hold the first national conference on the Roma people during your Presidency .
This would make a significant contribution to intercultural dialogue .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , for this first Presidency of a new Member State , Slovenia is inheriting a number of rather thankless tasks from its predecessors .
Thus , as regards the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon , you are required to ensure that no Member State apart from Ireland sets the bad example of organising a referendum , including countries that have made firm commitments to do so .
This is to some extent like moving backwards at a time when the EU 's citizens and institutions are supposed to be moving closer together .
Frankly , you deserve to have been given a nobler ambition .
At the social level , the Presidency will first have the difficult task of getting things moving again on two emblematic draft directives , one on working time and the sadly famous opt-out , and the other on temporary work and equal treatment of employees .
Nor will it escape a substantive discussion on the action to be taken in the wake of the recent judgments by the European Court of Justice in the Laval / Vaxholm and Viking Line cases , which lend legitimacy to social dumping .
My group , moreover , has requested a debate on this matter to be put on the agenda of a forthcoming parliamentary session .
This brings up again the whole problem of the Bolkestein Directive and the provisions of the treaty on which it is based .
In the midst of the ratification of a new text that includes all these provisions , this makes for a real muddle .
Finally , again on the social level , Europe is facing increasing demands for higher pay .
Indeed its share of added value has been diminishing for some decades .
It has never been so low , as even the financial press are pointing out .
Yet , the European Central Bank has just threatened to raise interest rates if this demand , however legitimate , is met , despite the fact that profits have never been so high , as the experts acknowledge .
If we do not put this issue on the agenda , it will soon make its own way there .
I recall that the joint document of the German , Portuguese and Slovenian Presidencies underlines in point 68 that , I quote ' The overarching aims of the three Presidencies will be to strengthen the European Social Model as an integral part of the Lisbon Strategy ' .
As the adage goes , the proof of the pudding is in the eating !
A word also about another sensitive subject : that of illegal migrants .
In its current state , the draft directive on their return deserves the ' outrageous directive ' label given to it by organisations that defend human rights .
Adoption in its current state would cast an unkind light on the good intentions expressed by the EU in the context of intercultural dialogue .
To conclude , I would like to mention the problem of Kosovo .
Before any decision is made , surely it would be justified to have clarification on a three-pronged question ?
Firstly , how to explain the fact that two billion euros of aid from the international community have , in the space of seven years , resulted in non-existent economic development , endemic poverty , 50 % unemployment , and the proliferation of corruption and mafia networks ?
Secondly , how to explain the fact that 17 000 NATO soldiers have proved unable to prevent the destruction of dozens of orthodox buildings , the kidnapping or murder of hundreds of Kosovar citizens from minority communities and the forced exile of thousands of others ?
Finally , how will the unilateral declaration of independence by Kosovo and the replacement of UNMIK with the European Union solve these vitally important problems while guaranteeing the stability of the Balkans ?
I would be curious to hear your response .

on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , I should like to thank the President-in-Office for the nice visit we had to Slovenia before Christmas .
President-in-Office , I hope you will lead the European Council better than you led the meeting group leaders had with you : you took most of the speaking time yourself and you said nothing we did not know in advance ; you did not allow your ministers , whom I would expect to know their subjects , to answer most of our questions ; and you did not send the answers in writing afterwards .
A parliament also contains an opposition with certain rights .
Yesterday I received a petition from 571 Slovenian journalists criticising you for not respecting their press freedom .
Will you allow an independent investigation ?
Last week you were reported to have asked Portugal to cancel the possible referendum supported by most Portuguese voters .
May I remind you of the existing Nice Treaty , which requires you to take all decisions as close to citizens as possible ?
To cancel a referendum is a violation of this article .
Member States can be criticised but not punished , because ratification is still a national competence .
The behaviour of a presidency and the European Commission is a Community affair .
You have to respect the national ratification procedures .
If you say something , you should remind Member States of the joint legal obligation to legislate as close to the citizens as possible .
You violate the Treaty , and so does the European Commission when it does not behave as guardian of this Treaty article .
You are part of a political agreement among prime ministers to avoid a referendum .
This agreement is a violation of the Treaty .
The Commission should have protested it instead of supporting the attempt to avoid the peoples of Europe .
Read Article 1 of the Treaty on European Union once more : ' Decisions are taken as openly as possible and as closely as possible to the citizen ' .
What a wonderful sentence that would be , if it were implemented !
The Lisbon Treaty was decided in as closed a way as possible and as far away as possible from the voters .
Now it seems that only Ireland can save our European democracy .
But the Council could at least publish a consolidated version of the Lisbon Treaty , so that you would be able to read what you have signed .
On 17 December 2007 , Hungary signed a text it had not even received !
This is not a way to decide close to the citizens or the Members of Parliament .
Mr Bonde , we look to you as Chairman of your Group to ensure that you and your colleagues acquit yourselves in the House as parliamentarians .
Face up to the challenges in your own right rather than merely targeting others !
( Applause )
- ( DE ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , as a Member from Carinthia , an immediate neighbour of Slovenia , it is awe-inspiring and a pleasure for me that a nation that only 20 years ago was groaning under the yoke of communism is now in charge of the European Union for six months .
This is proof for me that the path of European integration away from the catastrophes of the 20th century is the right one in itself to freedom and unity .
When I hear that Slovenia 's aim during this Council Presidency is primarily to introduce all the states of the former Yugoslavia to the European Union , then I believe that it is right and it is important , in order to round off this process of European integration territorially , as it were .
I believe that this is considerably more important than , for example , the accession negotiations with a country like Turkey , whose primary territory is in Anatolia , in Asia .
I believe that this process of introducing states of the former Yugoslavia to the EU would need to take place primarily in such a way that it enables Europeans to act without the influence of powers outside Europe , for instance the United States of America and Russia .
I hope that Slovenia is able to bear in mind first and foremost Croatia 's desire for EU membership and that conflicts like those surrounding fishing zones between Croatia and Slovenia , for instance , will not present any obstacle to this , because of the countries of the former Yugoslavia , Croatia , along with Slovenia , is undoubtedly the country that is most ready for Europe and a democratically mature , central European country .
On the issue of Kosovo , which will undoubtedly tax Slovenia 's Presidency of the Council the most , the situation is such that on the one hand , we have to take account of the right of each people group to self-determination , the right of the majority of the Albanian Kosovars , but on the other hand , we also have to consider the historic rights of the Serbs .
Something like a US satellite state should not be allowed to emerge with Kosovo , nor should Serbia be driven into the arms of Moscow , into the arms of the Kremlin .
Kosovo 's autonomy should not become a precedent for Turkish Northern Cyprus .
The aim should be stability in the Balkans and the rounding off of European integration in territorial terms .
Let me get down to discussing in a nutshell a bilateral problem between Slovenia and Austria : the issue of topographic signs in Carinthia .
I hope that the Austrian Federal Government will soon find a fair solution that satisfies the eminently well protected Slovenian minority in Austria .
By the same token , I hope that Slovenia also finds a sensible solution regarding the German-speaking Austrian residual minority in Slovenia and recognises these people as an indigenous minority , and that the cultural convention between Austria and Slovenia can be full of substance in this regard .
( SL ) Ladies and Gentlemen , the programme of the Slovenian Presidency contains all the important topics of our time and is a good working basis for these six months .
With just two minutes , I will limit myself to only one area , i.e. citizens ' freedom , administration of justice and internal affairs .
I expect the Slovenian Presidency to devote appropriate attention to following the effects of the " SIS 1 for all ” information system and accelerate the implementation of " SIS 2 ” .
The common asylum and migration policy must be based on close cooperation with the countries of transit and origin .
At the moment there are 27 different regimes and approaches to solving this problem and , of course , we have no illusions that such a complicated question can be resolved in such a short time .
However , we have to tackle this difficult task .
The third area is cooperation with Frontex , where the Slovenian Presidency , based on analysis of the Commission report , will prepare the guidelines for the future activities of that agency .
The fourth area concerns urgent harmonisation of the European visa policy and shaping of the legal groundwork for starting the operation of the European visa information system .
A red thread running through all the Presidencies so far has been the fight against organised crime and terrorism .
I support the proposed measures and suggest that we should at last start tackling the causes of terrorism as well .
Slovenia is one of the most successful members of the European Union in the area of e-administration and the elimination of administrative obstacles .
I therefore expect Slovenia , during its Presidency , to offer its good practice in every area to the other Member States .
I also hope for good cooperation between the Slovenian Presidency and the Parliament and Commission , and I am convinced that , after the Slovenian Presidency , it will be possible to say that the European Union has made a further step forward .
( SL ) I am proud that the Prime Minister of Slovenia is addressing the European Parliament today in the capacity of President of the European Council .
As the Prime Minister said , this is also a testimony not only to the dramatic changes witnessed in Slovenia in the last twenty years , but also to the almost unimaginable changes we have witnessed within Europe itself in this very short period of history .
The Vice-President of the European Commission said in Ljubljana that the start of the Slovenian Presidency of the European Council was the end of the division between the old and new members of the European Union .
I would like to build on that beautiful thought by saying that until recently we could only listen to what the candidates and thereafter new members of the European Union expected from it .
Today Europe has the right to ask the Prime Minister of Slovenia , and Slovenia as the presiding country , what Europe can expect from Slovenia .
I think we are faced with an exceptional historic event which has its symbolic and real consequences .
It is my personal conviction that it can expect the most Slovenia can give .
In my opinion , Slovenia is well prepared for and totally focused on its international role and the presiding role of the European Council .
I would like to thank my colleague Mr Schulz for the support our group gave the Slovenian Presidency and , as President of the largest opposition party in Slovenia - the Social Democrats - I would also like to assure this esteemed House that , in the light of the parliamentary elections which will follow the end of the Slovenian Presidency of the European Union , I will not use the European politics of the Slovenian Presidency of the European Union to make it a target or a victim of our common endeavours for Slovenian success in this important international task .
The success of the Prime Minister will be the success of the Slovenian Prime Minister , that of the whole of Slovenia and also my own success .
I am convinced that at the end of the Slovenian Presidency we will be able to establish that , as someone said , there are no minor or major members of the European Union , and that there are only those which are a little bit more or a little bit less successful in their Presidency of the European Union .
My wish is that , with a modicum of luck , the Prime Minister and the Slovenian government will succeed in being counted among the more successful .
( SL ) Prime Minister , your arrival and address today represent the start of the last phase of the full integration of Slovenia into the European Union .
Slovenia is the first country among the eleven new countries to have been able to take over the Presidency .
It is a great privilege for Slovenia and for Europe and I wish you great success in the Presidency .
However , the task of the Presidency is an arduous one , which is why I would like to ask you also about the injustices taking place in the European Union .
This question is addressed not only to you but also to the President of the Parliament and the President of the European Commission .
In 2004 ten countries joined the European Union .
It was actually only nine and a half as only part of Cyprus joined .
Two years later we announced the entry of Romania and Bulgaria and again we forgot about the northern part of Cyprus .
And even after Romania and Bulgaria had joined , we again said nothing about Cyprus .
Prime Minister , today you spoke of western Balkans , Ukraine , Moldova , Caucasus and northern Africa without devoting a single word to the question of northern Cyprus .
It is as though they have been overlooked , wiped out , which is not good .
It is right that in Ljubljana you started a dialogue between cultures and religions .
And the area where we could really achieve great success is precisely Cyprus .
Cyprus needs to have a dialogue between cultures and religions so that those 200,000 innocent people can have an opportunity to become members of the European Union .
Also , Cyprus has just accepted the Euro as its new currency .
In the north they are still using the lira .
And finally , Prime Minister , when you spoke about your culpability , that you were tried in a foreign language , I would rather you had said Serbo-Croat , or Serbian .
Some people in this hall might think that you were perhaps tried in Russian .
Once again , I wish you complete success in your Presidency .
- ( PL ) Mr President , I would like to begin by congratulating Prime Minister Janša on taking up the Presidency of the Union .
This is a historic moment in the history of European integration , it being the first time that a new Member State has taken up the Presidency .
Slovenia is a country which has been affected on many occasions by the border changes that have taken place on our continent .
It is therefore a good example of European unification , not only from an economic , but also from a geopolitical aspect .
For this reason I believe that the next six months will be fruitful in stabilising the situation in the Western Balkan region .
I would like to express the hope that the Union 's neighbourhood and enlargement policy will be given priority during this period .
I am counting on the aspirations of our eastern neighbour , Ukraine , also being received with more understanding .
I am glad that energy policy will also be one of Slovenia 's priorities .
We are only too well aware that a secure Europe cannot exist without us ensuring our energy security .
There must be no future blackmailing of the European Union on energy by anyone , and I am convinced that Slovenia , a country that bore the burden of communism for more than 40 years , has an excellent appreciation of this .
Mr President , my congratulations to Slovenia , and welcome to Prime Minister Janša : only four years a member of the EU and already the European Presidency .
It means work and responsibility , but it is also a proof of confidence in your young state , President-in-Office .
What worries and disappoints me - us , I should say - is that an impressive number of MEPs from very different countries and groups have still not received a clear answer to their repeated request as to whether Slovenia is going to host the first annual Roma conference .
A big thing , but also a huge challenge - and you are not alone .
The European Commission has offered financial support .
Moral support comes from the European Council which , in the Conclusions under point 50 , underlines that the EU should appear with concrete steps on Roma issues .
Logistical support comes from the European Roma community , who expressed willingness to cooperate closely wherever they can .
Political support comes from many MEPs from different groups in this House who are aware of Europe 's forgotten nation , the Roma , many of them still victims of the latest Balkan wars , living as refugees spread all over Europe .
Slovenia had a narrow escape , but it deeply experienced lack of freedom and safety itself .
I hope that Slovenia will take it as an honour to host the first annual Roma conference .
It knows it has many supporters - and maybe , I should say , fans .
Mr President , I too would like to wish the Slovenian Presidency well .
Today is indeed a historic day .
I do not doubt for a moment Slovenia 's capacity as a small Member State to preside over a successful presidency .
I hope , President-in-Office , that you are really serious when you say that you wish to see a Europe that really cares and a Europe that puts the citizen at the centre .
I have to say to you that , if we were serious about making that more than rhetoric - making that reality - it would in fact require a radical step change in our approach and in the content of our policy in this institution and across the institutions of the European Union .
I share the concerns of a previous speaker at the fact that referendums will not be held in Member States on the issue of the Lisbon Treaty .
I come from a jurisdiction in which there will be a referendum and the people will have an opportunity to assess , in a real-life way , how they reckon this project is advancing and developing .
President-in-Office , in Ireland you caused something of a stir : you were reported in the media as saying that it is important not to launch some discussions that might cause problems in our country .
This indicates to us that you propose postponing controversial or difficult issues .
We would like to know what those issues are .
If we are serious about democracy in the Union , if we are serious about a Union that cares , we certainly have to ensure that full information on policy initiatives and direction are given to the people .
- ( PL ) Prime Minister , not long ago you said that the European Union was united not only by a common economy and policy , but also by the values of a common memory , culture and creativity .
I agree .
Greetings to you , Prime Minister , from Poland , the land of Adam Mickiewicz .
That prophet , as the French call him , once asked : Slavs , what can you offer that is new ?
What do you bring with you to the world stage ?
His message was that the Christian spirit has particularly penetrated certain European peoples , and all Christian progress also contains within it the progress of nations .
Europe - the mother of nations - is united by a Christian culture in both the west and the east .
Here in this Parliament the French President Valéry Giscard D 'Estaing told me recently that he was always in favour of including a reference to the Christian God in the European constitution .
Prime Minister , you are right in saying that the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue is an opportunity for Europe to strengthen itself through culture .
Jean Monnet , now at rest in the secular Panthéon in Paris , used to say that if he were to start over again , he would start with culture .
Christian culture and religion , as Professor Tadeusz Zieliński , buried in Schöndorf near Munich , used to say , is expressed in human longing .
So let Slovenia , that small EU country , express this longing through its actions for the benefit of Christian culture in Europe .
This is where the greatness of your country in the EU lies ; this is where the greatness of our Slavic EU countries lies .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased that the Slovenian Presidency wants to deal with the subject of the threat of climate change and with the policy of safe and sustainable energy .
I think that it is about time we take off the green populist spectacles and free ourselves from the unjustified scare of nuclear reactors .
We have an opportunity to stop taking money out of the citizens ' pockets by immoral trade in emission permits , which are nothing but indulgences for the greatest polluters .
We have the opportunity to discard ludicrous taxes on fuel particles as well as technical pseudo-solutions , expenditure on which far exceeds their benefit .
Ladies and gentlemen , according to documented scientific conclusions nuclear energy is the form of energy that does not produce CO2 and minimises the aggravation of climate change .
It is also the cheapest low-carbon energy , it is reliable and it is safe .
In addition , nuclear energy reduces a country 's dependency on the supply of fuel from unstable territories .
I am convinced that if we wish to act in the interest of the citizens of the Union and deal with climatic change , we should invest in research , development and education in the field of nuclear energy .
- ( DE ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate the Slovenian Presidency of the Council on its comprehensive programme , the final phase of the programme of the three Council Presidencies , and also on the successful development of your own country .
You are part of Schengen , you are part of the euro area , and it really is a historic Council Presidency , of which I make the request that you do not do as all the others before you have done and present a programme that even a large country would not be able to accomplish in six months .
As a smaller country , you have the solidarity of the larger countries as well as of the European Parliament . My request , however , is that you do not overdo things .
UN reform will certainly not be possible within six months under a Slovenian Presidency of the Council .
There are some very pressing problems pending , a few of which you have listed .
The most difficult will be the Kosovo issue .
Here , too , you are in a particularly difficult situation .
Another is the continuing development of the internal energy market , the agreement with Russia - these are the priorities you will in reality be able to address .
And if you succeed in moving ratification of the Lisbon Treaty forward , then you will be able to say at the end of this six-month Presidency : yes , as the first country from the former communist block , we have managed to shape this Council Presidency as a positive role model for prosperity , freedom and peace .
Finally , a minor observation for our colleague , Mr Schulz , who is no longer here .
He talked about the Socialist Group here - in Germany he keeps quiet about this - but we do know he has done so .
At the end he warned against right-wing radicalism , as though communism might have been a right-wing extremist system !
If I quote him correctly , he has also assigned you the task of bringing Turkey 's membership forward .
The Commission has already confirmed that it is dealing with Croatia and Turkey even-handedly .
Do not get involved !
Leave this to the larger states , which have not been able to resolve it to date .
If you concentrate on the Western Balkans , you 'll be doing Europe a great deal of good and you will potentially have a lot more success in this than in trying to resolve Turkey 's problems !
- ( DE ) Mr President , Prime Minister , do not be reduced to your role in the Balkans .
Continue to be a European Presidency !
I shall begin , however , with small matters , and I hope that my country , Austria , will also make an effective contribution to your Presidency by solving the outstanding problems concerning the Slovenian minority in Austria and that the Slovenian minority will now finally come into its own .
As rapporteur for Croatia , I do hope that Croatia will be able to make great progress during your Presidency .
You must contribute something to this , as must Croatia .
From you I expect that during your Presidency , you will implement the Treaty that you concluded with Prime Minister Sanader and that a solution will then be found to the disputed borders through appraisal by a third party .
I expect greater efforts from Croatia and , as regards the ecological fishing zone , I expect the promise to be kept not to extend and apply this zone to Croatia and Italy .
The greatest problem is certainly that of Kosovo and I am of the opinion that you are going down the right path .
You are acting with caution , calmly , but purposefully .
This is the solution to which we aspire in Kosovo because , let 's be honest , it is not possible and not reasonable - either for Kosovo or for Serbia - for Kosovo to have a shared existence within Serbia .
This does not mean , however , that we do not share Serbia 's concern and cannot understand why Serbia has great problems here .
However , one thing should also be stated very clearly for Serbia 's ears , specifically to Prime Minister Koštunica : we believe that the future of Serbia , of a democratic Serbia , a Serbia that also cooperates with the ICTY , lies in Europe !
If Mr Koštunica believes that Serbia 's future lies in Russia , that 's his problem , but I do not believe that the population of Serbia would agree with him .
A clear signal should therefore be sent to Serbia under your Presidency : you must choose between Russia and the European Union on this issue .
We are making a straightforward offer to the entire region , and specifically to Serbia , to continue on the path towards the European Union in a reasonable period of time .
This is a massive task to perform and I 'm sure you will perform it well !
( Applause )
Mr President , I want to combine two of the topics for the Spring Summit .
Firstly , climate change and the climate and energy package .
Of course , it is very difficult when you have to go from targets to tools .
This creates a burden on all our Member States .
Still , this is something we have to do .
I want to point out two areas where we have to be very cautious when we enter negotiations on this green package .
The first one is the social issues .
In this Chamber we have had a lot of debate when it comes to the Lisbon Strategy and to adding economic development to sustainable social development and environmental issues .
It is very important that sustainable economic development is reflected in the green package when it is delivered next week .
The second thing is technology neutrality .
Slovenia is a forestry country , as is my own country , Sweden , and I think it is very important that you have all the different alternative fuels on the table so that you can pick and choose and let innovation get the full potential of the whole thing .
Do not forget methanol and cellulose !
Finally , the Lisbon Strategy has to be a combination of climate and economic development .
Look at the transport sector , which is a perfect example of how trains and cars can achieve not only economic development and a better internal market , but also the goals of the energy package .
It is only by starting that the unachievable can become achievable .
I wish you all the best luck in the world , President-in-Office .
- ( PL ) Mr President , Slovenia is the first of the new Member States to take on the Presidency of the European Union .
This Presidency coincides with the year 2008 , which has been designated as the Year of Intercultural Dialogue , so this is one of the main foundations of its programme .
It should be remembered , though , that such dialogue is possible only when the parties have a strong sense of cultural identity and wish to share this wealth with others .
The cultural foundation of Europe is Christianity , so Christian values should be promoted and strengthened , and not undermined .
It is difficult to discern such a positive approach in the most important EU documents that have been passed , such as the Charter of Fundamental Rights and the Reform Treaty .
They contain no references to Europe 's Christian roots .
There has also been no serious debate on this subject in the forum of the European Parliament .
In this context there must be doubts as to whether the European Union , while neglecting , and thus eroding its own roots , is sufficiently prepared for an intercultural dialogue with strong partners from other regions of the world .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as Mr Barroso said , the Slovenian Presidency in itself represents a historic achievement and this allows us to reflect on the relationship between Europe and the Balkans region .
This has certainly been subject to criticism , partly because of the aspects of disintegration which it has involved , and Europe should now counter this by promoting peace and rapprochement , encouraged by the very relationship with Europe .
That is why we should avoid unilateral action on Kosovo , on which there should be a common European policy , as the new treaty , in any case , states .
We need to tackle the problems of the new external borders which have arisen as a result of some countries ' accession to the European Union .
We need an active policy for social , economic and environmental integration which encompasses the entire area , and frankly I do not see nuclear power as a solution to energy problems .
Finally , I would like to remind the Slovenian Presidency of the problem of the ' erased ' , that is , those former Yugoslav citizens who still have citizenship problems in Slovenia , so that it may be definitively resolved .
- ( DE ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , we were told very graphically as children how General Tito tore through the streets of Belgrade , people jumping aside - it was closed , no traffic regulations were in force .
To our youthfully naive way of thinking , this was the epitome of the arbitrariness and ruthlessness of a particular system .
Later we then noticed how proceedings were arbitrarily initiated against dissidents , against critics in the country from which they were able to escape .
Now you are here , and your joy is understandable , but be vigilant !
The Tito here , in his attitude , for instance , is our Secretary General , Harald Rømer , who tears through this city of Strasbourg and does not fear the consequences even if it is at 100 kilometres an hour and people also have to jump aside .
And unfortunately there are arbitrary proceedings against unwelcome critics even in this European Union .
I resolutely reject these attacks against the Secretary General of the European Parliament .
Mr President , may I warmly welcome the Prime Minister to Parliament and wish him well in his period as President-in-Office of the Council .
I feel sure that Slovenia will carry out the task ahead with great competence .
I welcome the emphasis given to the next stage in the Lisbon Strategy .
There remains much to be done to persuade Member States to reform their economies and I hope that the Presidency will advocate greater liberalisation , reforms to labour markets and ensure European business benefits from globalisation .
Europe needs to be more competitive , more focused on creating new jobs and less concerned with protecting a social model that hampers employment growth .
I want to see action on completing the internal market and , in particular , the telecoms sector .
I welcomed the announcement by the Commissioner last year on further liberalising the telecoms market .
We now have the opportunity to reassess the existing framework to get rid of bottlenecks and to map out a more competitive future for this crucial industry .
I look forward to hearing in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , where I am also the PPE-DE Group spokesman , how the Presidency intends to take matters forward .
I also welcome the commitment to pursue vigorously the energy and climate change agenda .
The EU has established tough carbon emissions targets and it is now incumbent upon Member States to follow through with real action , and not just words , to ensure burden sharing does not just end up as load shedding .
I read with concern in the press this week that some Member States are trying to undermine the EU agreement of last year on climate change , and we will pay particular attention to see that the British Government lives up to the commitments it has entered into .
( NL ) Mr President , I would like to return to the situation with regard to Serbia .
I think that it is a good idea to set up a task force analogous with that for Croatia , as proposed by the Slovenian Presidency , to help Serbia cooperate fully and effectively with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in The Hague .
That could also clear the way - as far as I am concerned - for the signing of a Stabilisation and Association Agreement .
I would also appeal to the government of my own country , the Netherlands , to cooperate and to support the Slovenian Presidency 's proposal , and also to take a look at how well this has worked in the past with Croatia .
I would like to make a second comment about our neighbourhood policy .
Ukraine now has a new government , and negotiations are to start on the successor to the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement with that country .
We would like to know about the Slovenian Government 's proposals and ideas , the form the negotiations should take and the intended result .
We are not in favour of offering membership to Ukraine at this time - that is definitely not on the table - but it is important to offer the country something more tangible in terms of its links with the European Union .
I would now like to say a few words about the situation with regard to Georgia , another country covered by the European Neighbourhood Policy .
Personally , I found the European Union 's reaction to the election results and to the elections themselves rather too hasty and rather too positive .
There were large demonstrations afterwards .
A discussion is still under way about the irregularities that occurred in the course of the elections .
What I consider important now is that both the European Union and the Presidency take initiatives to at least foster links between the opposition in that country and President Saakashvili .
Finally , I would like to comment on the situation with regard to Russia .
Presidential elections are to be held shortly .
It appears that the way is clear for the opening of negotiations on a new partnership agreement with the country .
In our opinion , the whole issue of energy transparency is of particularly great importance in the preparatory negotiations for the new agreement .
We also want to engage in dialogue with Russia about the quality of democracy in that country , however , and in particular the problems we have experienced recently with election observation and the way we see this versus the way Russia sees it .
I hope that this subject , too , will be on the Slovenian Presidency 's agenda .
- ( PL ) Mr President , I think we are anticipating that in 2008 the Slovenian Presidency will enable the European Union to settle the matter of the Constitutional Treaty and make preparations for its ratification , and that it will also enable a solution to be found to one of the awkward problems that Europe faces - the problem of Kosovo .
I think it is important to say , however , that besides these priorities there are certain tasks that favour them .
I would request that intercultural dialogue be seen as one such task .
I think that it lies among the values that create European unity , and that it also underlies a certain geopolitical value that EU policy may have .
It seems to me that in this particular context Europe may play the role of a bringer of peace in a situation in which the world appears to be in a state of international disarray .
I would further add that where Kosovo is concerned , it is exceptionally important for the problem of intercultural dialogue to be its context .
This will be the problem of the future for Kosovo .
Prime Minister , I wish the Slovenian Presidency success .
- ( PL ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , I congratulate Slovenia on its Presidency of the Union and I wish Slovenia success , especially in ratifying the new treaty .
Little Slovenia has got in ahead of great big Poland , and that should be food for thought for us Poles .
Perhaps through Slovenia 's example we will see a reduction in our fear of the Union and an increase in our faith that it makes sense .
After all , you , sir , are the second Slav , after John Paul II , to come to lead the culture of the whole of Europe , including its western part .
After its expansion in 2004 , the Union looked forward to an influx of fresh blood , new brains and a new outlook , and through your proposal of a fifth freedom for the Union - the free movement of knowledge - you are meeting that expectation .
Your country , once a part of the former Yugoslavia , with its awareness of the problems of the worlds of Christianity and Islam , will certainly provide the impetus for a fair outcome for Kosovo , with respect for the rights of Serbs .
( SL ) It is with joy and pride that I am sharing with you festive feelings accompanied , of course , by a strong feeling of responsibility and great opportunities .
I am convinced that Slovenia will also show through the Presidency that its inauguration , years ago , was not just a geo-political decision , but also an acknowledgement that we were willing to cooperate responsibly in the creation of a free , democratic and successfully united Europe .
I strongly support the ambition to implement the Lisbon strategy , which is crucial for our future .
In this sense I expect that Slovenia will do everything for advancement of the common policy in telecommunications and information technology .
That is essential for implementation of the Lisbon strategy , not only because of the contribution to the essential increase in competitiveness , but also to get closer to the citizens .
The citizens of Europe like to feel the common policy in their pockets and we were successful with the directive on roaming , which enables us to phone cheaper within Europe ; the common policy in this area will certainly make it possible for us to feel the benefit of such policies more often .
My second emphasis is in the area of health .
I am very pleased , and I am not the only one in this Parliament , that the priorities of the Slovenian Presidency also include the fight against cancer .
It should become a permanent item on the agenda of the European Council .
Cancer is not only a matter for Health Ministers .
Every third citizen of Europe can expect to contract this disease and the trends are not promising .
It is a wide social and political question that is also connected with implementation of the Lisbon strategy .
If increasing numbers of people become ill , we will not be able to achieve higher productivity and better competitiveness .
Health is a vision , a dimension , and not just an activity sector .
I will be pleased if we achieve two things during the Slovenian Presidency .
Firstly , more attention should be paid to prevention in the fight against cancer , and secondly , interinstitutional working groups for the fight against cancer should be established .
This fight requires good , united coordination between the European parliament , the Council and the European Commission .
President of the Council , I wish you a successful Presidency .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
Prime Minister , with your Presidency the new Member States have taken a new step on the road towards coming of age .
It is likely that your Presidency will contribute to melting the reservations that have never existed in the European institutions but which have been present in the everyday life of the European Union .
You have the first Presidency in the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue .
Our region knows that , next to the big red blob on our globe , Eastern Central Europe became a blob that was painted pink , but this region has never been all the same colour .
This region has always preserved its historical multicolour and diversity .
This is particularly well known in the Western Balkans , since Yugoslavia papered over the dividing lines , but could not bridge them .
It is therefore no accident that we struggle the most with rethinking and reinforcing our national , linguistic and cultural identity , and we expect you to help us with this , since your Presidency can help in rebuilding an identity that is now inseparable from the consciousness of European citizens .
The opportunity and duty for the Slovenian Presidency is taking further steps to take the region 's European mission and enlargement into a new phase .
Slovenia is the gateway to the Western Balkans , and Europe 's path leads through this gateway .
The Member States ' enlargement fatigue cannot become reform fatigue in this region , since it would endanger the stability of our region .
Finally , concerning the Reform Treaty , I am proud that Hungary was the first to ratify the Reform Treaty .
Although there are only very few matters in which political agreement can be reached in Hungary today , Europe has been one of them .
Our region needs a Europe that works more and works better , and we are sure of the cooperation and help of the Slovenian Presidency .
I wish you great success in your Presidency .
- ( DE ) Mr President , the Alps are important this year for Europe .
Slovenia has the Presidency of the European Council , Switzerland and Austria are hosting the European football championships and all eyes are on the mountains .
I congratulate the Presidency on taking over the official functions .
It is an important Presidency .
The Lisbon ratification process is quite rightly your first priority .
The ESDP is being put to the test in Kosovo .
In Parliament we are looking to you to make clear to us - if we don 't manage to achieve a Security Council resolution - that Resolution 1244 is a watertight legal basis for all ESDP measures .
My Group Chairman has said : we are against an accelerated stabilisation and association agreement for Serbia without cooperation with the ICTY .
We celebrate the fact that Slovenia is the first Member State from the accession countries to take over the Presidency .
We Liberals have always fought strongly for this enlargement .
We have also advocated it whenever we encountered antagonism at home .
We do not feel very much like celebrating at the moment , however .
I am from North Rhine-Westphalia and learnt from 2 300 people in Bochum yesterday that Nokia are closing their production facilities and will be relocating to Romania .
The impression was then created that it was happening with EU money .
I want to make it crystal clear for the FDP that the relocation of jobs within the European Union must not be facilitated with EU funds !
We shall be doing everything we can to ensure that no EU subsidies are flowing in this case .
I see that the President of the Commission is nodding .
I hope that we get a clear response to this from the Commission .
This is a very important subject , which scares people and makes them afraid of Europe .
This should not be !
We shall also ensure that eligibility for assistance is checked if national subsidies are directed into Romania .
This is a problem and we hope that the skilled and motivated people in Bochum will soon find work again .
- ( PL ) Prime Minister , you have my sympathy and commiserations .
Following your entry into the euro area , inflation in your country is 100 % higher than it was a year ago .
Despite this , as Commissioner Almunia said two months ago , Commission President , you have conceded that this rise in inflation is one of the consequences of accession to Euroland .
One of your stated priorities is the matter of Kosovo .
Please bear in mind that its independence would be the first unilateral alteration of boundaries in Europe since the Second World War .
This is exactly what Ossetia and Abkhazia in Georgia are looking for , but Moscow is also interested in destabilising the situation in the South Caucasus .
This may actually threaten war in that region , and the greatest military conflict in Europe since the Balkans flare-up of the early 1990s .
Clearly we must respect the right of the Kosovars to self-determination .
( ES ) Mr President , I wish the Slovenian Presidency well .
It is an excellent symbol of the transformation of the European Union .
Some very important matters will be dealt with over the next six months , and I will mention a few .
Firstly , there is the Spring European Council , which will focus on the Lisbon Strategy .
The truth is that we are in a difficult economic situation : growth forecasts are declining as a result of the financial crisis , rising inflation , the strength of the euro and a very weak dollar , and the extremely high price of oil .
Food prices are also rising .
The public expect effective decisions that will help restore confidence in a time of uncertainty .
Externally there is the issue of Kosovo , which affects such important principles as the stability of borders throughout Europe .
Do not be hasty .
I think that the December European Council acted rather hastily .
It took decisions such as sending a civilian mission , but apparently with no agreement on the legal basis .
It is paradoxical that this is happening in the EU , a community based on the rule of law .
The issue of Kosovo is a delicate one , requiring caution .
Try hard to achieve a fresh Security Council resolution .
In May , as you mentioned , there will be the important Lima Summit with the Latin American countries , which are so close to Europe in terms of principles and values .
Lima should also be used as a lever to break the deadlock in the negotiations with Mercosur and to drive forward the negotiations with the Andean countries and Central America on their respective association agreements .
In March the expansion of the Schengen area will be a reality at airports .
This is a decisive time for the EU 's external borders , which brings me to the fight against illegal immigration .
A meeting is planned between the ministers responsible for border control , which I think is very timely .
There is a need for increased cooperation between those ministers , and the officials looking after external borders need to be fully aware that they are doing not only a national job , but also a European one , and that they share responsibility for what happens throughout the Schengen area .
Finally , I would also ask you to work on the fight against terrorism .
The public expect the European Union to produce results in this area that is so significant and important for their lives .


( BG ) Mr. President , Mr. Barroso , Mr. Janša , I cannot fail to note that the Slovenian Presidency is a very important sign to European citizens and in particular for the citizens in Central and Eastern Europe .
Slovenia has the opportunity to bring them all the self-confidence of being truly equal stakeholders in the European process .
We know Slovenia as a country which addressed , without much ado , persistently and consistently , the big issues of its transition and today has every reason to be referred to as ' Eastern Europe 's best performer ' .
This was made possible through the political consensus in that country .
This is exactly what we expect from the Slovenian Presidency : to push on , without any flourish of trumpets or big promises , in dealing with issues that are key to the European Union 's future as highlighted in the programmed presented .
You have every chance of achieving this because today 's discussion showed both political and institutional consensus in your support .
I believe that the Slovenian Presidency comes at the right time , especially in view of the challenges related to the Western Balkans .
Slovenia 's historical and political experience will enable the European Union to be more effective in its policy towards these countries .
They need a new impetus to continue reforms and speed up their progress towards the European Union .
A goal entirely within reach as Slovenia , a former constituent republic of Yugoslavia , has shown in practice .
I believe that through Slovenia , the European Union will speak in a voice more understandable for many of the Western Balkan nations .
In both the direct sense of the word , and figuratively .
I feel I must mention that for the first time the Council will be speaking a Slavic language .
It seems to me that no one else could deal more successfully with the ' Kosovo issue ' than Slovenia .
The risks faced by the entire region are huge , and that is why our expectations of you , Mr. Janša , are also high .
We expect you to succeed in preserving the unity of the European Union , both in regard to the resolution on the status of the province and in regard to the commitment of the Union in the difficult period thereafter .
Mr. Janša , for us , Socialists , it is important that the Slovenian Presidency be a success , and we will not just sit aside and observe , we will yield our real support for your efforts as best as we can and as far as our powers go , so that you can implement your programme .
I wish you success , so that you can prove that a small country can be big in Europe .
( IT ) Mr President , Prime Minister Janša , ladies and gentlemen , welcome , Prime Minister , on behalf of that radical party and those comrades who rushed to achieve your release , with the comrades and friends of the Mladina magazine , in late 1988 .
You were in prison for the sake of democracy and for the sake of Europe .
Today you find yourself President of a European Union which is eliminating and abolishing the anthem and the flag , which with the Eurogroup is even distorting - please note this , Prime Minister - the traditional geopolitical borders on our European coins .
You are in favour of enlargement , but this is the same Europe that was deaf to the tragedy in Yugoslavia , and today is deaf to Turkey and all the enlargements that we hope for .
We - myself included - were also at Ljubljana when the Serbian air raids took place .
At that time we met with Mr Skolk , with the young people of the AZMSS , with President Kučan and even with our friend Mr Kacin .
At that time you were fighting for a Europe other than the Europe that was betraying you , which wanted to see a neutral Yugoslavia because it was convenient for it .
Welcome .
If , on behalf of your country , Slovenia , you are going to be what you have been , then you will be the one here standing for the Europe of Altiero Spinelli , not we who represent Europe , not we who often represent its disintegration .
( The President cut off the speaker )
- ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on the night between 20 and 21 December 2007 we extended the Schengen border .
We gained a bit more freedom again and came another step closer to each other .
The barbed wire has finally been removed and Slovenia took over the Presidency of the Council of a reunited Europe on 1 January .
As a European , but particularly as an Austrian , a friend , a neighbour and an ally , I am very pleased about this .
President-in-Office of the Council , this debate revolves around six items .
Firstly , the fact that you hold the Presidency has more than merely symbolic value .
It makes us aware of historic developments that for many have either already become self-evident or are unfortunately seen as a threat .
Secondly , the ratification process started in Hungary .
You need to structure and galvanise the process and provide sufficient coordinated information to the citizens of Europe .
Thirdly , please use the targets for climate change and greater European energy independence to provide further impetus for growth , employment and social cohesion when implementing the Lisbon Strategy .
Fourthly , your geographical position , experience of history and the timing of your Presidency give you special responsibility in terms of Croatia 's accession , freedom for Kosovo and the agreement with Serbia .
Fifthly , we are embarking with you on the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue .
Let this Presidency be one of cooperation , of mutual respect , thoughtfulness towards one another and mutual understanding .
The sixth and final item : do not confuse your European responsibility with the bilateral issues to be resolved or Austria 's responsibility towards the Slovenian minority in Austria .
Bilateral treaties between two Member States do not fall within the European Union 's remit .
( FR ) President-in-Office , you have come before us with modesty .
You have even mentioned potential errors , and admitted to possible naivety .
Within the context of the Troika , I suggest you pass on this sense of humility to the French President , who will succeed you .
I have just one message for you : teach Europe some of the best lessons from your history .
You are Celts - me too !
You have been dominated by Bavaria , coveted by the Republic of Venice , incorporated into the Austro-Hungarian Empire , occupied by Napoleon - my apologies for that one - divided up between Germany , Italy and Hungary and integrated into the Yugoslav Federation , and you have been independent since your referendum in 1990 .
What a history !
Who is better placed than you to talk about intercultural dialogue ?
Who has greater credibility than you to do so ?
So make it a higher priority .
You have placed it fourth ; I suggest you move it up a rung or two !
Having said that , please do not restrict intercultural dialogue to interreligious dialogue .
Also think about the contribution to Europe made by those who believe that religion and politics should not be mixed , because history has shown that when one meddles with the other , it always leads to problems .
To conclude , if you would permit me , in the spirit of what I have just said , I would like to read a short passage from your national anthem to our fellow Members , because it is beautiful !
' God 's blessing on all nations , Who long and work for that bright day , When o 'er earth 's habitation no war , no strife shall hold its sway ; Who long to see , that all men free no more shall foes but neighbours be ' .
That is the spirit of your Presidency , and that is the spirit of Europe .
I am French , and I am not going to give up the Marseillaise , but for six months I am very happy to be Slovenian !
( Applause )
Mr Poignant , listening to you singing the Marseillaise or even the European anthem would certainly be a great pleasure .
- ( PL ) Prime Minister , the aims you have stated for your Presidency include the Treaty , the Strategy , the climate , energy , the Western Balkans , and if we add to this intercultural dialogue , that will be quite a lot for this small country , following the great success on which I congratulate you and all the Slovenian people .
At the last meeting of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Foreign Minister Luís Amado made no mention whatsoever of the Eastern dimension , while you have addressed it only in the most general terms , but I think that it is one of the aims , and particularly as a representative of the Slav countries , you should have a better appreciation of the Eastern dimension of the Slav countries than even the Portuguese have - not that I have any complaints in this regard .
The question is whether enlargement , as in the forecast made now by the French , prior to their Presidency , will concern mainly the Western Balkans , or maybe something more .
I would like you to clarify your views on this .
A second matter is that your country 's Presidency coincides with the pre-election period for the European Parliament and , as we know , a turnout of just over 20 % of European citizens is not very big and the trend is for it to get smaller .
Do you have anything to offer in this regard ?
How will you convince Europeans that this edifice is a good one and that participation in it is worthwhile ?
And the last matter I wish to raise , which is linked to the first , is that the Slovenian Ambassador to Ukraine has said that Ukraine should enter or will enter the free trade zone during this Presidency .
This would , of course , be good ; there are just a few conditions there that would need to be met , such as the approval of the Duma and properly functioning borders .
In what way will the Presidency assist Ukraine in this process ?
And , Mr President , I wanted to finish by saying that :
You have the power and the responsibility to control speaking time and I 'm asking that you do so in the future .
( FR ) President-in-Office , during a presidency , there are some subjects you can choose and others that gatecrash the party , like security in the Middle East , or Iran .
In this regard , Iran 's nuclear dossier is part of a complex process that touches on security in the Middle East and the Muslim world .
To restore trust , we need to talk about Iraq , Palestine , Lebanon , extremists , human rights and poverty .
Many of the region 's inhabitants are living on less than two dollars a day .
Is this acceptable ?
I am not speaking from a moral point of view , but from a security one .
These people end up becoming extremists because they have nothing to lose and feel humiliated .
Nobody is born a suicide bomber , nobody is born a terrorist .
We have to create an environment that will enable everyone to live with dignity , in peace and freedom .
These are not my words , they are the words of Mohamed El Baradei , the head of the International Atomic Energy Agency and a Nobel Peace Prize winner .
They imply that the beginnings of a relationship of trust should be established with the Arab world , in particular Iran , that it should not exclude any inflammatory subjects - neither that country 's shocking revisionism regarding the Holocaust , nor the security of Israel - and that it should be conducted on the basis of mutual respect and dignity .
Does the Slovenian Presidency want to take up these words ?
Most of all , does it really think it may one day be possible to denuclearise the region by avoiding any mention of the taboo that is Israel 's nuclear programme ?
( RO ) Prime Minister , I would like to congratulate you on addressing us today as President of the Council .
Slovenia has the admiration of the other European nations for its remarkable development since 1990 and for meeting the standards for accession - be they negotiation chapters , adoption of the single currency , or the Presidency of the Council .
I would also like to congratulate you on defining the priorities of the EU for the next 6 months , in cooperation wth the German and Portuguese governments .
Undoubtedly , it is desirable that the Lisbon Treaty , which puts and end to a prolonged identity crisis in the European Union , be ratified as soon as possible and acknowledged as an authentic democratic act by all European citizens .
At the same time , it is also desirable that the goals of the Lisbon Strategy should be put into practice as soon as possible , because we are facing a wave of pessimism among the citizens concerning this policy .
The latest European Commission Eurobarometer of December 2007 indicates a relative drop in citizens ' confidence in both of the Strategy 's components : economic growth and employment .
Unemployment remains a major concern for European citizens , although there has been significant improvement compared with 2006 .
With the new cycle starting in 2008 for the Lisbon Strategy , the European Parliament will adopt an action plan concerning workforce mobility , in order to strengthen employment at European level .
However , there is still the issue of restricted access to the European labour market , affecting over 100 million European citizens .
I therefore urge you , Prime-Minister , to support the initiatives of the Parliamentt and the European Commission concerning free access to the labour market .
I firmly believe that in this way Europe will secure its economic future by safeguarding the fundamental freedoms enshrined in the Treaty .
( IT ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , as an Italian I would like to welcome particularly warmly the fact that Slovenia holds the Presidency of the Council ; that , of the countries who have recently joined the European Union , it falls to Slovenia to be the first to hold the Presidency ; and that Slovenia is now in the Schengen area together with other European countries .
As holder of the Presidency , your fundamental task is to give a strong impetus to the process of ratifying the Lisbon Treaty .
This is a treaty that will enable this Parliament to have greater co-decision powers , that will make it possible to take decisions by qualified majority on some absolutely strategic issues and all within sectors where the fundamental rights of citizens will be given more attention and more protection : I am thinking of judicial cooperation and legal immigration .
Our suggestion is directed to this end , and we will have to attempt over the coming months to find room for an interinstitutional agreement to regulate the transitional stage on various issues : I am thinking , for instance , of the Europol package to be voted on tomorrow , and tomorrow this Parliament will ask you to make an undertaking for the Council to consult the European Parliament once again within six months of the entry into force of the treaties in the light of the new legal provisions that these treaties will offer us .
Again , on the common immigration policy I would ask for your commitment to a secure framework , as illegal immigration can only be combated while respecting fundamental rights with tenacity , conviction and accuracy , partly in order to avoid a recurrence of what happened a few months ago when hundreds of human beings clung to tuna nets in a vain attempt to cross the Mediterranean to reach Europe .
- ( LV ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to congratulate Slovenia on being the first new Member State to hold the EU Presidency .
I believe that other new Member States , when preparing for their presidencies , will be able to learn a lot from Slovenia 's experience .
Certainly , one of the most important tasks of the Slovenian Presidency is to promote a successful ratification process for the Lisbon Treaty .
For my part , I can announce that Latvia plans to ratify the Lisbon Treaty in May , during the Slovenian Presidency .
The Slovenian Presidency 's undertaking to strengthen the EU 's role as a global leader in combating climate change and the use of renewable energy is to be welcomed .
For several years climate change and energy problems have been a focus of attention for the public and politicians .
It is , however , important that this priority is not only expressed as a fine undertaking , but can also be reflected as a priority in the EU budget .
In view of the fact that work should begin on the mid-term review of the Financial Perspective this year , it would be important to hear the Slovenian Presidency 's thoughts about possible EU budget priorities within the context of the mid-term review .
I think that climate change and energy issues ought to be among these priorities , including directing a larger portion of the EU Structural Funds and Cohesion Fund towards increasing energy efficiency and fostering the use of renewable energy .
The Slovenian Presidency 's undertaking to pay more attention to the western Balkans , including the Kosovo issue , is understandable .
The view expressed by Slovenia 's prime minister , however - that the security situation in Bosnia-Herzegovina might be worse than in Kosovo - has met an equivocal reaction .
Therefore , it would be important to have a precise understanding of the Slovenian Presidency 's position concerning the state of affairs in the Balkans and its proposals for stabilising the situation .
Thank you for your attention , and I wish the Slovenian Presidency every success in its work .
( NL ) The President-in-Office of the Council bears the important responsibility of launching a new cycle of the Lisbon process at the forthcoming Spring Summit .
To be frank , my group , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , takes the view that the proposals presented to us by the President of the Commission in December lack ambition .
It is true , of course , that the previous cycle of the Lisbon Strategy created growth and jobs , but it is also true that Europe is now required to function in the context of accelerated globalisation and new world players .
The Socialist Group is convinced , therefore , that Europe will only be able to continue to play its role if it puts the maximum focus on sustainable development , on research and innovation , on investment in people ; in short , on quality rather than low costs or low standards .
It is also clear to us that this needs to involve everyone in Europe .
Lisbon did not prevent a situation in which 78 million people risk descending into poverty and in which a large proportion of the jobs created are precarious and do not offer a decent income .
Therefore , Lisbon cannot succeed without genuine reinforcement of the social dimension .
This requires more than comments , Commission President ; it must occupy a visible , prominent position in the guidelines and in an ambitious social agenda .
President-in-Office of the Council , we are counting on the Slovenian Presidency to make this clear at the Spring Summit .
- ( DE ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , I , too , am happy that Slovenia is taking over the Presidency of the Council .
I was this Parliament 's general rapporteur for the enlargement round of the 12 countries and now seeing a country from this line-up take over the Presidency for the first time personally gives me great pleasure .
Slovenia is also the most successful of the new Member States , as a member of both the Schengen area and the euro area , and has proved that these new countries get on very well in Europe .
And it must be said that small countries are often the most successful as regards the Presidency of the Council because they get fully involved in this business .
I therefore wish you every success with it .
You have a multifaceted array of tasks ahead of you .
You have to see through and deliver ratification of the crucial Lisbon Treaty and you must already be preparing to implement this Treaty , which is at least as important .
You have a difficult problem ahead of you with Kosovo , and you have an exceptional opportunity to sort this out for us because you know this region very well .
However , this also shows that the European Union is often pushed on foreign policy issues so that we are played off against the Americans and Russians .
When I see that at the same time as we are discussing strategies for Central Asia , and Gazprom is concluding gas contracts with Kazakhstan , then I have to say that we are not really taking strategic action on issues that are crucial for our future and I think that perhaps something needs to be improved here .
Please allow me one final comment .
I too , coming as I do from North Rhine-Westphalia , would be grateful to the President of the Commission if he were able to provide clarification on the subject of Nokia .
Relocations may , of course , take place .
To put it clearly , Germany , more than almost any other country , gains extensive benefits from the European internal market or an enlarged European internal market , but it is very difficult to make this clear to those concerned if the loss of their jobs was facilitated with European funds or if unlawful national subsidies were used for this .
We therefore request clarification on this because if these rumours were to be repeated , great harm would be done to the European concept .
- ( EL ) Mr President , the Slovenian Presidency is very fortunate to be following on from two successful presidencies .
Slovenia is also the first of the 12 new Member States to take on the Presidency , and this makes its responsibility all the greater .
The Slovenian Presidency 's programme undoubtedly contains worthy elements .
For my part , however , I believe that greater weight ought to have been given to the attempt to achieve greater understanding and acceptance by the public both of the Reform Treaty and of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
The Slovenian Presidency supports the plans for the accession of the Western Balkan States .
This is also the position of my delegation , but , as experience has taught us , it should be borne in mind that the premature setting of the date for the commencement of accession negotiations can lead to deadlock .
We should also very seriously consider that the overwhelming weight of European public opinion appears to be particularly cautious about any further expansion , and this is something that we cannot ignore .
We must all be particularly careful on the subject of Kosovo .
We should realise that a power game is being played in the region .
On the one hand , US policy seeks to fully control the whole region , while Russia for its part wants to maintain contact with a region with which traditionally and for centuries it has maintained special relations .
In this game Kosovo is like a ping-pong ball .
At the recent Summit Meeting the European leaders did not take a decision on whether they would recognise a unilateral declaration of independence by Kosovo .
Let us hope that we shall all weigh up the dangers inherent in unilateral recognition and act with particular care , because unsuccessful manoeuvres might set off chain reactions in the wider region , with unforeseen consequences .
Mr President , I am told that , when Slovenia opened its borders recently , the crowd there compared notes on how much they had smuggled across during the Communist days , even to the extent of having a model confessional box there for anyone who confessed their sins , who was then rewarded with coffee and brandy , so I can understand why President Barroso rushed to be part of these celebrations !
But , Prime Minister , you gave us , initially , a moving account of your country and indeed your own history .
You talked with pride of Slovenia and you talked with some emotion of your experience in the prison cell .
I hope that those are the emotions you will bring to the Presidency - the belief in human rights and the determination that Europe shall have that pride too .
There are two areas that I want to raise with you as you do that .
One is on our environment , because alongside human rights and our Lisbon Agenda goes a clean environment , a healthy environment and , indeed , a healthy people .
That environment needs to move on from Bali , which was a great talking shop .
We now need the action .
We need real action , realistic action , and that must start next week with our climate change package .
On the health field , we need legal certainty on cross-border health .
There is a great new opportunity for Europe 's citizens - its patients - if we get this right .
We waited and had this delayed .
That must wait no longer .
We must make sure , please , that it now comes forward .
If we do not , it is not an option to do nothing .
The alternative is that the lawyers go on making policy for us .
Thirdly , on that , I ask you to pay particular attention to mental health .
If there is any criticism of Slovenia I have , it is the slowness with which it has enacted its mental health laws .
Now you have an opportunity to lead on mental health following the Green Paper and I hope you will take that up .
You are a small country , a proud country , and the small countries of Europe are usually the best Presidents of the European Union .
I wish you success in that .
I have confidence that Slovenia , under your leadership , will meet that pride in success and achievement by the time you finish in six months ' time .
We still have another 10 minutes ' ' catch the eye ' , each with a minute at the most .
( SL ) The many good wishes addressed to Slovenia as the first of the new Member States to take over the Presidency of the Council indicate that the activities of Slovenia will attract special attention .
The expectations are great and so is the responsibility .
People outside the political institutions in the new Member States often think that the Union is led by just a few of the large countries .
This is where Slovenia has an exceptional opportunity to prove that the Union consists of 27 States which together are responsible for shaping the common policy .
In implementing the priorities and the inherited agenda , I expect Slovenia to pay great attention to cohesion and the reduction of differences in Europe .
In this short minute I would like to mention climate change and the energy policy , because Europe has set extremely ambitious aims for itself to develop into a society with low carbon emissions .
And that is what is important : a society with low carbon emissions .
I would like Slovenia to put forward some concrete proposals and projects and to achieve results in that area .
- ( PL ) Mr President , Prime Minister , Slovenia 's Presidency is facing many ambitious tasks .
At the forefront of these ambitious tasks is ratification of the Treaty .
You will be the watchman , you will have the entire procedure in your hands .
I therefore have a request , and that is to spare a thought , please , for those countries which have not adopted the Charter of Fundamental Rights , those who have opted out .
It is a fact that Poland and Great Britain have opted out , but I am certain that these two countries will realise that they have made a mistake and will want to adopt the Charter .
They will want to offer their citizens the Charter .
They must be given help in this , and so I am calling on you to make provision for a simplified return procedure , a procedure that will be easy and quick , that will be an opt-in and will not require further ratifications .
The success of a Presidency , Prime Minister , is generally inversely proportional to the size of the country .
I am sure you will apply this principle .
( SL ) Prime Minister , I welcome the points which you devoted to human rights today .
As a liberal MP from Slovenia and a former journalist , I am of the opinion that freedom of expression and freedom of the press are the two most important human rights .
For that reason I would like to use this solemn occasion to point out the great seriousness of the petition with which a quarter of Slovenian journalists are protesting against the overt and covert pressure they are experiencing .
The public discrediting of the signatories using their statements taken out of context , with the intention of portraying them as untrustworthy people , is an inopportune act .
In my opinion , it is a duty of the Presidency of the European Union to ensure that its representatives deal with the content of the statements and evidence in the petition .
- ( EL ) Mr President , our greatest concern regarding the proposals for a solution for Kosovo relates to the attempt to place a unilateral declaration of independence on a legal footing , and this would have momentous consequences for international law .
The recognition of Kosovan independence outside the framework of the United Nations , by means of a unilateral declaration , would constitute a dangerous development ; it would perhaps lead to further bloodshed and a redrawing of the borders .
We believe that , as a very clear infringement of international law , it would also be used in other conflict situations as a method of resolving disputes .
Perhaps this could also happen in the case of EU Member States such as Cyprus .
The situation in Kosovo is a continuation and a result of interventionist policies and is a problem that can be resolved only within the framework of the UN and existing international law , without external intervention and infringement of the principles of its very charter .
The impact of measures that are taken unilaterally can currently be seen in Iraq .
It is only by means of legal , agreed political solutions that peace can be ensured .
Mr President , I join my colleagues in welcoming the Prime Minister here today .
President-in-Office , what a journey in 20 years : from languishing in jail to Prime Minister of the Republic of Slovenia , to President-in-Office of the European Council , and now a member , as you tell us , of the EU , NATO , the euro zone and the Schengen area .
It is true that the current Balkan situation represents unfinished business ; peace in the region is very important to all of us .
Thank you particularly for your sensitive handling of the forthcoming Irish referendum needed for the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty .
Perhaps I could add to our referendum slogan your words in your concluding remarks when you said : ' I care about Europe because Europe cares about me ' .
What better slogan for the Irish referendum !
We can take nothing for granted - it will be hard to deliver - but , believe you me , the Fine Gael Party , of which I am a member , our leader and all the Members of the European Parliament will leave no stone unturned to ensure a ' yes ' outcome to the referendum of the Lisbon Treaty in Ireland .
Thank you , and we look forward to delivering it to you during your Presidency .
Mr President , as a Finn I am a big fan of ski-jumping , and - to use an allegory - I would say to the Prime Minister that the task of the Slovenian Presidency is like the Planica hill , the instruments that you have are like Elan skis and I hope you have the willpower of Primož Peterka .
I think that this is going to be a successful Presidency for three reasons : one , you have prepared extremely well ; two - and we heard it in your speech today - you are extremely humble ; and three , you are very businesslike .
That is a recipe for success .
You have three big tasks .
If you can pull them off at the end of the Presidency , I think you have done it .
One , the Treaty : if you have got a lot of Member States to ratify without problems , you have done a great job ; two , the energy package : if you have got some of that done , you have done a great job ; and three , if you have succeeded with Kosovo , you have done it .
I think the Slovenian Presidency is going to be one of the best ones that we have seen for a long time .
Good luck !
Mr President , Slovenia is the first Member State which , having suffered under totalitarian Communism , can now take the lead in Europe as a whole .
Therefore it is your historic challenge and chance , Prime Minster , to take the lead also in promoting integration of different historic experiences , to create a united and balanced perception of our history as a common European history .
I think you , and all of us , need to be confident that the mass murders which happened under Communism will never be repeated again .
This can only happen if , in Europe as a whole , we pass the same moral and political verdict on totalitarian Communism as was passed on Nazism .
Two more speakers have come forward , both from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , which was the group most strongly opposed to the ' catch-the-eye ' system .
In this respect it is interesting as to who makes the most use of it .
( SV ) Mr President , first let me offer my heartfelt congratulations to Slovenia and wish you all the best for the Presidency .
Janez Janša , a colleague of mine , has already put a question regarding your statement that the security situation in Bosnia is worse than that in Kosovo .
I want to be sure that you really answer this question .
I therefore ask it again : on what do you base this assertion ?
For it is quite simply not the case .
By making this statement you showed not only a lack of information but also a lack of diplomacy .
If the situation had been so complicated in Bosnia and worse than in Kosovo , your statement would have been positively dangerous .
I therefore expect an answer .
( DE ) Mr President , Prime Minister , we have various projects that are very important for us , including the ' Research on Small and Medium-sized Enterprises ' project .
I would ask that the Council 's conclusions insist that we are able to complete this at first reading because I believe that this is a pressing concern for our small and medium-sized enterprises .
The second point is that energy efficiency in production and consumption should be for us a focus of the debate .
A large number of jobs can be created here .
The Lisbon Agenda for new jobs and employment is very important for us all .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) Ladies and Gentlemen , thank you for the debate , questions , proposals and suggestions with such lively and interesting content .
Much of what has been said will happily be considered in the next six months .
I was pleased with your support for our priorities and especially touched when I heard the Slovenian national anthem being quoted , not by one of my Slovenian colleagues but by a colleague from France , and also when Slovenian products were mentioned , such as Elan skis , etc .
In short , I enjoyed listening to the debate and I will be happy to answer some questions .
Sadly , time will not permit me to answer them all .
Ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon is certainly one of the key political priorities of the European Union in 2008 .
We were particularly aware of the importance of the Treaty in the period before it was signed .
At that time , everybody was talking about a crisis .
Now that the Treaty has been signed , it is still just as important , although it has not yet been ratified , and this is where our responsibility lies .
More precisely , it is a concrete responsibility of every Member State to bring about the ratification in accordance with procedures laid down by its national constitution or legislation .
If possible , this should be done within an agreed deadline .
We do not wish to interfere in the internal affairs of any country , either as a Member State or as the State holding the Presidency for these six months .
Some countries in particular misconstrued some of the statements .
We never asserted otherwise and we always appealed for solidarity in discussing sensitive issues that may affect the process of ratification in those Members States where this topic may sometimes even be controversial .
The progress of the European Union does not begin with the Slovenian Presidency and we are convinced that it will continue in all areas .
The stated priorities were not mentioned in any particular order in the sense that we would approach one when we had completed the previous one .
We will attempt to accomplish as much as possible in all the areas listed as priorities , as well as in the others .
I am pleased that the President of the European Commission was somewhat more specific on points where I had run out of time .
Certainly , the environment and energy package will be one of the key challenges in the next six months and up to the end of this year .
We must demonstrate in practice that our aims , set out in March last year , were intended seriously .
I would like to emphasise once more that I have no doubt that healthy economic growth is the only basis of prosperity .
Certainly , that must be a priority .
The Lisbon strategy is clear about that , and I would like to emphasise that the story does not end there .
This is where the story of social justice begins and both stories are important .
However , we must recognise that we first have to create before we can share equitably .
As regards the most frequently raised questions relating to the situation in the western Balkans , I would like to answer some very specific questions and firstly those relating to the legal foundations of the solution to this problem .
We would not like the European Union to start a long discussion about the legal foundations , which of them are stronger and which weaker , once we have reached the end of a long search for concordant solutions .
There is absolutely no need for Europe to be divided on this issue just because other bodies are divided .
The unity of the European Union in solving this problem will be one of our priorities .
I would like to remind you that a similar question and discussions about legal foundations in the mid-90 's of the last century led to more than 100,000 deaths in Bosnia and Herzegovina and one million people being displaced .
It is difficult to make up that lost time , but we can learn something from it .
Bosnia and Herzegovina was never said to be a bigger security problem than Kosovo .
However , what was said was that in some aspects it was a very serious problem , for instance the return of the refugees .
In Bosnia and Herzegovina , there are still many refugees who have not been able to return to their homes .
Many things that need to be done in that country have been planned , but they cannot be implemented until the refugees have returned to their homes .
That is one of the challenges awaiting us and I am afraid that some of the things said about it have been misinterpreted .
Therefore , Ladies and Gentlemen , President of the Parliament , President of the Commission , the priorities presented are our common challenge .
I am pleased with your support in realising them together .
Once more I would like to emphasise the significance of the cooperation and synergy which we can achieve with the joint participation of all three key institutions of the European Union - the European Parliament , the European Commission and , of course , the Council .
We will do everything in our power to maximise that synergy .
I am looking forward to being here with you on many occasions during the Slovenian Presidency and to fruitful and , as we have already seen , very lively discussions with you .
( Applause )
President-in-Office of the Council , my sincere thanks to you for the cogent introduction to your programme for the Slovenian Presidency .
All contributions to the debate from the responsible group chairmen and other Members have created the impression that you can count on the enormous and unreserved support of the European Parliament .
On behalf of us all I sincerely wish you every success in your work .
President of the Commission . - Mr President , thank you for this very interesting debate , where I think there was a very large consensus supporting the priorities that were presented by the Slovenian Presidency .
During my first statement I highlighted some - because I could not go into detail on all aspects - of the priorities for our work during these six months : the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty , the new cycle of the Lisbon Strategy and also our climate and energy package .
Specifically on this point , I was very encouraged by the support that many of you gave to our work on this matter .
It is very important that we now deliver on our commitments .
The Heads of State and Government agreed on ambitious targets - a 20 % reduction in the emission of greenhouse gases and 20 % for renewables .
We cannot have the targets and then not deliver on the means of achieving those targets .
It is a question of coherence and of credibility , and I was very encouraged by the support given to this during today 's debate .


I would like just to answer one question that was brought to the debate by Mr Schulz , Mr Lambsdorff and Mr Brok regarding a specific problem that is now being discussed in Germany - the question of possible funding for relocation of a company in Europe .
I can tell you that the operational programme on competitiveness for Romania has a specific clause banning the use of Structural Funds for the cofinancing of delocalisation .
The European Commission has not received any project relevant to this issue , so the Commission can confirm that no European regional development funding is implicated in this relocation .
Of course we consider that it would be unacceptable to use funding from European Union funds for relocation inside the European Union .
( Applause )
At the same time it is true that the European Union , through the PHARE programme , has funded an industrial park in Romania where several companies are now investing .
This is important and I will draw the attention of all my colleagues here , especially our German friends , to this debate and how important it is to have a responsibility in this debate .
We have to make a distinction between delocalisation outside the European Union and relocation in Europe .
If investment goes from Finland to Germany , it can also go from Germany to Romania .
Let us be honest about it .
We have to make clear that this is not delocalisation outside the European Union .
As you remember , the Commission and I have proposed a Globalisation Adjustment Fund that is already working precisely for cases where some jobs could be affected by delocalisations outside the European Union .
It is very important that European leaders at all levels in the European Union - in the Commission , in the European Parliament , but also at national level - also have the courage to explain the benefits of enlargement .
( Applause )
Germany is the country that is now exporting more to the new Member States .
The enlargement of the European Union is creating jobs in Germany too .
German companies are also investing a lot in the new Member States .
So it very important from a European perspective that we all explain that enlargement of the European Union is not only good for the new Members but it is also an opportunity for the European Union as a whole .
( Applause )
At the same time , I agree that we have to check that no Structural Funds money is used to finance a specific delocalisation of a company .
That would be unfair competition .
But I call on all those who are pro-European to stand up and defend this united enlarged Europe , and also to exploit the benefits that we all , in all the new Member States , are getting from this more dynamic Europe that we can build today .
( Applause )
Many thanks , President of the Commission , for this statement .
We wish the Slovenian Presidency every success .
We will now go together to the press conference .
Voting will then take place here .
Thank you for the very intensive and good debate .
Written declarations ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( FR ) Congratulations , Prime Minister Janša , for your speech to our European Parliament .
You are the first leader of one of the nations freed from the yoke of communism that joined the European Union in 2004 to be President of the European Council .
It is a challenge for you , for your people and for your government .
There are no large and small countries : there are good and bad ones .
Your economic results , your recent acceptance into the euro area and the prosperity of your people make you an example that should inspire many countries teaching lessons to others .
You are the final part of the ' troika ' that began with Germany and continued with Portugal , and you will pave the way for the success of the Presidencies in the next ' troika ' : France , the Czech Republic and Sweden .
As I write these lines , I am thinking of Kosovo , your brothers in the Western Balkans , and their future in Europe .
in writing . - ( IT ) Thank you , Mr President .
The Slovenian Presidency commences at a time when , in Europe , a sense of moderate optimism regarding the EU 's future is again beginning to be felt .
After a few years of confusion and uncertainty , the time has really come to make the EU 27 project take wing .
Once again , I would like to ask the Presidency-in-Office to reflect on one particular issue , and that is the two meeting places of the European Parliament .
Now , when we are constantly asking the citizens of our various countries to make sacrifices , we will give a really strong signal if we decide to focus all our work in Brussels .
The cost , in terms of financial resources and organisational inconvenience , incurred by Europe due to this monthly change of location is becoming truly unacceptable in the eyes of citizens , who cannot understand the reasons for such an absurd situation .
The seat in Strasbourg , which is of course a magnificent city , could be used for other prestigious purposes within the EU 's activities .
Let us give a good example and , on that theme , let us turn words into action .
in writing . - ( PT ) With the Slovenian Presidency of the Council comes the opening of the third act of the farce orchestrated by the forces promoting federalist , neoliberal and militarist integration in Europe , in which the EU - with Germany at the helm - imposes a treaty that was previously rejected , avoiding the holding of national referendums .
They say that there is no need to hold referendums :
Because there is a ' broad consensus ' in every country on what the Treaty proposes , especially in the national parliaments .
However , one of the main lessons of the referendums in France and the Netherlands was surely that they revealed a profound contradiction between the will of the people and the ' parliamentary majorities ' .
Because ratification by the parliaments is as legitimate and democratic as ratification by referendum .
How then should we understand the claim that holding a referendum in Portugal would aggravate the risks of the Treaty not entering into force ?
What they fear is a referendum result that differs from what they want , and so do not hold any .
Because the Treaty proposal is different from the one that was rejected previously and involves ' substantial change ' . Yet they do not say what .
However , do the promoters themselves not claim that the substance is the same ?
Read the statements by Giscard d 'Estaing .
They are motivated by fear ...
in writing . - ( HU ) Before I start , I would like to welcome the ambitious programme of the Slovenian Presidency , which is treating the important cohesion of the Western Balkans as a prominent question for the whole EU .
According to the Commission 's annual report for 2006 , the accession of 2004 was a great result for the old and new Member States , but the smooth management of the process was the key factor in its success .
The EU currently has to confront new challenges that require greater efforts .
Maximum support from the Slovenian Presidency in fulfilling all the priorities of its programme is essential for handling these matters appropriately , including the creation of the preconditions for Croatian and Turkish accession .
The fundamental interest of the EU is supporting the processes of reform in the Western Balkans , and in sorting out the Kosovo situation within the framework of the European Perspective in a way that is acceptable to everyone .
Enlargement is a strategic and security policy interest for the EU , and requires an effective development policy and cooperation in partnership .
The emphasis must also continue to be placed on dealing with programmes for the Western Balkans that serve to reduce differences in the state of development and strengthen social , economic and regional cohesion .
However , stimulating investment in human resources and supporting the development of a knowledge-based , creative society are essential for ensuring balance between increasing competitiveness and cohesion , and encouraging the development of the Western Balkans .
In accordance with the principle of European solidarity , efforts must be made to end poverty and guarantee ' direct aid ' for the countries of the Western Balkans too .
It is our joint responsibility to support the programme of the Slovenian Presidency so as to achieve the main objectives of the Union .
All the countries that have joined the European Union since 2004 are proud of the fact that one of them - Slovenia - is taking on the Presidency .
We welcome the new Presidency 's announcements and the first steps it has taken .
The priorities for the first half of 2008 are to a large extent evidence that the work of Slovenia 's predecessors is being continued , primarily in the sphere of revival of the Lisbon Agenda , ratification of the new Treaty and action to prevent global warming .
Continuity of work is a desirable feature in the European Union , bearing in mind the half-yearly cycle of the Presidency .
Independently of its declared priorities , Slovenia , because of its geography and history , is seen as a country with links to the Balkans .
This brings with it both opportunities to enlarge the Union further and , first and foremost , serious problems regarding the question of Kosovo 's independence .
An understanding of this problem area is a clear ace that the new Presidency holds .
We also hope that a country which has gone through the labour of transformation and adaptation to EU standards will appreciate the problems new Member States face in terms of unreasonable obligations regarding renewable energy and greenhouse gas emissions .
A balance needs to be found between care in protecting the natural environment and the need to keep the European economy competitive in global terms .
I wish you success , and thank you for your attention .
in writing . - ( SK ) The start of 2008 , of ' Together in Diversity : the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue ' , is a significant period for the EU , all the more so due to the fact that the EU Presidency in the first half of the year will for the first time be held by a new Member State , Slovenia .
Four priority areas that emphasise the implementation of the new Lisbon Strategy for growth and employment , energy , climate change and relations with the Western Balkans can contribute towards synergy in Europe .
Slovenia has an opportunity to become the architect of EU world leadership in the fight against global warming .
The acceptance of the euro is currently a hot topic in Slovakia .
Slovakia 's acceptance into the euro zone will be decided during the Slovenian Presidency of the European Union .
Slovenia is an example to Slovakia : it was the first of the EU-10 countries and the thirteenth of all EU Member States to introduce the euro , which it did in 2007 .
Slovakia can learn from many of Slovenia 's experiences and can use them in its own preparation for the introduction of the euro .
I expect that Slovenia will do everything possible to make sure that the decision on whether to introduce the euro in Slovakia by the planned deadline of 1 January 2009 has a positive outcome .
I hope that by its actions the Slovenian Presidency can convince 500 million European citizens that even a small country with 2 million people is capable of successful leadership of the EU during its six-month presidency .
I believe that Slovenia will indeed succeed .
in writing . - ( FR ) I would like to give my warmest wishes for success to the Slovenian Presidency , which represents a form of consecration of the reunification of a Europe divided by the Cold War .
Slovenia , which has cooperated with Germany and Portugal to prepare an 18-month programme , ends a cycle of presidencies marked by a successful relaunch of the institutions and the heavy responsibility of seeing through the process of ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon .
It is a major challenge to which we must all contribute , in each of our respective Member States , to ensure that the forthcoming French Presidency can put this new common foundation definitively in place before the European elections in 2009 .
The Slovenian Presidency must also continue and complete the Lisbon Strategy to meet the challenges Europe has to face on energy and climate change , growth and employment .
I sincerely hope that the Slovenian Presidency will manage to guarantee peace and stability in the Western Balkans and produce a unified EU approach to the issue of the final status of Kosovo so that 2008 , the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue , can truly be a chance for all Europeans to reaffirm their values of tolerance and mutual understanding .
in writing . - ( HU ) It is of historical significance that a new Member State that joined the Union in 2004 is leading it in the first half of 2008 .
This is a major step forward in the recently acceded countries taking the places they deserve at the Union table .
There is a huge amount at stake for the first Presidency from one of the new Member States , and Slovenia is leading the Union at a key time .
The most important duties of the Slovenian Presidency are helping with the ratification process for the Lisbon Treaty , dynamically setting in motion the new three-year cycle for the Lisbon Strategy and continuing to develop the integrated energy and climate protection policy .
The Slovenian Presidency is handling the integration of the Western Balkans , especially the question of Kosovo 's future status , as a priority .
Slovenia 's sensitivity and knowledge of the region may make the complicated organisation process a little easier and promote preservation of the unity achieved by the European Council of December 2007 with regard to the missions to be sent to Kosovo .
In March , during the Slovenian Presidency , the European Commission will propose legislation for a health check on the Common Agricultural Policy , which will be the overture to comprehensive conceptual and funding reforms for the CAP .
The Presidency will also emphasise programmes for the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue in 2008 .
We are cheering on our Slovenian friends , so that they have a successful Presidency .
I am sure that the Slovenian policies and diplomacy will successfully solve the difficult tasks , and that , as a new Member State , we can be proud of our neighbour .
Agenda
We have an announcement before we start with regard to this afternoon 's debates .
I should like to propose bringing forward the debate on the report by Díaz de Mera García Consuegra on EUROPOL and taking it as the second item before the Council and Commission statements on the situation in Pakistan .
The order of business this afternoon would , therefore , be as follows : from 15.00 to 18.00 : first of all , the Council and Commission statements on the situation in Kenya , then the report by Díaz de Mera García Consuegra on EUROPOL , then the Council and Commission statements on the situation in Pakistan ; then at 18.00 , as normal , we would go on to Question Time with the Council .


Are there any comments ?
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , for once we can agree , but I should like the Commission to note that it is Parliament that sets the agenda and only in exceptional circumstances can we respond to the wishes of individual Commissioners .
We can agree today , however , by way of exception .
Thank you for that point , Mr Swoboda ; it clearly is an exception .
But I thank the House for its agreement .
( Parliament agreed to the request )
1 . (
2 . (
- Before the vote :
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to take the opportunity to clarify a point which was raised in yesterday 's debate on the proposal for a Consumer Credit Directive .
This point concerned the new version of Article 8 concerning the obligation to assess the credit-worthiness of consumers .
Both amendments 46 and 45 foresee that Member States whose legislation requires creditors to assess the creditworthiness of consumers on the basis of consultation of the relevant database may retain this requirement .
As I understand it , this also means that the sanctions foreseen in this national legislation for a failure of the creditor to fulfil these requirements could also be retained .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , as we have now been debating this guideline in the institutions for six years , I would therefore like to make a few comments .
Firstly , I would say that this should not be taken as a criticism , but this lengthy period shows how European legislators have dealt very earnestly with this complicated subject and how close consumer protection lies to our hearts in Europe .
I am confident that the legislative procedure will be finalised with today 's vote , which is also my intention , despite all the differences on the subject at various points .
I want to expressly put on record that in my view all the joint amendments now available without exception improve the Council 's text , the joint position .
They certainly also hark back for the most part to my own proposals .
To clarify matters , I wish to say that we have wanted to reach an agreement , and in order to come to an agreement , on Article 16 ( 2 ) as well , which until recently had actually been disputed merely on account of the wording , we have decided to approve the proposal by the Socialists and Liberals in order to resolve this issue amicably , just as we have also withdrawn a few other amendments for the sake of harmony .
I also wish to thank the Commission , the Council and Members expressly ( we have had intensive , even heated discussions ) for the cooperative and enjoyable teamwork .
As regards the remaining proposals , I would emphasise the statement that in my view they are merely an additional improvement to the joint position and would in no way compromise consumer protection and the benefit this would have from the directive , because it is also a high priority for us .
I wish to conclude by expressing the hope that the positive expectations arising from the directive will also be met .
( Applause )
Madam President , yesterday the IND / DEM Group asked for all the votes to be roll-call votes .
I note in today 's votes that , again , all the votes are roll-call votes .
Yesterday the President said that he was going to examine whether it was in fact possible for the IND / DEM Group to ask for roll-call votes .
Am I to understand that it is possible , and that from now on all our votes will be roll-call votes ?
Mr Matsakis , it will be discussed at the Conference of Presidents tomorrow but what I would say is that this is an important vote , so it is probably in all our interests that it is by roll-call vote .
Mr Bonde has asked for the floor .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , I had asked for the floor before .
Our voting yesterday went very well .
It was quicker than normal - smooth , calm and there was not a single request for the time-consuming and irritating check .
Therefore my group proposes we should continue with electronic voting .
Some six months ago I was promised an exercise where the numbers of the reports and the numbers of the amendments would be shown alongside our voting .
The new , much bigger screens can show the full voting list and save us much more time because we can vote immediately when we see the numbers in different colours on the screen .
We will not need to wait for the interpretation .
We will avoid the situation where those waiting for interpretation through a relay are voting on one issue while those who vote without relay are voting on the next item .
We would save a lot of time .
( Applause )
Thank you , Mr Bonde , we have noted that .
Work is ongoing on that project , but now I think the House would like to move on with this morning 's vote .
3 . (
- Before the vote :

( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to raise a point of order : without wishing to interfere with the procedure , I would like to know if there is a rule by which it is compulsory each time to state , as well as the result , the number of voters , the number of abstentions and so on , or whether this is your own choice .
If you do not wish me to tell you I will not , but it is , clearly , good to be certain .
- After the vote on paragraph 60 :
Madam President , could you at least put the results on the screens in front of us if you are not going to call them out ?
You just have to raise your eyes if you wish to see the result .
- After the vote :
Madam President , I am advised by the services that each additional roll-call vote costs EUR 400 , which makes the cost of yesterday 's escapade in excess of EUR 25 000 .
So , I would ask those who are calling for roll-call votes all the time whether they think that is a good use of taxpayers ' money .
Madam President , if the cost of every roll-call vote is really EUR 400 , I suggest that this Chamber is running itself with all the efficiency that it also applies to the common agricultural policy , to structural aid , to international development and to the rest of the European Union budget .
Surely we can do it more cheaply than that !
Madam President , here is a practical suggestion .
One of the expenses is that we translate votes , but these are only numbers , so we need only one edition of the votes .
We do not need to put them into every language because we are dealing with numbers , and the names are the same in every language .
So we can cut expense there .
I think of all the bits of paper we produce in this Parliament .
The most important thing for the citizen is to know how we vote .
( Applause )
4 . (
- After the vote :
President of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection . - Madam President , I wanted to intervene after the vote on the Lechner report .
I did not want to interrupt the voting , but I merely wanted to thank the PPE-DE Group for supporting the common position so that we now have a very strong majority , which will be a very good signal to both consumers and businesses that we intend to open up the market and protect consumers .
Madam President , I know that you have taken a very active role in this dossier and I think it is a credit to all the parties that we just got a tremendous majority in the end after many doubts and reservations .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
Madam President , as someone who has followed , through the Committee on Budgetary Control , a number of the Court of Auditors ' reports concerning misappropriations and fraudulent spending of monies from the agriculture budget , I must say how pleased I am to see this Parliament welcoming new technology in many different ways , especially in this field of agriculture .
I hope that in future years this information - as one of the amendments in this report suggested - can be spread via the internet to all those people across the European Union who would like to see it , especially to the various national audit authorities in each Member State so they can see , for example , if in Greece they are claiming more acreage for olive-producing land than they actually have .
I am also standing up because I want to talk about the Constitutional Treaty .
I want to make sure that this House gets a say and that people get a referendum in the future , and that is why I am giving explanations of votes on all reports .
Madam President , it may not be obvious why , as a representative of London , I am giving an explanation of vote on a matter concerning farming and the common agricultural policy .
But we have to recognise that the common agricultural policy also affects consumers right across the EU in the form of higher prices .
Therefore it is incumbent on all of us to make sure that we are monitoring how taxpayers ' money is spent in a number of areas , including the common agricultural policy .
I understand that , in response to the common agricultural policy management needs , there is considerable need for information on land use , and that is why I think we all welcome the use of better technology .
I hope that many of my constituents will benefit in terms of providing that technology .
I also have to agree with my colleague that one of the reasons I am giving an explanation of vote is because the people of Europe and the people of Britain should be given a say on the Constitutional Treaty in the form of a referendum .
I would like to remind colleagues that we are taking explanations of vote on the reports concerned .
If anybody tries to speak about anything else , I am afraid I will stop your speech , in accordance with the Rules .
Madam President , I will with pleasure speak on the report itself .
The Graefe zu Baringdorf report , explaining as it does the new methods to address fraud and agrarian policy under the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) , is dealing with one of the most inefficient , expensive , wasteful , bureaucratic and amoral systems of farm support known to man , and no amount of agro-meteorological gimmickry can rescue it .
Extrapolate from the experience of the CAP ; infer from it .
Before handing new powers to any organisation , we should first look at how it exercises the powers it already controls .
Agriculture has been , since 1960 , the European Union 's chief competence .
Look at the mess it has made - the ecological destruction , the destruction of surpluses , the poverty inflicted on Africa .
Is this the institution that we now want to put in charge of foreign policy , of criminal justice , of defence , and if it is , should we not consult the people in the referendums that we were promised ?
The Elder Cato is supposed to have ended every speech , whatever its subject , with the demand that Carthage be destroyed .
I shall end mine with the demand that the Lisbon Treaty be put to the people : Pactio Olisipio censenda est !
Madam President , I do not think any of us should be unduly concerned about new technology , but it is important that it is properly used and not abused .
But there is much abuse , particularly in southern Europe in regard to the common agricultural policy , and I trust this technology may do something towards eliminating this .
If it does , we could save much more than the EUR 400 that someone complained about when it comes to bringing transparency to voting .
I note that this report talks about remote sensing .
Well , I would also say this : if Europe could get a sense of democratic sensing , then it would sense across Europe a great resentment at the shutting out of citizens and the denying to them of the right to express their opinion on the most important matter , namely the matter of how they should be governed .
Madam President , the common agricultural policy is a leftover from the 20th century .
We are seeing more and more demand for agricultural products driven by demographics and biofuels .
The idea that we as the European Union should spend a large part of our budget on subsidising agricultural production is , quite simply , out of date and , therefore , there is no reason why we need better technology to do the wrong thing .
We should stop doing the wrong thing .
I have to say that I voted in favour of this measure as a loyal Conservative following the whip , but I did so with great reluctance .
In addition , I have to question the right of this House - the democratic legitimacy of this House - to adopt this measure and any other measure given that we reject the verdict of the people on the Lisbon Treaty .
Madam President , I sense that this measure of remote sensing would actually be very efficient with regard to cutting out the bureaucracy that some of my farmers in the South East of England have to suffer at present with regard to tagging .
If this mechanism is to work properly , I recognise that it would be more efficient in the operation of the extremely inefficient bureaucratic system which we recognise as the CAP .
So in that regard , as a loyal Conservative , I followed the whip and supported this measure .
However , I recognise that an overhaul of the complete CAP system is long overdue and I call upon our colleagues in this Parliament who recognise the same thing to accelerate that process .
I do , however , sense - and I feel - that if we can remote sense cows , why do we not remote sense the people 's views about the referendum ?
Madam President , I am very happy to rise to explain my vote on the Graefe zu Baringdorf report , where I voted against it .
I did so because any kind of remote-sensing apparatus is bound to lead to longer-distance surveillance .
Where will that end ?
We do not wish the people of Europe to be surveyed by some kind of remote sensor - cameras in the sky - because that is exactly what the Graefe zu Baringdorf report will lead to by extension .
Is this , we have to ask ourselves , an excuse to give work for the Galileo project , the enormous expense of which , if not used there , would have paid for all the roll-call votes in this House for the next ten years ?
If the EU wants to survey anything , let it survey the wishes of the people of Europe and hold a referendum on the new Constitution signed in Lisbon , without delay .
Madam President , I know you actually share our views on this referendum because I know you personally want one yourself , because it would give legitimacy to this place .
But leaving that political difference aside , I - happily - am not a Conservative , therefore I do not have to vote blindly for complete nonsense .
I can vote with common sense , and I voted against the Baringdorf report because I find the whole idea of the spy in the sky and satellites deeply distasteful and extremely frightening .
I think it can only lead to long-term abuse .
It is bound to happen - and I know our lady friend down here , who is all motherhood and apple pie , thinks it is absolutely wonderful - but of course we have got to look at the next generation .
I am afraid I have a deep distrust of politicians .
If they can abuse a power , they always do , and I see this as being absolutely no different , so I voted against .
Madam President , I should like to explain why I voted against the report by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf .
The CAP has done nothing but ruin our farming industry in the UK for well over 30 years ; we do not want interference from the EU ; this will extend their interference yet again .
So the reason for voting against it is that we would like to get the powers of running our own agriculture back to Britain .
However , there is very little chance of that while we ignore the votes of the people in France and Holland in the referendum that we should be given on the Constitution .
- ( CS ) I would like to stress that I voted for the report on consumer credit , because I think that the report is a step in the right direction .
I am pleased that we have managed to tame the regulatory enthusiasm of the Commission and the Council for more detailed legislation , which , in my opinion , is not desirable .
There are differences between the Member States as result of their diverse law traditions and cultures of financing and an attempt to erase these differences by force will not , in my opinion , lead to success .
Therefore , it is good that the European Parliament has focused on the basic elements : principles of harmonisation of consumer credit ( here I would like to stress the right to cancel an agreement and the option of early repayment without a financial penalty for the consumer ) .
I consider a two-week deadline for withdrawal from an agreement by either of the parties to be necessary for the legal certainty of all the parties involved .
At the same time it is important to ensure that in the case of a linked credit agreement this deadline may be reduced to three days at the request of the consumer .
It will enable consumers to take earlier possession of the product purchased .
I think that a provision that guarantees that early repayment of credit cannot harm consumers is more than sufficient .
The Member States will be obliged to integrate this provision into their national legislation and consumer interests will thus be protected .
( SK ) Madam President , I have voted for the Council common position , which was amended by the Kurt Lechner report .
After more than six years of legislative work , the directive on consumer credit agreements is a significant step forward in the protection of contractual freedom and encourages responsible decision-making by consumers .
It is necessary to bear in mind that a large number of regulations does not automatically mean greater consumer protection .
A deluge of information can cause greater confusion precisely in the case of an inexperienced consumer and the objective of simplicity and transparency is missed .
In addition , it entails higher costs , which are in the end passed on to the consumer .
In spite of continuing interest in buying on credit and in spite of the use of consumer credit products , very few consumers are aware of the risks connected with consumer credit , for example that in the event of illness or loss of job they might not be able to pay .
I believe that this directive will help consumers to make the correct decisions on the basis of a quick and simple process of being able to compare more offers from domestic , as well as foreign , providers .
Madam President , on the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection where this report has been gestating for a long period of time in both readings , it is well known that I have had some severe criticism of it from its early stages where it was confusing new products that are available in one market - such as the UK market , such as mortgages where you can offset your credit balance with the same bank against your mortgage - which under initial proposals would have been banned in this report , to where we have now , after six years , new concerns - even though we have been talking about this report for six years - about the early repayment of credit costs .
This is an amazingly important piece of legislation .
It will affect huge numbers of people including anyone that owns a home in my constituency .
I was talking about it in a Conservative meeting in the village of Harpole at the house of a man called Michael Orton-Jones who raised it with me personally , about the consumer credit directive and the money-laundering directives that are passed in this House .
We have got to be much more careful in the way that we deal with this sort of very important legislation .
Madam President , I represent London , the greatest city in the world , which happens to be home to Europe 's two largest financial districts : firstly , the City of London , which , as we all know , is the pre-eminent financial force in the world , and , secondly , the Docklands - Canary Wharf - which used to trade in all manner of goods all over the world , and now it trades in financial services all over the world .
I think it was that great group of Swedish philosophers who said : ' Money , money , money , I work all day , I work all night to pay the bills I have to pay , ain 't it sad .
But in my dreams I have a plan .
I 'll get myself a wealthy man . '
In my case that is not going to be true , because I do not happen to subscribe to that particular taste .
But what I will say is that it is important for consumers right across Europe that we continue to look at ways to make it easier to have access to consumer credit , not only for my constituents in London but also for the financial services industry .
Mr Kamall , I am trying to take this very seriously , but I hope it is not going to degenerate into the radio programme Just a Minute that we know so well in the UK .
( Laughter )
Madam President , one minute without repetition , deviation or - what was the other one ?
Hesitation ! Quite so .
Let us start , then , from first principles .
Why does the European Union need to have a policy on the harmonisation of consumer credit laws ?
There seems to me to be a contextual misunderstanding behind this report .
Free trade and open markets do not require common laws on every aspect of commercial activity .
In fact , if anything , the opposite is true .
Free markets depend upon diversity , variety , pluralism and , although a degree of light regulation at national level may sometimes be in order , that does not equate to euro-harmonisation of every aspect of market activity .
This is important because it seems to me that the same conceptual error lies behind the extension of EU jurisdiction in the various fields proposed in the Lisbon Treaty .
As in the field of consumer protection , so in the fields of justice and home affairs , foreign affairs , defence and all the rest .
If these areas are to be transferred largely or wholly to Brussels , we ought at least to have the courtesy to consult our constituents first .
The Treaty of Lisbon should be put to the people : Pactio Olisipio censenda est !
Madam President , harmonisation , as we all know , has been a primary tool of the EU since its inception .
It has reached into every facet of our lives and it is quite clear that it is a strategy - a strategy , of course , to diminish the relevance and the import of national decisions and the ability to take national decisions and thereby diminish national institutions .
So it has been the modus operandi of intensifying European integration and it is something therefore which I come to with quite a hostile attitude .
Because fundamentally I believe in the right of Member States to govern within their boundaries that which affects their citizens .
There is one aspect of harmonisation we could help on .
We could harmonise giving to the citizens of Europe the right to have their say on the Lisbon Treaty .
Madam President , I think it is relevant when making an explanation of vote actually to say how we voted .
In my case I voted in favour of this measure , again as a loyal Conservative , again following the whip and again , had I been left to make my own decision , I would have voted against it , for the reasons very clearly set out by some of my colleagues , particularly Mr Hannon 's reference to free markets requiring diversity .
Madam President , I can ask the honourable Member if he can give way to me .
I just wondered if he could maybe re-assess his comments because , this being a second reading report , there was a ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Sorry , but we will have the explanation of vote from Mr Helmer .
Each speaker has one minute in which to give an explanation of vote .
Mr Helmer , please continue .
Madam President , I agree that credit should be a matter for national governments to decide , subject to local custom and practice .
The amount of credit taken across borders is not sufficient to justify harmonisation , but may I suggest that the European Union itself is running out of credit with citizens because it refuses to take the necessary action , through referendums , to legitimise itself ?
Madam President , this reminds me of my days in the House of Commons .
If this report in the slightest way could have helped Mr Brown and this inept Labour Government back home not to have had the Northern Rock crisis , if this report had been in any way useful in teaching this Labour Government back home how to run an economy , well , I might have said this report is a good one .
But , being a loyal Conservative I had to support it ; I followed the whip .
But if we talk about credit , credit means trust , and if the European Union cannot trust its citizens and the citizens of Europe cannot trust the European institutions , is that why we are not going for a referendum ?
Because we do not trust our citizens to decide in the right way ?
Madam President , I voted in this report in order to help Member States and I therefore pick out these bits : Amendment 46 , split vote - Member States ' own laws may not be waived .
I voted for that and I am glad to see that I was supported .
I voted for Amendment 9 , part 1 - extending areas in which an obligation shall not apply .
I am sorry to see that failed .
I voted for Amendment 29 , where it states that compensation must be according to national law .
I am sorry to see that failed as well .
I voted , therefore , in order to help Member State governments , but that should not be read to mean that I want a Member State government to interfere in the affairs of finance houses and banks .
As my colleague Mr Deva pointed out , they are signally ill-equipped to do so .
In the case of Northern Rock , they have spent half the Treasury money on trying to rescue it , and who knows if that is at an end .
What we know is at an end are the referendums on the Lisbon Treaty , and that should not be so .
Madam President , I have a confession to make .
I have absolutely no qualifications whatsoever for this job and yet I find myself sitting here helping to make legislation that affects around 400 million people .
When I look around the full Chamber , I fear that very many of the Members share my lack of qualifications , looking at the level of debate we seem to get here .
The people , the citizens of the Member States , have an enormous amount of intelligence collectively , yet we deny them the right to make their own decisions .
In my view , this is in an area that politicians should keep well out of and give the people their own decisions ; in particular , please let them have a referendum on the EU Constitution .
- ( MT ) I wish to briefly explain the manner in which I voted in order to attract the attention of the Maltese authorities .
I would like to draw attention to two cases in particular .
Firstly , the case of the Gozitan boy , Mr Attard 's son , which attracted media attention in the last two years because of the way in which his father suffered prejudice by being denied his paternal rights as a father figure and bringing the child to live in his country , Gozo .
Secondly , the recent criminal case of a 13-year-old girl , in which the authorities did not know where to send her ; she was sent first to prison , and then to a mental institution .
This is a grave failure .
Thank you .
- ( DE ) Madam President , I speak on behalf of the ÖVP-Europa-Club [ Austrian People 's Party European Club ] .
We have blackballed all articles that include the right to sexual and reproductive health , because the interpretation of this text can also , of course , be used to terminate pregnancies at any point in time and we are against this .
We voted in favour of Article 127 on the headscarf ban , because young people should not be encouraged to wear political symbols and because we want to guarantee that freedom to vote and freedom of choice continue to be safeguarded for young people .
We also voted in favour of Article 116 , but this does not mean that mandatory legal consequences would be derived from it .
Madam President , I came to this report actually with some trepidation , because I am always aware that many of these reports call for an extension of powers in this place that we do not actually have already .
In my constituency I represent a town called Rothley in Leicestershire , which is where the McCanns live .
They have been very active in calling upon this Parliament to be more active in holding registers of missing children and various other matters .
I also represent in the town of Northampton a new charity called ' KidsAid ' founded by a gentleman called David Mackintosh , who again had strong opinions that most of this report was actually very , very good .
However , as is always the case in this House , political correctness took over , and you look at amendments 162 , 163 and 164 and you see how this place tries to extend its powers .
There is a motto which is used around this place : if you do not succeed , redefine success .
It is what you have done on the Lisbon Treaty , and I very much hope that the people in my constituency get to have a say on that .
Madam President , I rise to offer an explanation of vote on the Angelilli report ' Towards an EU strategy on the rights of the child ' .
I note in the explanatory statement that the rapporteur says she ' wishes to point out that the aim of this report is not to draw up a list of problems to be resolved or rights to be taken into account as a matter of priority ' .
I represent a constituency , London , the greatest city in the world , capital of the greatest country in the world , and there are a number of children in my constituency .
In fact , I am the father of two children and , as the great philosopher once said , I believe that children are our future .
Therefore , it is important that we do take account of the rights of children .
But I really have to question whether this should be done at EU level .
Let us look , for example , at whether we want young adolescents to be given information and education on that dirty word ' sexual and reproductive rights ' .
I think we should be very careful in looking for local solutions - and give the people of Britain a say on a referendum on the Constitution .
Madam President , Disraeli once replied to a delegation with the phrase ' to the liberalism that they profess , I prefer the liberties we enjoy , to the rights of man , the rights of Englishmen ' .
Our national tradition of rights is not merely different from the European conception of universal entitlements ; it is incompatible .
We point to specific liberties , ones at specific moments guaranteed in specific charters , whether Magna Carta , the Bill of Rights or in simple statute acts ; we do not put our faith in universalist human rights codes interpreted by judges for whom we cannot vote .
I have to say , our tradition has had more success than that pursued by some of the continental states which have taken the universalist path .
We have not fallen , as other countries have , either to revolution or to dictatorship .
We believe that all rights are residual in the individual .
As Aldous Huxley once put it , ' liberties are not given , they are taken ' .
That is why I fundamentally oppose the incorporation of the EU Charter in the Lisbon Treaty without a referendum .
The people must be consulted : Pactio Olisipio censenda est !
Madam President , there are serious issues here and there are serious moral issues .
Certainly my vote was motivated in great measure by consideration of some of those .
I find portions of this report offensive .
I find it offensive to take the position that one must impose upon children what someone perceives to be , in their view , the reproductive rights for adolescents that we find in recital L and in paragraphs 162 , 163 and 164 etc .
It does seem to me wrong and inappropriate to have foisted upon one society ideological and morally prejudicial values which might be at variance with the established ethical outlook of a particular region .
It is that which I fundamentally object to and , as Mr Hannan has said , it is that which the Charter will bring to us more and more .
That is why I want my citizens to be able to agree or disagree .
Madam President , I voted against this measure .
For the first time we come to an item where the Conservative whip was a free vote and I took advantage of that freedom .
I agree very much with what my colleagues have already said .
This measure contains much that I agree with : it contains a great deal of motherhood and apple pie , and we all agree with motherhood and apple pie .
But , on the other hand , it proposes that we provide sex education for children in order to reduce teenage pregnancy and the spread of sexually transmitted diseases .
It is my experience that if you tell children about something and teach them how to do it , the first thing is that they want to go out and do it , and we should not be surprised if they do !
We hear far too much about adolescent reproductive rights and not about reproductive responsibilities .
We should be more responsible in our approach to children , and it should be exercised by parents and locally .
In conclusion , I believe that , before we go ahead with this , we should have a referendum on the Lisbon Treaty .
Madam President , I am very disappointed by this report and I have to say , taking advantage of the free vote , I voted against much of the report .
This report is not about the rights of children .
It is about the right of children to have sex and the right of children to have abortions , which I find quite difficult to accept .
But what about the rights of children and their parents to decide the future of Europe , and the future of the Lisbon Treaty , and the future of where we are going ?
After all , all these institutions are not being built for us - they are being built for our children .
Are we going to ask what they and their parents feel and want to say about how Europe is going to develop ?
No .
We shall decide , without any rights being conferred on them to tell themselves or us what their own destiny should be .
This is all wrong .
( Applause )
( NL ) Madam President , just for the record , I voted against Mrs Angelilli 's report .
This is not , of course , because I oppose children 's rights - far from it .
Indeed , I welcome the fact that the report breaks a couple of this House 's taboos , such as the taboo of structural violence against girls in the Muslim community .
The report even states - rightly , in my view - that the obligation for girls in the Muslim community to wear headscarves is detrimental to the development of their personalities .
Whilst I agree with all of this , I voted against this report , as it is a further example of enormous European interference .
I believe that all these matters can be dealt with better at national level and that Europe has precious little to do with it .
I would like to give a single example .
This report argues very strongly against prison sentences for minors , whereas in my country there is a broad popular consensus in favour of imprisoning even those serious criminals who are underage to encourage them to mend their ways .
( SK ) Madam President , we need to keep renewing our knowledge throughout our working life , not only during our years at school .
Education is important for personal growth and better employment opportunities .
As companies assess the need for new qualifications and the requirements of the labour market , adult education will adapt to these requirements , thus helping to overcome the discrepancies in the labour market .
All this is taken into account in the Commission 's proposal for an adult education action plan , and therefore I have voted in favour of it .
I agree that the EU Member States should help adult education by adopting active measures , motivating citizens to educate themselves and employers to provide suitable conditions for education .
There should be economic stimulus in the form of grants , tax allowances , contributions or cofinancing .
For this purpose a more active use of the Structural Funds , and the European Social Fund in particular , is necessary too .
I feel that it is exceptionally important for older people to get involved in lifelong learning and thus find a place in the labour market .
Madam President , I voted in favour of the Pack report , since one of the purposes of lifelong learning is to increase the flexibility of the labour market .
For people over 50 , which also concerns me , such a policy creates a wider range of opportunities to react to changes in the labour market and adapt to the situation without major repercussions .
The report emphasises the positive effect of lifelong learning on social inclusion and employability , which in any case should not be disregarded in an ageing society , for example in my home country , Estonia .

- ( DE ) Madam President , Mrs Pack 's report on ' Adult Education : It is never to late to learn ' is in my opinion one of the most important programmes of action in the European Union : the motivation to take part in adult education programmes , the learning of foreign languages , the motivation to complete tertiary education and with it the chance of having better job opportunities and therefore a better income , as well as the opportunity for better integration of immigrants .
It is particularly important for women , however , that the relevant framework programmes for child care are available here .
In particular we must also pay great attention to the possibility of exchanging knowledge between the generations .
For this reason the ÖVP-Europa-Club was happy to approve this report .
- ( CS ) ( Beginning of the speech not audible ) ... the introduction to this report on adult education clearly emphasises the attention paid to life-long learning in all the EU institutions .
However , the accumulation of documentation , kind words , appeals and supporting votes , including my own , are not enough .
Let us encourage the educational institutions to get really conceptually involved in life-long learning .
This process must not be seen as some sort of appendix to traditional education , but should become a full part of the education system .
That requires substantial changes .
This process could , therefore , represent a significant financial burden for each country , which could be a limiting factor in the development of education .
When considering where to direct funds when adjusting the funding for individual EU policies , this sphere - and in particular the universities as the natural centres of learning - should not be forgotten .
Madam President , this report is entitled ' Adult education : it is never too late to learn ' .
I wish the European Commission and those who want the Lisbon Treaty to go through would learn from that statement themselves .
Adult education is one of the most important parts of the education system .
Lifelong learning is something that I think most in this House will agree is a very good thing .
We all had amazing teachers when we were at school and we all remember them .
I had a brilliant mathematics teacher who taught me there were three kinds of people : those who can count , and those who cannot .
I had a brilliant science teacher who taught me that radioactive cats had 18 half lives .
But the most important thing is , I guess , a phrase that you will recognise , a phrase that the youth of today are using more and more . ' We don 't need no education ; we don 't need no thought control ' .
What we are doing with the Lisbon Treaty is putting another ' brick in the wall ' between the voters who put us here and the European elites who abuse them .
Madam President , I should just like to acknowledge how patient you have been during these explanations of vote .
Thank you very much for laughing at some of the jokes as well .
You may be aware that I represent London , the greatest city in the world , capital of the greatest country in the world .
In London there are a number of educational institutions .
I myself went to school in London ; I went to the London School of Economics to do my Master 's course .
However , what I would like to say in regard to this particular explanation of vote is that we should not underestimate the role of the further education sector in lifelong learning .
In particular , there are some very excellent institutions : Bromley College , with its excellent head , Peter Jones - I would like to put that on record - and Westminster College .
We all deserve a say on the referendum on the Constitution .
I could return the flattery and say that up until now I thought we were doing quite well , but it is beginning to get a little repetitive .
Madam President , may I add my thanks , alongside those to yourself , to your staff and to the interpreters for patience and good humour .
Let me ask what any of this has to do with Brussels ?
Under what Treaty article , indeed under what possible consideration of common sense is adult learning an EU competence ?
Most of us accept that there is a case for multi-state initiatives to deal with plainly cross-border issues ; I can accept that argument - or at least an argument for a coordinated European strategy on , let us say , pollution or tariff reduction , perhaps elements of aviation and so on .
Although , even here , European coordination does not equate to EU jurisdiction .
But , adult learning ?
Surely this , of all fields , is one that ought to be determined by national electorates through their own proper democratic mechanisms and procedures .
Why do we always assume that the gentleman in Brussels knows better than the ordinary voter ?
That same unlovely assumption lies behind the EU Constitution , now called the Lisbon Treaty , and that is why we should put that Treaty to the people : Pactio Olisipio censenda est !
Madam President , there is much of apple pie and motherhood about this report .
But the fundamental importance of it is this : it signifies and typifies a belief that Brussels has a right to set agendas and to dictate to Member States how they should prioritise issues and expenditure that quite patently are within their own domain and should be exclusively so , because any region has the right to decide within its limited budget what its priorities are .
If adult learning and increased expenditure is a priority , it should be so decided by that region or that nation , not by Brussels and not because of Brussels but because it is right for those circumstances in itself .
We all learn - I have learnt much since I came here in 2004 .
What I have learnt most is the utter contempt in which the European elite hold their citizens and that is why they are denying the citizens the fundamental right of a vote .

Madam President , I can tell you that , on this occasion , I voted against the measure , but I also voted in line with the Conservative whip , and this time I did so with a good will because I would have intended to vote against it anyway for the reasons that have been so clearly set out by my friends and colleagues , especially by Mr Hannan and Mr Allister .


This is nothing to do with the European Union .
I am in favour of education .
I am in favour of adult education .
I am absolutely against Brussels deciding how it should be done .
Like Mr Hannan , I am unable to work out any basis in the Treaties on which it should be done .
We have no legitimacy in terms of the Treaties for passing a measure like this .
We equally have no legitimacy in the face of the rejection of the Constitution in France and in Holland for passing the same measure .
We should now have referendums across the European Union on this question .

Madam President , on a point of order , could I , being an adult and having had some education , ask Mr Hannon , who has , obviously , greater education than I , what his Latin expression means ?
I am sure he will tell you after we have closed the sitting !
Madam President , this has been one of the liveliest debates in this European Parliament since its inception .
Had we done this before we might have had the television cameras here and our constituents might find out what we are doing instead of these boring , turgid things we do day in , day out .
Let me now turn to adult learning .
It is never too late to learn , it says .
This surely is a matter for subsidiarity : it is up to the nation states to decide what their priorities are .
It is surely not for the Brussels Commission , surely not for the European Parliament to decide whether adult learning is imperative or not !
But it also says - does it not ? - that it is never too late to learn , and surely one of the things we need to learn very fast is that we cannot divide the people of Europe from their decision-makers .
We must enjoin them on how we want to run the European Union and , therefore , we must have a referendum .
Madam President , I voted against this measure and I did so primarily because , you see , I am a schoolmaster .
This measure without doubt leads directly , by linkage , to the European Qualifications Framework , which is a hijack .
It is going to get people to study at their traditional universities , take their qualifications there , and then overstamp them with a new document with the EU logo , the EU crest , the EU motto , with no reference to the great university or college from which they got their learning .
That is a distinct and very terrible denial of a seat of learning - and I make that remark for all the universities of Europe and not just those famous ones in Britain .
To get back to the question of adult learning , I have a suggestion to make to you .
Let us by all means encourage adult learning .
Give every adult in the EU a copy of the Lisbon Treaty and then ask them to vote on it .
Madam President , yes , I voted against this report .
My explanation is that the UK Independence Party supports the return of the grants system for the UK , and I would like to point out that it is our membership of the EU that caused it to be abolished in England and Wales in the first place .
However , it is up to Member States , and not the EU , to decide on tax incentives and cuts for employers who cooperate with adult learning .
As with most things , we need less interference from the EU , not more .
As I see that I am very well within my time , may I add that the coming ratification of the European Constitution , despite its rejection in two referendums , is undemocratic , cowardly and illegitimate .
Time , but not your subject .
( NL ) Madam President , I voted against the Pack report ; not , of course , because I oppose lifelong learning .
On the contrary , no one in their right mind would doubt the great importance of adult education in our constantly changing world .
I do think , however , that Europe , and first and foremost the European Commission , should not interfere too much in what is a competence of the Member States .
This is not just a matter of common sense ; it is also inherent in the principle of subsidiarity that is always being lauded here but in practice is increasingly proving to be a dead letter .
- ( DE ) Madam President , I should like to make a verbal declaration regarding the very good Angelilli report on the EU strategy on the rights of the child .
The radical treatment of the issues of child prostitution and sex tourism is particularly important .
The victims of these criminal offences can also be found in our own backyards .
In the border area between Germany , the Czech Republic and Austria , for example , prostitution involving women and increasingly children increased enormously after the opening of the borders .
However , no attention was paid to this subject at EU level for a long time .
Problems central to child prostitution , such as the networking of perpetrators through the Internet and the lack of cooperation regarding cross-border surveillance and law enforcement , can only be combated at European level .
The report deals with these areas and incorporates them into a comprehensive strategy .
Even though there is still a great deal to be done to combat child abuse , this is an encouraging sign .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for the resolution on the report by my German fellow Member Friedrich-Wilhelm Graefe zu Baringdorf and on the proposal for a regulation on the measures to be undertaken by the Commission in 2008-13 making use of the remote-sensing applications developed within the framework of the common agricultural policy .
I support the proposal that the remote-sensing activities should be financed by a proper budget and not by the European Agricultural Guarantee Fund ( EAGF ) .
Though my fellow members believe the focus should be more on improving the existing website of the EU 's Joint Research Centre Agriculture Unit so that all relevant research data can be made freely available to the public , I am very much in favour of the creation of a spatial data infrastructure and a website as the European Commission 's objectives propose .
I support the proposals to create an inventory of all spatial data , remote-sensing and agro-meteorological projects , and to consolidate the existing spatial data infrastructure and websites .
in writing . - ( PT ) The European Commission considers that , in order to provide a response to common agricultural policy management needs , there is considerable need for information on land use , land conditions and crop conditions .
It has therefore presented remote sensing as a research method to gain easier access to the information contained in conventional agricultural statistics and forecasting systems .
The proposal took account of a pilot project on remote-sensing techniques , under the auspices of Council Decision No 1445 / 2000 / EC , initiated in the meantime .
According to the Commission , this project enabled the agro-meteorological system for forecasting yields and monitoring land and crop conditions ( MARS ) to reach an advanced stage .
Now the Commission is proposing the continued application of remote-sensing techniques in agriculture for the period 2008-2013 , in the field of monitoring agricultural markets .
The project will apply from 1 January 2008 for a six-year period .
The remote-sensing applications would thus constitute a tool for the Commission to implement and monitor the common agriculture policy , although the information could be useful to the Member States .
The question is how it will be used and who will be using it , hence our abstention .
in writing . - ( PT ) While I am in broad agreement with the European Commission 's proposal , I am voting in favour of the Graefe zu Baringdorf report since it makes some relevant points .
I understand , for example , the rapporteur 's concern over the impossibility of comparing data between different Member States owing to the different frequency of analyses .
I still approve of the creation of an inventory and consolidation of spatial data infrastructure and the relevant websites , and the improvement of the Agriculture Unit 's website to make the data public .
in writing . - ( SV ) We vote against this report because , as usual , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development of the European Parliament seeks to introduce amendments aimed at transferring more money from the EU budget to the agricultural policy .
Amendment 4 from the Committee on Agriculture proposes that EUR 9.2 million be set aside in a separate budget instead of being channelled through the European Agricultural Guarantee Fund .
We can only interpret that as a way of securing budget increases .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report .
I feel that the prolongation of any proposal seeking to contribute to making the Common Agricultural Policy more precise in its distribution can only be a positive step to ensure a fair deal for Scottish farmers .
The ability to more accurately estimate yields and make related information more freely available will allow for the improvement of a policy that so far lacks an image of fairness , transparency and environmental sensitivity .
in writing . - ( FR ) Based on the excellent report by my German colleague Kurt Lechner , I approve the adoption by the European Parliament , at second reading of the codecision procedure , of a legislative resolution on the Council common position for adopting a directive on the harmonisation of the laws , regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States concerning credit for consumers and replacing the 1987 Community framework , amended on two occasions .
I welcome the European Commission 's desire to establish the conditions for a genuine internal market in consumer credit , to guarantee a high level of consumer protection and to clarify Community regulations by recasting the three existing directives of 1987 , 1990 and 1998 on this type of credit .
I welcome the important work done by my French colleague Jean-Paul Gauzès , who by the wisdom and strength of his convictions has made a substantial contribution to this important compromise , which is so valuable for economic growth , consumer protection and credit institutions .
in writing . - ( FR ) After five years of discussions , European consumers will soon have identical information about consumer credit , enabling them to make better comparisons with foreign offers when buying a car , a dishwasher or a sofa bed .
Although Europeans already have the ability to take out bank loans abroad to buy consumer goods , few use it : less than 1 % of the total amount of this type of credit is currently borrowed abroad .
However , rates currently vary by up to 100 % ( Portugal 12 % , Finland 6 % ) !
The major obstacles identified are the language barrier , distance and the lack of consumer confidence .
The directive , which I support , should help to increase this confidence , keep consumers better informed and facilitate their choices , while enabling them to benefit from uniform rules of protection ( early repayment , right of withdrawal , etc . ) .
Two questions , to conclude :
Are we not in danger of encouraging people to take on too much debt if we do not further strengthen the conditions for lenders to check consumers ' creditworthiness ?
Do we not urgently need to open the way for cross-border competition in property loans ?
This vote relates to the second reading of the proposal initially made by the European Commission in 2002 .
These compromises are aimed at reaching agreement with the Council on a text that would repeal the current Directive 87 / 102 / EEC and introduce a common legal framework for consumer credit agreements .
The idea is to facilitate the opening-up of national markets and to promote cross-border consumer credit operations , with the aim of stepping up competition and ' improving ' the internal market .
Among other things , it lays down the formula for calculating the annual percentage rate of charge ( APR ) , the conditions in the event of early repayment and information to be given to consumers regarding credit agreements .
We voted in favour of the proposals that are designed to offer better consumer protection , which is especially important in Portugal , where families ' indebtedness is constantly on the rise , exceeding 124 % of available income , and where the major financial groups are making scandalous profits .
We voted against all the proposals for facilitating the opening-up of financial markets and cross-border credit , designed to remove barriers to the entry of the major financial groups rather than to protect consumers .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the report proposing the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States on consumer credit .
Although European households already have the ability to take out bank loans abroad to buy consumer goods , few use it .
Problems of language , distance and lack of confidence are the biggest obstacles .
The new directive will increase the transparency of the market for the benefit of consumers for credit of between 200 and 75 000 euros .
Consumers will have the information they need to choose in full knowledge of the facts , if they decide to buy across borders .
In the case of credit offers , the information given to consumers will be contained in a new European credit information form .
Consumers will also eventually benefit from a single annual percentage rate comparable throughout the EU .
The directive will give consumers good quality basic information that is easy to compare .
The right of withdrawal and the right of early repayment without paying excessive costs , as well as the transparent presentation of their rights and obligations , will give them the confidence necessary to compare prices .
in writing . - ( FR ) The compromise on which Parliament must give its opinion is certainly an improvement on the position of the Council , but it is still deficient on many key points concerning consumer credit contracts .
The lower limit of 200 euros , the amount of credit from which the directive applies , is in my opinion much too low given the standard of living in most Member States .
Similarly , it is not necessary to harmonise the provisions governing compensation for early repayment .
The differences between the Member States are too great .
The ' compromise ' negotiated by the Council is merely the addition of various national provisions , and introduces more complications than harmonisation .
In my opinion , the directive is much too bureaucratic , for companies , credit institutions and consumers .
The minimum amount of information it provides for is too great and too indigestible .
It is in danger of spreading confusion among well-informed consumers .
in writing . - ( NL ) The result of today 's vote in the European Parliament means that , after a good five years , an agreement has been reached on the consumer credit directive .
The dialogue between the European Commission , the Council and Parliament was still fruitless at the end of last week , as the rapporteur had prohibitive objections to a compromise proposal concerning early repayment that all the other parties were prepared to accept .
The compromise subsequently reached between negotiators from the Socialist Group in the European Parliament and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , which was also acceptable to the European Commission and the Council , has today received broad support from Parliament .
I am pleased that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats has now decided to support the compromise , as I am convinced that it represents the best that could be reached for consumers and industry .
I would like to thank everyone concerned , particularly the rapporteur , for their commitment throughout the process .
Consumer and housing loans in Greece have reached 95 billion euros : consumer credit is growing at the highest rate of any country in the Euro area , and is approaching the EU 's annual budget total .
This is a sign of increasing poverty .
Two million households are borrowers , of which 3-4 % are unable to service their debt .
In most cases the debt exceeds 40 % of income , which results in constant repossessions by bailiffs .
The same is also true for small and medium-sized enterprises , which are forced to resort to borrowing .
The banks ruthlessly pocket enormous profits from high interest rates on loans and low interest rates on deposits , unlawful and irregular deductions and charges , misleading advertising , etc . , leading to workers going ever further into the red .
The EU supports financial institutions by guaranteeing profits and by alleviating the consequences of its unpopular policy , which restricts the buying power of workers and decreases their quality of life .
The proposed directive safeguards the principle of the freedom to draw up contracts , despite unequal negotiating capacities .
It strengthens financial capital by transferring responsibility to the consumer .
It safeguards against compensation for early repayment , promotes the harmonisation of legislative provisions and the opening up of national markets in the consumer credit sector , and is deliberately complex and unintelligible for borrowers .
The Members from the ΚΚΕ ( Communist Party of Greece ) are voting against the strengthening of financial credit and campaigning for a genuine people 's economy for the benefit of workers .
in writing . - The call for a harmonisation of the laws on consumer credit across Europe is one that I agree with .
The report not only creates an internal market in credit for consumers but also outlines a set of requirements to ensure a fair deal for both the consumer and creditors .
The rules in this area need to be consumer friendly , especially on the subject of early repayment and compensation , and in my opinion the report adequately addresses these concerns .
The harmonisation of advertising will also help ensure that customers across Europe are equally well informed when taking consumer credit related decisions .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the compromise the PSE Group reached with the Council ( Amendment 46 ) , because it allows the balances struck during the German Presidency last spring to be maintained .
I am pleased that the consumer credits defined in this draft directive have a minimum of 200 euros and a maximum of 75 000 euros .
However , I would have preferred the upper limit to be set at 50 000 euros .
I am particularly pleased about the qualified majority obtained in plenary to ensure that the interests of consumers are clearly protected in the event of early repayment of the credit .
The compensation banks may demand will be strictly controlled and may be prohibited for credits of less than 10 000 euros .
In any case , the fight against people taking on too much debt should remain a priority and resorting to credit should be done in a reasonable manner .
It is an illusion to think that you can revive consumption through credits to households : this approach leads only to poverty for the most vulnerable consumers .
The revival of growth through consumption is achieved by raising pay and not by increasing available credit !
in writing . - ( FR ) The report by Mr Lechner on opening up the European consumer loans market was adopted today .
It seems to me that changing a market that until now has been strongly national into a European market , while maintaining a high level of consumer protection , is the first step towards harmonising the rules on consumer credit .
The risk for consumers of getting into debt remains far too high .
Control and transparency by setting up databases of the creditworthiness of every consumer seems essential .
Like most of my colleagues , however , I voted against Amendment 29 on Article 16 , and I am pleased it was rejected .
To my mind , this point genuinely penalised consumers who decide to repay their loan early .
Offering consumers the possibility of paying off a loan before its term constitutes a good initiative .
It should not be spoiled by giving the lender the option of claiming compensation for any costs where this is not fair or justified .
It was therefore necessary to set limits .
The lender will not therefore be able to claim compensation of more than 1 % of the value of the credit .
in writing . - ( PT ) A common legal framework for consumer credit must lay down clear , simple and concise rules , so as to offer European added value with the aim of promoting the internal market .
Today , therefore , I would like to congratulate Parliament for the positive agreement reached on this legislation .
I regard the opening up of the national markets to consumer credit as very important since it will step up competition , with very positive consequences for consumers .
With this new proposal the EU is clearly favouring competition between financial institutions and is introducing the necessary transparency for the disclosure of pre-contractual and contractual information on the provision of credit , data which I regard as fundamental for consumer protection , and also possibly enabling interest rates to be reduced on account of the increased supply , especially on smaller markets .
The credit ceilings laid down under this agreement are also a very positive aspect for the Portuguese market .
I am convinced that the new framework will facilitate more credit opportunities , as there is currently a need to ensure proper protection for consumers and their creditworthiness , preventing excessive exposure to debt , in the context of a healthy social policy .
The advantages are to be benefited from and not for solving problems by creating new ones .
in writing . - ( FR ) It is a highly controversial directive , ' on ice ' for almost six years , that the European Parliament passed today .
Yet , it is a text very close to the hearts of Europeans because it provides for the harmonisation of the consumer credit market .
This market is worth 800 billion euros ( two out of three Europeans use credit to buy furniture , a television or a car ) , and interest rates currently vary from 6 % ( in Finland ) to more than 12 % ( in Portugal ) , and yet transactions have so far been mainly national ; less than 1 % of credits are currently cross-border .
The directive opens up European borders to consumers looking for the best credit deals : they can choose the best offer and be guaranteed the same rights and the same standards of information , comparison and , above all , protection against getting into too much debt .
Assessing the creditworthiness of the borrower , free and fast information in the event of refusal and the 14-days right of withdrawal in principle are some of the main objectives of the directive .
However , one regret , and it is a big one , is the lack of clarity surrounding early repayment terms .
Heavily penalising consumers who repay early would make the other advantages of harmonisation completely pointless !
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of the Lechner report on consumer credit .
I believe that it is vital for the European Union to equip itself with a general reference framework designed to protect citizens in a sector which has grown significantly in recent years .
In Italy , in particular , growth in turnover in consumer credit agreements has been exponential .
Very often consumers , sometimes in the wake of seductive advertising campaigns , have entered into them without being fully aware of their rights and the contractual terms , and have then found themselves bound by a whole set of conditions and obligations .
Within this context I therefore stress the advisability of increasing consumer protection , including through this directive .
I am voting in favour of Kurt Lechner 's report on the recommendation for second reading on the Council common position for adopting a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on credit agreements for consumers and repealing Council Directive 87 / 102 / EEC .
I feel that the compromise reached during successive negotiations is satisfactory .
The solution proposed is aimed at simplifying the procedure for granting credit and making it easier for consumers to gain access to credit throughout the European Union .
Harmonisation and unification of standards will lead to enhanced competitiveness between the institutions that make credit available , will cut costs and will also create a true internal market in the sphere of consumer credit .
in writing . - ( FR ) The vote on the draft directive on consumer credit denotes significant progress in the eyes of French MPs from the UMP [ Union pour un Mouvement Populaire / Union for a Popular Movement ] .
Indeed , thanks to the contribution made by the European Parliament , and in particular the rapporteur , Mr Lechner , the final text encourages the opening of borders in an important area of daily life , while preserving the existing rights of consumers , notably French consumers .
The transposition of the directive will therefore make it possible to offer better credit conditions in future , and to limit the risk of people taking on too much debt .
in writing . - ( FR ) Six years after the arrival of the euro , Europe still did not have a single market in terms of banking that would benefit consumers and give them a more tangible experience of the advantages of the single currency .
Information about interest rates and credit terms and conditions will be standardised to make it easier to compare offers .
Consumers will thus be able to choose in full knowledge of the facts , and obtain the best credit terms .
Lenders will also have to give consumers clear information about the advantages and disadvantages of their credit offers .
The questions of the right of withdrawal in the case of linked credit ( immediate delivery of the goods ) and of the amount of the penalties imposed if the credit is repaid early are clearly framed .
These penalties must be ' fair and objectively justified ' .
They may not exceed 1 % of the amount of the credit repaid early and will not be permitted on loans at variable rates .
I am particularly pleased that the Member States can say , as is currently the case in France , that no compensation may be demanded for credits of less than 10 000 euros , and that is why I voted in favour .
in writing . - ( SV ) The moderates have voted in favour of the proposal for an EU strategy on the rights of the child .
We consider that children 's rights must be respected in just the same way as human rights and , of course , we support action to combat such things as child pornography and the sexual exploitation of children .
We must emphasise , however , that many of the points in the report relate to fields which should be regulated on an intergovernmental basis , for example that of adoptions .
Besides , subjects are covered which are already regulated in existing EC legislation , such as TV advertising and product labelling .
in writing . - I voted for this report because I believe it makes a good contribution to the fight against all forms of violence and abuse against children , including poverty , discrimination and access to education .
I particularly welcome EP advocacy of a mechanism whereby suppliers of products manufactured with child labour can be prosecuted in Europe .
I too urge the Commission to urgently bring forward mechanisms that make the main contractor in a supply-chain liable for violations of UN conventions on child labour .
However , I deplore the attempts to remove references in the report to adolescents ' right to sexual and reproductive health and family planning education and services .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of Roberta Angelilli 's report ' Towards an EU strategy on the rights of the child ' because it is important to draw attention to the fact that many instruments adopted at EU level directly or indirectly affect children 's rights .
I therefore believe that it is essential to establish a legislative framework that recognises the rights of the child so that they can be codified in legal form .
In this context , this report makes an important contribution towards ensuring that the rights of the child are respected , in that it advocates Community legislation prohibiting all forms of violence against children , and stresses the importance of areas such as education , health , adoption , and combating poverty and discrimination .
I would also point out that the new Treaty of Lisbon provides a legal basis for the rights of the child , now included in the objectives of the European Union .
in writing . - ( SV ) Children 's rights are without doubt universal and inviolable rights , and the Junilistan Members are pleased to note that all the EU Member States have ratified the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child .
This means that we are already bound by international legislation for the protection of children against child labour , trafficking , violence and many other forms of interference in the lives of children .
Moreover children 's rights are an area in Swedish law which uncompromisingly places the child 's best interests in the forefront of consideration .
We have chosen to abstain in the vote on the report for the simple reason that the rapporteur seems to have failed in her report to focus attention on the child 's best interests .
The report focuses almost exclusively on which specific social model the Member States should adopt in their respective countries in order to give effect to whatever the European Parliament thinks is the best solution .
Everything from banning violence on TV and the sale of violent computer games to forced marriages , illegal adoptions and illegal work is covered in this report .
Clearly we have voted in favour of the amendments which stress the importance of full compliance with the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child as a guarantee of the legal protection and universal human rights of children .
in writing . - ( PT ) This report has almost 200 articles and includes some aspects we support and others which we do not .
Our vote should be understood in the light of that statement .
However , we should point out that the report fails to address the causes of situations that it sometimes diagnoses .
The report shirks its responsibilities by failing to criticise the EU 's neoliberal policies , which underlie the poverty of millions of people , especially children .
These policies lead to deep and unacceptable social inequalities , caused by capitalist exploitation and concentration .
Policies that foster social strife , with the loss of value of workers ' wages ; easy dismissals and increasingly insecure contractual arrangements ; longer and more flexible working hours and the liberalisation and privatisation of public services .
Policies that have profound adverse consequences on the efficiency and living conditions of workers and their families , and hence of their children .
The respect and full exercise of the rights of the child requires , among other things , a fair distribution of wealth , jobs with rights , decent wages , shorter working hours , development of strong public systems of social security , health and universal and free education .
in writing . - While I voted yes on this , I want to clarify my position on paragraph two of the report .
This states that the IGC decision of 19th October 2007 incorporating children 's rights as one of the objectives of the EU in the Treaty of Lisbon provides a new legal basis for children 's rights .
According to Commissioner Fratini 's response to my question on this during the plenary debate , Lisbon does not bring in a specific legal base and it is important to clarify this .
Regarding paragraph 127 I am not supporting this as I do not support a ban on headscarves and hijabs .
in writing . - ( DE ) I should like to comment on the Angelilli report on the EU strategy on the rights of the child .
This is a very good report .
The radical treatment of the issues of child prostitution and sex tourism is particularly important .
The victims of these criminal offences can also be found in our own backyards .
In the border area between Germany , the Czech Republic and Austria , for example , prostitution involving women and increasingly children increased enormously after the opening of the borders .
However , this subject was not a priority at EU level for a long time .
Problems central to child prostitution can only be combated at European level ( the networking of perpetrators through the Internet and the lack of cooperation regarding cross-border surveillance and law enforcement ) .
The report deals with these areas and incorporates them into a comprehensive strategy .
Even though there is still a great deal to be done to combat child abuse , it is an encouraging sign .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report because I believe it to be a comprehensive statement , full of good proposals .
I especially welcome the recognition of a child 's right to be involved in decisions that concern them directly and for them to be properly represented in legal or administrative hearings .
The report is strong on the need for a healthy environment and the right to play .
It also recognises that those children with the legal right to work should be paid on a basis of equal pay for equal work : too many young people are used to provide a cheap alternative to other workers when they work as well and as hard in many sectors .
I voted to remove the paragraph referring to encouraging states to outlaw the wearing of the hijab for young girls .
I believe this to be a misplaced proposal of the Women 's Committee , assuming the hijab to be an automatic sign of female subjugation , which it is not .
Personally , I am offended by seeing pre-pubescent girls wearing clothes with sexual invitations written on them but I would not seek to ban this via a Parliamentary report .
I am pleased the report passed without that paragraph .
in writing . - I strongly support the idea of a comprehensive and coherent European strategy on the rights of the child .
The fight against all forms of violence , poverty and discrimination suffered by children is something that should not simply be treated on a national level .
The protection of a child 's right to education , health and adoption are all rights that Europe as a whole should continue to recognise and protect .
in writing . - ( DE ) Violence thrives in parallel societies with an ancient Islamic tradition .
Children let out the hatred instilled in them for the decadent Western culture in the school playground and on the street or even turn into potential terrorists .
We have ignored the preliminary warning signs out of a misconceived tolerance and refused to accept what was an explosive momentum .
The growth in child trafficking and pornography is also alarming ; sex offenders , as is generally known , display a high reoffending rate .
The cover has also been blown in this regard on dubious adoption procedures for children from developing countries , procedures in which there has been no recoil from child trafficking , trade in human organs or prostitution .
In view of the multitude of orphans waiting for adoption , primarily in the East , and millions of unborn children in Europe , a strict ban on the adoption of non-European children would be a heavy blow against child trafficking , as would the introduction of a Europe-wide sex offenders register and greater penalties for sexual activity with children and for the possession of child pornography .
Last but not least , domestic violence must also be combated in migrant families and the proportion of foreigners in schools limited in order to defuse spiralling violence .
in writing . - While the Treaty of Lisbon sets the promotion of children 's rights as a broad EU objective , it does not create new legislative powers for this purpose .
I believe that any movement in this field should be within the existing legal framework .
There are significant areas in this report which step outside these boundaries .
Nor is the report offering feasible solutions to children 's problems .
One example is institutionalised care .
We have voted to restrict this to a temporary measure .
Yet hundreds of thousands of children throughout Europe are born with or acquire such significant physical or intellectual handicaps that it is a medical or social necessity for them to have long-term institutional care .
A quadriplegic , spina bifida or hydrocephalus afflicted child can have a life of dignity and happiness with expert staff care and family visits .
Strengthening the system is the priority , and not its abolition .
We in Europe are bound to follow the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child .
This report distorts several important messages contained in the Convention .
With regret , therefore , I found myself unable to support this report , though I share the concern for children 's welfare that its supporters expressed .
in writing . - ( EL ) This lengthy report , full of literary rhetoric , attempts to conceal the responsibility of the EU and its Member States for their barbaric policy , which results in the inhuman conditions experienced by children and parents of ordinary families .
How hypocritical that the EU should show interest in the rights of children while its policy is crushing workers with unemployment , partial employment , a fall in living standards , the privatisation of health and education , and the commercialisation of sport and culture .
The edifying references to combating violence against children , child pornography , etc. cannot conceal the fact that the system , whose overriding value is profit , treats children themselves as a source of profit .
It commercialises adoption and drives people into child labour , prostitution and organ trading .
How dare advocates of the EU talk about the rights of children , when EU / NATO aircraft actually bombed a Belgrade maternity clinic !
Let us remember that the European / NATO armed forces are killing thousands of children in Afghanistan , Iraq and elsewhere .
Let us remember that they are condemning hundreds of thousands of children in Africa , Asia , and across the planet to death from hunger and disease - crimes with regard to which the report remains utterly silent .
in writing . - ( SK ) Children are people with their own rights , from the very moment of conception .
Every child has a right to have a family , which is the basis of his upbringing .
We must not forget about the street children and the children of migrants , who are also exposed to violence .
The rights of the child must be the EU 's main priority .
I welcome the initiative to set up a confidential hotline .
I have expressed my agreement with the EU strategy in the area of children 's rights by casting my vote .
The strategy is dealt with in an excellent report by my colleague Mrs Angelilli , which provides a great deal of useful information .
We have to realise that we are still lacking the legal basis .
As part of a long-term strategy , it is therefore necessary to adopt concrete measures in the area of the rights of the child and implement them as quickly as possible .
Ratification of the Lisbon Treaty will make the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights legally binding .
Its Article 24 deals expressly with the rights of the child .
In the days ahead we are going to face several challenges : reducing cyber-crime as quickly as possible , putting an end to paedophilia and the sexual abuse of children and minors , and establishing rules for international adoption , which must be in the interest of the child not the adults .
All forms of violence must be prohibited .
Now is the time to transform words into actions .
The EU must listen to the children : they are the foundations of tomorrow 's society .
The European house must be a safe house for children .
If we have happy children , we will have a happy society .
In the context of the debate on building a European strategy on the rights of the child , I think we should give priority to the concept of the ' interests of the child ' , not in opposition to the idea of rights , but to complement them , and also as a guiding theme of the strategy .
Threats to the rights of the child , in the wider world and throughout Europe , vary in nature and degree .
While in some places it is a priority to combat poverty and its causes or take action against the use of children as soldiers and for sexual exploitation , in other cases we need to safeguard the right of access to health , protection against sexual abuse or trafficking of children , or the right to be adopted in a timely manner and in accordance with transparent rules , and reinforce the role of the family .
In all cases , however , the criterion should be ' the child 's best interests ' .
That is the standard , the criterion , that should be used to assess the usefulness , necessity and merit of any decision , legislation or action .
I therefore believe that the most important thing in devising this strategy is to establish this concept , to which the lists of rights must be subordinate , as they are not always reasonable , achievable or appropriate .
in writing . - ( FR ) This report has the great merit of clearly defining the rights of the child , but above all of condemning almost exhaustively the dangers children are exposed to : from exposure at an early age to depictions of horror , pornography and violence in the media to honour crimes , forced marriages and genital mutilation on cultural or religious grounds .
Without actually mentioning the words ' Islam ' or ' Islamism ' , terms that are strictly taboo because political correctness and fear of reprisals totally prohibit any form of comment on this religion , and still less any criticism , the rapporteur still manages under cover of more general comments to condemn within the rules all the discrimination that the practice of Islam engenders .
Thus , the banning of girls from taking part in some tuition and sports such as swimming , and all the traditional practices that are barbaric and damaging for young girls of the Muslim religion , are condemned .
We are delighted by this .
This report is a first step towards the beginnings of freedom of expression and clear-sightedness .
We will vote in favour .
in writing . - ( SV ) One paragraph was a cause of concern to all groups .
In paragraph 127 of the original report there was a proposal which called on all the EU Member States to ban the wearing of headscarves and the hijab at school .
As private individuals we can sympathise with the basic idea , that is to protect the right of children to play freely , take part in school gymnastics and also , as minors , to enjoy a certain protection against the coercive power of parents .
However , a complicated and sensitive question such as this can hardly be resolved at EU level .
The nations of Europe balance the rights and responsibilities of children , parents and the State in the light of their own history and political situation .
We entirely agree that the EU should create a good framework .
In a reasonable perspective paragraph 127 falls outside any such framework .
in writing . - I was pleased that the committee and the ensuing report took on board a strong focus on family and recognised the family 's position in relation to children .
I also welcome the strong defence of children in relation to trafficking , institutionalisation , pornography and disability .
However the report ties EU policy into the UN International Convention on the Rights of the Child which changes competence for children from parents to the state .
Although not explicitly referred to it is a seismic shift of great concern .
Despite the positive elements of this report , like those mentioned above , the report was regrettably used to promote the sexual and reproductive rights agenda ( which for the UN Convention includes abortion ) which was particularly incongruous because we are dealing with children and the protection of children .
Though I very strongly support all protections for children I found myself unable to support this report .
in writing . - ( NL ) Despite the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child , which was signed by many Member States , there are still too many breaches of the basic rights of young people and children .
Therefore , the Commission 's initiative to present a European strategy is very welcome .
Even though children 's rights remain a competence of the nation-states , both the Commission and EP rapporteur , Mrs Angelilli , have highlighted a number of urgent points , such as the combating of all forms of violence and of the poverty and discrimination affecting children , and also respect for the rights of immigrant children .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance has managed to add the following points to the report : greater attention to the right of children to participate in decisions that concern them , recognition of a children 's ombudsman , prohibition of child labour , equal pay for equal work for those under 18 , recognition of the rights of refugee children , and the right to a clean and protected environment .
I am delighted that Parliament has allocated debating time to this subject , and I fully endorse this report .
I was unable to support the report on the strategy on the rights of the child , because the Left has succeeded in having as many as five references included to these so-called rights and to reproductive health which , among other things , implies the availability of abortion .
in writing . - I am in favour of the EU promoting the rights of the child .
One recent example I would again draw to the Commission 's attention is discrimination against children 's right to travel with airlines withdrawing facilities for unaccompanied minors to fly .
If they did the same for the disabled or any other similar group there would ( properly ) be an uproar , but apparently the EU thinks it is perfectly in order to remove children 's rights in this arbitrary way .
At the same time there has been some controversy over paragraph 127 calling for ' Member States to ban headscarves and the hijab , at least at primary school ' .
I voted against the paragraph because of both the ambiguous wording and the fact that I believe this is too important an issue to be dealt with as a peripheral part of such a report .
Nevertheless I would be disappointed if such a practice was to become common in Europe 's primary schools .
in writing . - I am the strongest defender of the need to give children a good upbringing in a strong , loving and secure family environment , to protect children from harm and abuse , to give them moral guidance and a first class education , and the best of opportunity in their lives .
I believe that the role of the state in this is a limited one - it should not seek to abrogate the rights and duties of parents , of the churches and of schools .
I certainly , therefore , see no reason for the EU to get involved .
I regret the deletion of the call for a ban on headscarves and the hijab at least at primary school - what hope is there of proper integration into our mainstream western societies if such dress is allowed ?
I regret also the inclusion of language relating to adolescent sexual ' rights ' - a further erosion of the very concept of childhood .
For these and many other reasons , I voted against the report .
in writing . - ( FR ) Based on the excellent report by my German colleague Doris Pack , I voted for the European Parliament resolution on adult learning in response to the Commission 's Communication ' Adult Learning : It 's never too late to learn ' .
Education and training , particularly adult lifelong learning , are critical factors for achieving the Lisbon Strategy 's objectives of raising economic growth , competitiveness and social progress .
Whether in terms of competitiveness , the social inclusion of adults , or the challenges associated with demographic change , this initiative , which dates back to 2001 , is good news for the European Union and its citizens .
Concerning learning , and more generally , the issues associated with enterprises , I suggest handing the matter over to the social partners who , we constantly need to be reminded , have the legal instruments for constructing European social law under the current treaties , in Article 137 and subsequent articles of the Treaty establishing the European Community , as confirmed by the Treaty of Lisbon currently in the process of being ratified .
in writing . - I voted for this report because the scale of current economic and social change , the rapid transition to a knowledge-based society and demographic changes resulting from the ageing population in Europe are all challenges which demand a new approach to education and training , within the framework of lifelong learning .
I voted in favour of the report by Doris Pack on ' Adult learning : it is never too late to learn ' , because I consider that adult learning , through the acquisition of essential skills , is crucial for achieving the objectives of the Lisbon Strategy of greater economic growth , competitiveness and social inclusion .
On the other hand , and to complement this I also agree with the viewpoint that lifelong learning is fundamental for facing the current challenges of economic and social change , the rapid transition to a knowledge-based society and demographic changes resulting from an ageing population .
It is important to pay more attention to adult learning .
The adult learning agenda needs to be pushed forward .
Adult participation in education and training is not sufficient if the EU wishes to reach the benchmark goal of 12.5 % participation in adult learning by 2010 .
However , it is necessary to ensure the quality of adult learning , paying special attention to the various dimensions of quality in learning , principally the development of educators , quality assurance mechanisms and teaching methods and materials .
As the report says , adult learning is a vital component of lifelong learning and a very complex sector .
Adults need to connect learning to their knowledge , experience and cultural background .
Finally , it is important to emphasise gender equality with regard to programmes relating to lifelong learning , so that both men and women can derive equal advantage from the possibilities offered by such learning , and to make use of all available tools to ensure equality between men and women in measures for preparing adult education policy , in cooperation with the European Institute for Gender Equality .
in writing . - ( SV ) We have a high degree of confidence in the Member States ' ability to deal with questions concerning the very important issue of adult education .
It is important that the education departments of the Member States have sufficient funding to develop adult education .
One way to make financial resources available to them is to reduce contributions of Member States to the EU budget so that they have more money available for investment in social provision , education and welfare .
We observe once again the failure of the federalist majority in the European Parliament to respect the exclusive competence of the Member States in the organisation of education and the content of training systems .
This own-initiative report from the European Parliament should never have been written and cannot be seen as anything more than a job-creation scheme for the European Parliament 's Committee on Culture and Education .
The report on which we are voting relates to adult education , in other words to a matter which is acquiring immense significance throughout the European Union , but which has become something more than that in my country - it is a beneficial trend and passion for thousands of people .
This is not always dictated by purely commercial considerations .
May I draw your attention to one aspect of continuous adult education that is linked to both modern demographic and civilisational challenges and the inheritance of the old order .
The socialist system enforced a specific educational model which , in the sphere of humanities , was saturated with propaganda and ideology , and in other spheres reflected a detachment from world trends .
For these reasons , adult education in the new Member States is both a chance to make amends for the weaknesses of the socialist model of education outlined above and at the same time a genuine opening up to the world .
In the sphere of knowledge of foreign languages , readiness to take the risk of retraining and changing jobs and the promotion of European educational standards , this is an obvious precondition for mobility and the chance of finding employment - which explains the broad interest in continuing education among my peers from Central and Eastern Europe .
In her report , Mrs Pack calls for education to continue throughout a person 's working life , without restricting study to the school years only .
I agree with the assertion that the current rate of economic and social change is enforcing a need for constant , long-term personal development .
It is also a fact that adult education has a beneficial impact on adults ' sense of their own worth , helps to foster better social integration and builds intercultural dialogue .
in writing . - I feel that the report 's goal of ensuring Member States reach a 12.5 % target for participation in adult learning by 2010 will improve not only the EU 's competitiveness , but will also allow for greater social inclusion and intercultural awareness : exactly what is needed for the year of intercultural dialogue .
The greater use of technology and proposals to increase childcare facilities will improve opportunities for everyone to truly benefit from education .
I therefore voted in favour of this report .
in writing . - ( DE ) It is counterproductive on the one hand to stop one 's own population from learning , and on the other hand to come up with plans for a ' blue card ' , because owing to the increase in atypical relationships and greater competitive pressure , a good basic and continuing education is now no longer any kind of protection against unemployment .
Enough well-educated people have been rejected by companies simply because the latter are searching for the cheapest McJob graduates or are merely wanting to offer more unusual employment contracts .
As a matter of principle , the lack of skilled workers used as a pretext for this should be removed .
If this is not possible preference should be given to a seasonal model .
Further mass migration can then be prevented .
Despite the discrepancies displayed in the EU targets , efforts and programmes in the lifelong learning sector still deserve our support .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
That concludes the vote .
I would like to thank the services , particularly the interpreters , for bearing with us over lunchtime .
( The sitting was suspended at 13.30 and resumed at 15.00 )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Situation in Kenya ( debate )
The next item is the statements from the Council and the Commission concerning the situation in Kenya .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) I am very pleased that today the European Parliament is going to discuss the situation in Kenya and also debate the proposed resolution on the current situation there .

The mere fact that the European Parliament sent the Election Observation Mission under the leadership of Mr Lambsdorff , and its own delegation led by Mr Mulder , gave a very important sign that the European Parliament is interested in the situation in Kenya .
The elections in Kenya , as we know , took place on 27 December .
The high turnout of the Kenyan voters is proof of the commitment of the Kenyan people to the democratic process and of the trust in that process .
The European Union Election Observation Mission was present at the actual location and was led by Mr Lambsdorff .
It warned of numerous irregularities in the counting and recording of the votes during these elections .
These irregularities are causing serious doubts about the actual outcome of these elections .
As we know , after the results were published , violence broke out in the capitol Nairobi and other parts of Kenya .
Supporters of the opposition leader , Mr Odinge , clashed several times with the security forces and also attacked the followers of President Kibaki .
Shots were fired by the security forces into the masses .
According to Louise Arbour , United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights , the security forces responded " with excessive violence ” .
At least 600 people lost their lives and almost a quarter of a million people were displaced - all this in Kenya , a country to which refugees from the neighbouring countries , Somalia and southern Sudan , usually flee .
It has affected the economy not only of Kenya itself , but also of the neighbouring countries , especially those without their own access to the sea .
That is a tragedy .
At the same time it is a great blow to the process of democratisation and a blow to the whole continent of Africa , where Kenya was regarded as exemplary .
The European Union condemned the violence in Kenya .
We appealed to Kenyan leaders to try and answer the doubts about the regularity of the elections , but first of all to establish a dialogue and find a political solution .
Naturally , we responded to the humanitarian needs of the Kenyan population .
The European Union saluted the mediation by President Kufuor of Ghana , who is presiding over the African Union .
We also expressed our support for a group of eminent African personalities led by the former United Nations Secretary General , Mr Kofi Annan , which should arrive in Nairobi shortly .
In the meantime , President Kibaki has appointed his government without consultation with the opposition leader , Mr Odinga .
The latter has called for mass demonstrations in Kenya in three days ' time .
On a more positive note , the Kenyan Parliament had its first session yesterday .
The opposition candidate was elected President of the Parliament .
This was encouraging in the sense that certain democratic rules have still been observed in the country and that the opposition still has a voice .
As for the European Union , it is perfectly clear that normal business with Kenya will not be possible until a political compromise is found .
The compromise must lead to a permanent solution which will uphold the will of the Kenyan people , gain the trust of the Kenyan people and return Kenya to stability .
In the name of the European Union , I can say that everything that has followed the Kenyan elections has represented a great disappointment and that the situation is still worrying .
However , this cannot be compared with the disappointment felt by the people of Kenya themselves , people who took part in the elections en masse in the hope of a better future .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it goes without saying that the European Commission is deeply concerned at the serious crisis Kenya is experiencing .
Furthermore , the day after the elections , when we saw the warning signs of the chaos following what happened particularly during the counting of votes , we mobilised and established contacts with the authorities on both sides - the outgoing majority and the opposition .
I should also tell you regarding this that I had no trouble getting in direct , personal contact with Mr Odinga .
On the other hand , since then and despite repeated attempts , I have never been able to make direct , personal contact with Mr Kibaki , which is surprising considering how easy it was to contact him in the past .
This is fairly indicative of the unease that reigned .
The post-election violence , which has caused the deaths of more than 600 people and the displacement of more than 250 000 , has obviously highlighted the frustration and anger felt by the Kenyan people about the profound problems of socioeconomic inequality and corruption undermining Kenyan society , with the risk of confrontation on ethnic lines .
But these elections have also highlighted the democratic aspirations of the Kenyan people .
These aspirations have been flouted by the irregularities that occurred on election day , which cast serious doubt on the validity of the official results .
We fully share the conclusions and declarations of the European Union 's election observation mission , led by your fellow Member Alexander Lambsdorff , whom I would really like to congratulate for the excellent work he did , to the point that the international authorities outside the EU , which started off in a slightly less categorical position , in some ways a slightly less objective position , ended up supporting Mr Lambsdorff 's observations and conclusions and endorsing them .
The Commission 's position with respect to the political situation in Kenya could not be clearer .
Kenya 's political leaders urgently need to size up their responsibilities and immediately and seriously commit themselves to finding a political settlement .
Without such a commitment , the European Union will undoubtedly have no other option than to review its relations with Kenya , which until now , it has to be said , have been excellent .
Kenya is a country that was felt to be on the right track in terms of governance , human rights and democracy , and it was also playing an important role in regional stability .
We need to remember these things .
Seeking a political settlement is therefore the responsibility first and foremost of the Kenyan leaders .
It requires an immediate halt to provocation and violence in the streets , but also in the media and in public posturing .
It is crucial for President Mwai Kibaki , and the opposition leader Raila Odinga , to agree to compromise by recognising that the election result is not correctly reflected in the exercise of power and responsibility , and that there must inevitably be power sharing to avoid the continuation of the political crisis .
This power sharing could be an interim solution until , for example , new elections could be held .
Finally , it is important for the Kenyan political class to recognise the pressing need to solve the basic problems at the root of this outburst of violence , whether they are the constitutional organisation of power , the political governance of the country , or the serious discrimination and socioeconomic inequalities .
The Commission and the European Union as a whole fully support the African mediation launched by President Kufuor and continued by Kofi Annan , thanks to Graça Machel and Benjamin Mkapa .
They call upon President Kibaki and Raila Odinga to cooperate fully with the aim of finding a political settlement .
I spoke at length with Desmond Tutu at the start of the crisis , during his mediation mission .
I also had a very long discussion with Kofi Annan , who indicated that the most appropriate thing would be for African mediation to accompany a process of rapprochement .
I have promised the Commission 's support for this mediation , whether politically or financially .
Whatever the case , we should be pleased that the speaker of the Kenyan parliament was elected properly last night .
We should take this as a sign of respect for the constitutional framework , from this point of view at least .
However , the next few days will be crucial .
We will be monitoring the situation closely and will remain in constant contact with the African mediators .
We will adapt our relations with Kenya , including as regards cooperation , to reflect changes in the situation and the actions of both sides .
All options are currently on the table .
There needs to be European and international dialogue so that what we do has the maximum impact .
It seems that the international community is currently on the same wavelength , that there are no longer differences in approach , political tendency , or even strategy .
This is important .
It was not necessarily the case at the outset , straight after the elections .
I think this is something we have now achieved , and it is a good thing .
As for the humanitarian situation , the Commission has reacted very quickly .
Following the assessments by experts from ECHO and our partners in the field , the Commission has released initial emergency aid of 5.5 million euros to cope with the needs of displaced people for water , food , shelter and healthcare .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , as has already been said , Kenya has been an important example of democracy and stability in the region since 2002 .
In recent years , the country has made great political and economic strides .
The Kenyan elections have shown that the vast majority of Kenyans prefer democracy to dictatorship .
They have shown that they have more faith in elected representatives than in the military .
Nevertheless , these alarming outbursts of violence have occurred , and there is now a humanitarian crisis that has already left hundreds dead and more than 250 000 refugees .
This will not be without consequences for the country 's economic situation .
What is to be done ?
It is important for the European Union to offer its full support to the panel of ' eminent African personalities ' appointed by the African Union and headed by Kofi Annan .
If the past can teach us one thing , it is that we must not think that we - Europe - can solve Africa 's problems .
African problems require African solutions , and I welcome the European Commission 's support for this .
Mr President , our group fully supports the resolution .
I do have one more thing to get off my chest , however : something that our group considers extremely regrettable .
This is that , one day after the elections - that is , at a time when the outcome had been decided and , as the Commissioner has said , irregularities had already abounded - the European Commission transferred more than 40 million euros to the government in budget aid .
It did not even await the findings of our own observation team - which , incidentally , were published just three days later .
This political decision cannot be justified on the technicality that the payment had already been delayed once , until after the elections , and that it was just the third in a series of payments .
This payment could have and should have been deferred .
This was an extremely unfortunate decision , all the more so because the Member States themselves had already suspended their aid .
This must not happen again .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , additional proof that the majority of the Kenyan people did not support President Kibaki is that in the parliamentary elections , which were held at the same time as the presidential elections , Mr Odinga 's opposition party won more than twice as many votes as Mr Kibaki 's party .
As we know , this enabled Mr Odinga 's party to win the post of speaker when Parliament opened yesterday in Nairobi .
Meanwhile , 22 of Mr Kibaki 's ministers , who aspired to be MPs , were defeated at the elections .
President Kibaki is , in my view , responsible for a great deal , not only because of the electoral fraud .
His five years in government have led to frustration , disillusionment and deception .
It is true that the economy has grown by 6 % , but more than half the population is still living below the poverty line .
Also , several cabinet ministers , appointed by Mr Kibaki in a clear act of provocation , have been linked with cases of corruption .
This President , who is fraudulently seeking to remain in power , is also responsible for another serious matter : his action has caused a resurgence in inter-ethnic conflict , a spiral that may be difficult to contain .
As if this were not enough , as you know , two weeks ago the Chairman of the Kenyan Electoral Commission stated no less than that he did not know who had won the presidential elections .
In view of all this , in my opinion it makes perfect sense , as paragraph 11 of the joint motion for a resolution of Parliament states , to demand that new elections be called if it is impossible for an independent institution to organise a clean , transparent and credible recount of the votes cast in the 27 December elections .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I would like to begin by expressing my gratitude to the Council , the Commission and also to my fellow Members here in the European Parliament .
There is great unity among the institutions .
This makes me personally very happy and I say this also on behalf of my team of more than 150 election observers , at least 50 of whom have been stationed in Kenya for over a month .
Our unity here is a good sign .
Some of these observers - I want to state this here - are now on their way to Pakistan , or have already arrived there , where the next difficult election is pending .
Election monitoring is sometimes a difficult and dangerous job .
I should like to thank these people most sincerely for their commitment to this .
Whatever you stand for , Europe is the common value .
We can be proud - as the Commissioner has just said - that other monitoring missions have subscribed to our judgment , for instance the Commonwealth Delegation and the International Republican Institute from the United States .
I believe the work of the monitoring mission has therefore established a basis for a joint effort in which the European Union , Africa and the United States all pull together in order to reach a solution to the crisis in Kenya .
In its resolution the European Parliament will highlight the paths it considers appropriate .
As chief observer , I have not taken part in these consultations myself .
The neutrality of our mission must , in my view , be unequivocally preserved to the end .
To the end means until our final report , which we are presently compiling , is submitted .
Together with the professional work of our observers in the field , the resulting neutrality was our strongest asset .
Neutrality and professionalism also include the fact that we work only on the basis of proof .
In our conclusion we discovered that there is scepticism about the result of the presidential election .
As a monitoring mission , we have never said that a particular candidate has won the elections .
What we have said is that it is not possible to establish who the winner is .
I would like to quote something in English from the Kenyan election observers , who write as follows :
' In our view , considering the entire electoral process , the 2007 general elections were credible in as far as the voting and counting process is concerned .
The electoral process lost credibility towards the end with regard to the tallying and announcement of presidential results . '
That statement comes from the national Kenyan observers , who stationed between 16 000 and 20 000 people there .
It is entirely consistent with our findings .
I now wish to say something that applies to me , to the team and to everyone : we are hoping for a rapid settlement of the crisis , an end to the violence and for the refugees to return to their homeland as quickly as possible .
Mr President , Prime Minister , Commissioner , Kenya is more than just the problem of President Kibaki 's electoral abuses .
We are dealing here with a humanitarian crisis for the civilian population .
The most dramatic situation seems to be happening in Eldoret , in the Holy Spirit Catholic Church in Langas .
There we are dealing with numerous murders set against a political and ethnic background .
Many Kenyans have been driven out of their family homes , which have then been burned down .
On 1 January 2008 more than 3 000 people were taking refuge in the parish of Langas .
The refugees are deprived of food , clean water and sanitation .
On 2 January this year the Catholic Missionary Service News Agency , MISNA , reported that between 7 000 and 10 000 people were taking refuge in the cathedral in Langas .
What is needed is not only political mediation , but also action to guarantee that no outburst of ethnic and religious hatred will be permitted .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , I think that in view of the current situation , the European Union should make an effort to assert its credibility as regards the observation missions it sends to these countries .
For if it is observed quite seriously , as was the case , that the result is clearly fraudulent , that the president cannot be considered the legitimately elected president , the European Union should then be consistent in its policy and start , at the very least , by not recognising the president , in this case Mr Kibaki .
Secondly , the EU should propose and ensure , as rapidly as possible , that new presidential elections are held that will enable the president to be properly elected , honestly this time .
Sadly , we have precedents , notably in Ethiopia where the President also used force to get himself into office , despite the evidence of fraud followed by much repressive violence .
The European Union 's acceptance of this fait accompli helps to undermine the value of sending observation missions .
What is the point of sending European observation missions with the seriousness and commitment of all our colleagues in this area to make conclusions that are unanimously recognised by everyone , if in the end we lie low and a few months later accept a coup by a president who will not even listen ?
Would we accept this kind of situation in our own countries ?
Obviously not .
Therefore we cannot , in terms of the democracy and electoral processes we support , have double standards , one applying in the European Union and the other fluctuating in line with peoples ' interests in these regions .
The Kenyan people , I believe , want to get to the bottom of this situation and are calling for new elections to make things perfectly clear .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are certainly all agreed that the events in Kenya are tragic and that there must categorically be an end to today 's continuing violence .
The crisis in Kenya is fundamental and in my view not merely political in nature .
To all intents and purposes , it can also have an impact on the situation in Africa 's neighbouring countries .
It is true that there are rabble-rousers in Kenya trying to invoke hatred between ethnic groups in order to gain power .
But if , for example , you read the free Kenyan press these days , it is very heartening to see how many journalists are constantly striving to stand up for unity in the country and for unity among the Kenyan people and are turning against the fragmentation of society .
The problem primarily is that it has not been possible to allow broad sections of the Kenyan population to have a share in the Kenyan economic boom and that violence is able to spread on this basis .
In the context of our development cooperation , we should rather emphasise the fact that a real attempt is being made here to bring about change and in particular , to carry out a practical campaign against poverty in Kenya .
I also think that holding discussions about the cancellation of budget support for Kenya is a problem , because this fuels anxiety about the future in Kenya .
I specifically welcome the fact , Commissioner Michel , that the EU is clearly on the side of Kofi Annan and other mediators from the African Union in helping to resolve these processes in Kenya and with African politicians .
- ( LV ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to commend the high level of activity among the citizens of Kenya on election day .
The elections were characterised by high rates of participation and patience on the part of citizens , regardless of the long queues and technical problems in certain districts .
The situation regarding the production of presidential election results was , unfortunately , entirely different .
The requisite transparency was not achieved .
The many breaches and discrepancies in information cast doubt upon the election results announced .
Unfortunately , the impression has been given that the results were produced according to the principle that it is not how you vote that is important , but rather how we count the votes .
If it is not possible to carry out a reliable and transparent review of the votes , then the presidential elections in Kenya should be held again .
After the announcement of the election results the already tense atmosphere unfortunately turned violent .
The most urgent priority now is to stop the violence and avert a humanitarian crisis .
The European Union must support the mission led by the African Union and Kofi Annan to mediate between the President and the opposition , in order to stop the violence and find a solution to the political crisis .
If necessary , the European Union ought to be ready to continue this mediation .
Certainly , the European Union must grant Kenya the humanitarian aid needed to relieve the situation of the many thousands of displaced persons who , because of violence , have been forced to abandon their homes .
Humanitarian aid should , however , be provided in such a way that it really reaches displaced persons and there is proper control over the way in which funds are used .
From this viewpoint , the European Commission 's decision , one day after the elections , to transfer 40 million euros of budget support to the Kenyan government without taking into account the criticisms of European Union observers regarding the conduct of the elections , is questionable .
Budget support unfortunately does not ensure rigorous control of the use of funds , and the provision of such assistance to a president and a government that have reached power in questionable elections ought to be carefully evaluated .
I call on the European Commission to assess this case and to inform the European Parliament of the measures taken to prevent a recurrence of such a situation .
Mr President , clearly we need to identify the fact that Kenya is a country where most people are actually subsisting on a couple of dollars a day .
There is massive discontent and deprivation ; a whole army of discontented people , as we have seen , has been engendered by the situation there , because what they realise is that the gap between the haves and the have-nots in Kenya has widened - and that in the context of that 6 % growth in GDP which others have mentioned .
Kenya is a low-income , low-resource economy .
It is also a country which , tragically , is mired in patronage and in corruption .
And what we see is that , as we speak here today , people are storing up food , and people are out on the streets again in Nairobi and in other parts of Kenya .
Therefore I would add my voice to those that have said that the EU must suspend budget support to Kenya until a political resolution to the present crisis has been found .
Of course , it is unacceptable that that EUR 40.6 million was sent the day after the election criticisms were made .
I am very encouraged that Commissioner Michel intimated in our committee on Monday that budget support would be reviewed immediately .
I would like to hear some more detail of that .
Instead of channelling money through line ministries in Kenya , we must look at ways of doing it through project support , which also ensures that the poor of Kenya are not damaged by such an action .
In my view we need to be much clearer about the need to place aid conditionality on good governance , as is clearly stated under the Cotonou Partnership Agreements , and we have not done that .
We have , I am afraid , turned a blind eye to many of the serious accusations about corruption in that country .
Finally , the perpetrators of those irregular election results that the observers have reported to us must be held to account and must not be allowed to get away with it .
I also say that the European Union must play its part in monitoring the mediation process .
We have been at the vanguard of asking for these considerations to be made , and I would like the Council and the European Union to be stronger and more consistent in its approach , and make sure that Kofi Annan is given all the support he needs from Europe , and that a new Election Commission can be put in place as soon as possible .

( ES ) Mr President , we Europeans cannot just say that we are very concerned but we very much hope that things will return to normal , because a return to normality at the price of accepting the fraudulent victory of Mr Kibaki is not a solution that we can accept .
In too many African countries , rigged elections have robbed citizens of all faith and hope in the democratic system .
Another case of this , this time in Kenya , would be lethal for the democratic hopes of Africa .
The solution can only come from strong external pressure .
Without strong external pressure the two leaders will not reach any kind of agreement , and we need to tell Mr Kibaki clearly that his Government is illegal and act accordingly .
Otherwise , our electoral observation missions would be pointless .
We have talked about the responsibilities of the African people , but we should also remember our own responsibilities .
For too long we have closed our eyes to what was going on in Kenya .
For too long we have sung the praises of that country as an example of democracy , forgetting the social inequalities and the corruption that was rife throughout the country : 16 billion dollars in aid have been received by that country since independence and there have been just four presidents .
Kenya is paying very dearly for the protection and support that we have given to its poor governments , without denouncing them .
We cannot close our eyes this time .
( NL ) Mr President , today has seen further serious police violence against demonstrators .
There have been further deaths in Kenya .
Can there be an end to this tension without renewed presidential elections ?
I doubt it .
At all events , an independent investigation into this electoral fraud is required , the outcome of which must be respected by all parties even if it means new elections .
Kenya is running tremendous risks .
It is in the interest of all Kenyans , of the region and even of the EU itself that the unrest is brought to an end .
To reject dialogue now would be irresponsible .
Moreover , one thing is clear : further budget aid to an undemocratic government such as this is out of the question .
Kofi Annan has been taken ill , and rarely has a bout of flu come at a worse moment .
Nevertheless , the EU must lose no time in fully supporting his mission and offering technical and financial assistance where necessary .
Naturally it is the African leaders who must mediate in the first instance but , if the situation threatens to escalate further before Mr Annan 's arrival , the EU itself will have to be ready to join with the African Union in sending a high-level delegation to Nairobi without delay .
Kenya must not become another Somalia .
It is not yet too late .

Mr President , I agree with Mr Borrell Fontelles that , if any good has come out of the post-election situation in Kenya , it is that it has revealed that the so-called Kenyan success story is built on a foundation of straw .
While it is true that the thirst among ordinary Kenyans for democracy is strong and that Kenya has been going through a great economic boom , it is equally clear that for years a government overseeing that economic boom has failed to ensure that the whole of its population has benefited economically and socially .
We now know that there is deep-rooted social and economic disarray in the country and that for years the Government has operated on a basis of corruption and economic mismanagement .
The concept , as Mrs Kinnock rightly says , of good governance and respect for democracy are prerequisites for European Union aid .
But , contrary to what other speakers have said , that does not mean that we should abandon the country .
It means we should rechannel our aid through agencies and organisations that can get money to the poor , the neediest and the weakest in Kenya .
Clearly , if the election results are not properly monitored and respected , we cannot continue to channel money through the Kenyan Government .
We have to send a clear message : good governance is a prerequisite for assistance from the European Union .

Mr President , this situation , as all the others have said , is very tragic : it resembles very much what happened a few years ago in Addis Ababa .
I doubt whether a solution can be found without new elections .
But , ideally , a solution should now be found through dialogue in Kenya , preferably supported by the African Union .
But , so far , we have seen very little progress .
Time is short : the fabric of the country is disintegrating as we speak .
We cannot be bystanders if the situation is not resolved .
To suspend aid is a must under the present circumstances .
Moreover , if reconciliation fails , the EU has to step in to offer its services to mediate .
Is the Council , is the Commission prepared to do that ?
In the longer-term perspective , I would submit that we have to seriously reconsider not only our development cooperation but in particular our governance programme , and in particular help political parties to become real parties and , in addition to that , strengthen the institution of the Kenyan Parliament , because that is a key problem right now .
Mr President , as someone who has visited Kenya previously and in particular the slum areas in Nairobi , I am familiar with the corruption that was in place even prior to this election .
I condemn the tragic loss of up to 600 lives , and the critical humanitarian situation which has ensued after the 27 December elections in Kenya .
I call on the relevant authorities and stakeholders to do their utmost to bring peace to Kenya and ensure that human rights and the rule of law are respected .
It is most unfortunate that Kenya , being one of the most stable and economically-developed nations in East Africa , has now descended into such chaos , as this will most likely have detrimental knock-on effects on its neighbouring countries .
The EU election observation mission concluded that the lack of transparency and adequate security procedures severely undermined the credibility of the presidential election results .
Today , Mr Odinga 's opposition party has called once again for nationwide protests regarding the outcome of last month 's presidential election .
These opposition rallies are due to last for three days , despite a government ban .
Such protests could lead to further bloodshed .
Many of the killings seem to have been based purely on ethnic differences , the most horrendous of which was the brutal attack on a church near the town of Eldoret , which is thought to have left more than 30 ethnic Kikuyu dead .
I urge Mr Kibaki to respect his country 's democratic commitments as enshrined in Kenya 's national Constitution and the guidelines of the African Charter of Human and People 's Rights .
I call on the Presidency of the EU and the European Commission to monitor closely the mediation mission that will be led by Mr Annan later this week and , if required , to ensure an immediate continuation of these mediation efforts by a high-level EU delegation , possibly a joint EU-AU initiative .
- ( DE ) Mr President , I should like to follow up on the question from my colleague Glenys Kinnock to Commissioner Michel .
What are the main points ?
How can we visualise this ?
In what direction is budget support being modified ?
One extra question : I assume that arrangements are already in place in the current budget support system for support to be suspended in such a situation as that which prevailed in Kenya after the elections ?
( NL ) Mr President , we all agree that what has clearly gone wrong in Kenya is the presidential election procedure .
What have gone relatively well , however , are the parliamentary elections , the elections for members of the national parliament .
I agree with Commissioner Michel that yesterday 's developments in the Kenyan Parliament are encouraging : the speaker has been elected - the parties and the opposition have been sufficiently powerful to push through the elections for the new speaker .
I therefore believe that the European Parliament must do everything possible to support parliamentary democracy in Kenya and strengthen it where possible .
The budget aid that was granted exactly one day after the elections has drawn criticism from many quarters of this House .
I would like to ask the Commissioner the following question - even though this is probably not officially allowed .
Would he be inclined to make future decisions to grant budget aid dependent on the European Parliament 's opinion ?
In my view , it is not for a small group of officials in the European Development Fund Committee to take such a decision ; instead , the Commissioner should first seek the European Parliament 's opinion .
I would like to have a clear answer to this question .
- ( PL ) Mr President , the example of Kenya shows what a breakdown in democratic standards can lead to , and how important it is for elections to be free , transparent , honest and fair .
People who have lost elections , regardless of whether they lost in honest rivalry or whether they were cheated by those who organised the election process , should nevertheless not pursue violence and destruction .
Randomly hurting people , including women and children , has nothing in common with acceptable forms of struggle for one 's rights .
The only hope for an effective solution to problems of this type lies in convincing the rulers and the opposition that the overriding aim of politics is not to acquire or hold onto power ; the aim of politics is the good of the people .
A return to normal for Kenya must therefore begin with a suspension of violence and destruction .
I appreciate that this is the aim of mediators from the African Union , and the European Union should support this process .
I would like to thank Commissioner Michel for making such a declaration .
- ( DE ) Mr President , it is not only recently that the extent of corruption in Kenya has become evident and as a result , many Member States - actually all Member States - have stopped budget support in the last few years and even switched over to project aid .
This is actually one of the points of criticism I would like to address to the Commission , since the Commission has apparently not made the Member States aware of these concerns and has carried on with the budget support .
I , too , am now in favour of continuing the support in an appropriate form , but not in a form that would give the previous structures the opportunity to administer the money via budget support .
I am also very much in favour of in future supporting the institution that has now been authorised , in other words the Kenyan Parliament .
We cannot automatically assume that all Members of Parliament behave properly and that there is no prevailing corruption .
I have no illusions about this .
Nevertheless , we should channel a large proportion of support into Kenya 's political institutions , into promoting its Parliament and our colleagues ' capacity for work .
Then we shall have the opportunity to enable these newly-authorised colleagues to govern Kenya more effectively in future than the current government has managed to do .
Mr President , I think it is generally accepted that the recent presidential elections in Kenya were flawed .
I think that is a great pity because Kenya is a country that has been politically stable for many decades .
Sadly that has changed in the last two weeks and we have seen over 600 people killed and 250 000 people have been displaced .
Unfortunately , again , that violence is ethnic in nature .
The question now is , what can the international community and ourselves do to bring political stability back to Kenya before the situation deteriorates further ?
Constructive political dialogue between both sides must be a key priority , and I would agree with other speakers that yesterday was a positive day in the Kenyan Parliament .
Without political engagement , however , there will be no agreement , and the European Union is urging its political talks .
I am delighted to see that Kofi Annan and the Presidents of Tanzania and Uganda will be there shortly to try and broker some sort of deal .
Many of the people who have been displaced have gone into Uganda , which means there have already been effects on the regions surrounding Kenya .
With regard to aid and the European Union increasing its level of financial support for humanitarian programmes in Kenya , I would be interested to hear Commissioner Michel 's answer on how exactly that money will be spent and to make sure it has been spent correctly , as raised by previous speakers .
I think we all should remember - and particularly the Kenyan people and the politicians should remember - that history has shown , time and time again , that , where there is a political vacuum , that vacuum can often be filled by extremists , but the people of Kenya deserve better .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , I will first quickly mention not the 30 million but the 40.6 million euros that constituted the payment , several months ago , of the second tranche of the 120-million-euro programme known as ' Poverty Reduction Budget Support ' .
The payment decision had been delayed to await the results and recommendations of the third review of the PRBS programme by the International Monetary Fund .
These results have been known since early November and in November , on the basis of the International Monetary Fund 's favourable opinion , the Commission approved in principle the payment of a sum of 40.6 million euros by letter to the Kenyan Finance Minister .
However , taking account of the electoral context and the risk of the government using this payment for electioneering , the Commission decided , in consultation with the Member States , not to make the payment before the elections but after they had taken place , by the cut-off date of 31 December for financial commitments in accordance with the applicable procedures .
That is why , technically , the payment was made on 28 December .
I understand the upset this is causing , but just to remind you , it was only from the evening of Friday 28 and Saturday 29 December that the irregularities started to appear , when the transmission of the results from the last 49 constituencies , out of a total of 210 , were subject to abnormal delays and , as you know , it was only on Monday 1 January , on the basis of the weekend 's events , that the EU election observation mission reported in its preliminary analysis that the elections had not met international standards .
Therefore , it was technically too late to prevent or block the payment of this sum of 40.6 million euros .
Secondly , I would like to mention - because it is important from the point of view of the argument - that I agree with many of the things that have been said , but that there are also things I do not agree with at all .
When someone suggests that the technique or method of budget support is a method or technique on which there are no conditions or controls , that is obviously wrong .
I would just like to draw attention to the fact that before we suddenly suspend budget support we should first check that the proposal , made by Mrs Kinnock and others , to convert budget support into project support , is feasible quickly , or as quickly as budget support allows , so as not to put the people in an even more catastrophic situation of deprivation .
Indeed , it is easy to affirm principles , but we still need to make sure that the results and consequences of implementing them do not help to make the situation even worse .
That brings me to two thoughts on budget support .
Budget support is controlled .
There is evidence to be provided , and it is no less transparent than the project support system .
Of course , Mrs Kinnock and others , it goes without saying that if a settlement is not reached quickly between the parties to restore calm and , I hope , to agree on the possible organisation of new elections , as Mr Wittmann wishes , budget support , which to some extent qualifies the countries it is used for as meeting certain standards , certainly will not be able to be used any more and it will be necessary to find other means of providing support .
However , I do not agree that we should just suspend development aid to Kenya .
We always need to remember that behind this aid there are people who benefit from it .
I wanted to clarify this and I believe it was important .
A last response , finally , to two other points .
Do elections need to be organised straight away ?
I think it would be desirable for the parties to reach an agreement .
We can express all the wishes in the world , but believing that elections will be organised immediately without agreement between the parties is unrealistic .
Care also needs to be taken not to encourage situations to develop that make the people 's difficulty and misfortune even worse .
This is something we should not lose sight of , and I think we need to act with great caution .
I am in favour of elections , provided that they come out of a settlement .
We will fully support the African mediation and , of course , as the Council said , the Commission is available for a mediation mission .
I made contact with Kofi Annan and had a long discussion with him .
I told him we were available - including the High Representative - for mediation work .
Clearly what is now hoped for is that it can primarily be African mediation .
It seems to me that this is something we cannot lose sight of .

In closing , my last comment in answer to the question Mr Mulder asked , if the European Development Fund were budgetised , as Parliament and I are asking , budget support - for example the amount , technique , controls , verification and monitoring - would be done automatically , which would greatly simplify the procedure .
You cannot imagine how much easier and more efficient my life would be if I depended much more directly on Parliament 's choices , options and control over the use of my budget .
As things stand , I am afraid that this will unfortunately not be possible , but clearly this is a subject I would like to discuss .
The question you ask proves once again that the budgetisation of the European Development Fund would be a considerable advance on the level of effectiveness of our support .
I contribute to this debate with a degree of sadness .
Five years ago in December 2002 I was part of the European Parliament 's Election Observation Mission to Kenya led by Baroness Nicholson .
That election was conducted within International Guidelines that gave the result an integrity that validated a result that gave a victory to the opposition .
Having had the opportunity to meet with Mwai Kibaki , the incoming President , we all felt , alongside the conviction of the fairness of his election , that Kenya 's future looked brighter with a new era of more efficiency and less corruption beckoning .
Now like at the end of George Orwell 's ' Animal Farm ' the pigs have become men and the men pigs .
The regime that offered so much promise has become as corrupt and inept as its predecessor , in the process destroying the hopes and future of millions of Kenyans .
I welcome the robust statements of the EU 's Chief Election Observer .
I hope the Commission will encourage reconciliation amongst the disputing factions and threaten strong measures if there is any failure to agree .
in writing . - As a former European Parliament election observer for Kenya , I am deeply concerned by the turn of events following the election in December .
The fact that Kenya has for years been seen as the most stable country in that part of the African continent makes developments doubly worrying .
Kenya , like my country , is a member of the Commonwealth .
I support the proposal put forward by the Commonwealth observation team that independent Commonwealth judges be put in place to review the election results .
Our own EU election observation team suggested that an independent audit of the results take place .
I am convinced that the Kenyan people would have confidence in such an audit being carried out by Commonwealth judges .
Our immediate priority is to see Kenya return to a state of normality , by which I mean a peaceful society in which the democratic process is not in doubt .
The news today that the security forces prevented opposition politicians from staging a protest rally does not bode well .
I urge the EU to do all in its power to work with other international organisations to ensure that Kenya can recover both its normality and its democracy .
EUROPOL ( debate )
The next item is the report by Agustín Díaz de Mera García Consuegra , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs on the proposal for a Council decision establishing the European Police Office ( EUROPOL ) - C6-0055 / 2007 - .

President-in-Office . - ( SL ) I would first like to thank Mr Díaz de Mera García Consuegra for the report he prepared regarding the Council 's decision in favour of establishing the European Police Bureau , Europol , on the basis of the proposal put forward by the Commission .
At this point in time , the Council is still debating the draft of said decision and , in these debates , the Presidency will refer to or take into consideration the above-mentioned report by the Member of Parliament .
Especially in the area of personal data protection and democratic control , the Presidency will take into consideration or strive to take into consideration doubts expressed by the rapporteur .
The shaping , final shaping , of the Council 's decision by June 2008 is one of the priority tasks of our Presidency .
The aim of the decision , which will replace the Europol Convention , is primarily to improve the operative and administrative function of Europol , thereby enabling it to respond more rapidly and more effectively to new challenges .
I must emphasise that the German and Portuguese Presidencies have already achieved an important advance in this matter , on the basis of which sections one , two , three , six , seven and nine have been finally shaped .
These are the sections on foundation and tasks , data processing systems , common information processing provisions , organisation , confidentiality matters and other provisions .
Therefore , the Presidency will from now on concentrate primarily on the remaining sections regarding relations with partners , security and data security , budgetary provisions , i.e. monitoring and evaluation , and transitional and final provisions .
In deliberations on the open sections , pursuant to the Council decisions of June last year , the Presidency will devote special considerations to finding appropriate solutions for the following issues : firstly the issues of removing immunity from Europol officials working for common investigation units ; secondly the principle of rotation and the possibility for those employed by Europol and participating in common investigation units to receive instructions from the head of the unit ; and thirdly the question of budgetary neutrality .
The expert groups have already started deliberations on the issues mentioned , and the Europol working group and the committee are also continuing deliberations according to article 36 .
The two key elements of all these deliberations will be the improvement of Europol 's operational capacity and the consideration of the principle of budgetary neutrality .
The Presidency is aiming to reach an agreement on these questions as early as the first quarter of 2008 .
The Presidency will also closely follow the course of events relating to the implementation plan .
This plan defines all the key points which should be resolved if the decision on Europol is to be enforced from 1 January 2010 .
The initial debates on all such implementation measures are scheduled to start in the first half of this year .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Slovenian Presidency , whom I thank , has just said that the Commission 's proposal , of December 2006 , which aims to replace the Europol Convention with a Council decision , is one of their priorities , and that they hope to secure political agreement as soon as possible .
Obviously I offer them my full support because I believe the operation and administrative functioning of Europol will be clearly improved by it and that , as the Council of Justice and Home Affairs Ministers pointed out in June , the ability to operate effectively is a key aim of the reform of Europol .
I also thank most warmly the rapporteur , Mr Díaz de Mera , for the quality of his report and I would highlight the quality of the amendments proposed on the basis of his proposal , which has , however , been subject since then to many modifications , mentioned by the Presidency , following discussions during the German and Portuguese Presidencies .
The Commission is going to look at how these amendments can be taken into account .
Among the amendments , the Commission notes the proposal from Mr Díaz de Mera that Parliament 's democratic scrutiny of Europol could operate by Europol being funded from the general budget of the European Union .
I also support the idea of Community funding referred to in Amendment 6 , which relates to Recital 5 .
I also support Europol having a Community footing , requested in Amendment 5 .
Generally speaking , I am very interested in the amendments tabled on the role of the data protection officer , such as Amendment 9 , and those concerning data protection .
There are many , but I would particularly like to mention Amendments 13 , 16 , 17 , 18 , 23 , 24 and 25 , and can agree with the objective .
On the role of Europol officials in the coordination of joint investigation teams , I would point out that this coordination role was not supported by the Council .
It was discussed at length , and in view of legislation that now applies to joint investigation teams , the Member States can still , in the arrangements they make between participating Member States , set up a joint investigation team , and specify and limit the role of Europol officials .
Therefore , on this point , we need to continue discussions to reach a good compromise .
Consequently , at this stage , making a provision of this kind in the proposal for a decision on Europol would unfortunately not be sufficient to grant a wider investigation coordination role to Europol officials , legally and systematically - a role , ladies and gentlemen , that I would personally like , of course .
I agree with Amendment 15 , which proposes establishing a special relationship between the national unit and the competent national authorities .
These , then , are the comments I wanted to make on this report , and I thank the rapporteur once again .
I hope that the vote by Parliament can take place this week , so we can all give Europol excellent prospects for the near future and the possibility of a new status very soon that will enable it to function better .
Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , Vice-President of the Commission , I would also like to thank you for your words and for your support .
I would like to start by asking for a commitment from the Council to this House for the decision that we are debating to be reviewed by the European Parliament no more than six months after the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty .
As an MEP I strongly defend the broadening of Parliament 's powers , especially those which , in the foreseeable future , will give this House the essential capacity as joint legislator in such important matters as are those concerning the area of freedom , security and justice .
However , I also believe that Parliament cannot make its work dependent on the anticipated entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , or suspend it on this basis .
Our work therefore needs to continue .
We need to continue with the process that is underway and use it in two ways : to be more effective in the fight against crime and to decisively claim the powers of the European Parliament .
Crime is dynamic and is constantly changing , therefore Europol and the other EU instruments to protect the safety of its citizens need to adapt more quickly to the changing times .
The Convention of July 1995 is obsolete , so it is crucial for the Europol Decision , with its numerous advances , to enter into force quickly in order to provide better protection for EU citizens .
Keeping the system of protocols for amending the Convention is an absolutely anachronistic process .
The new proposal that I am putting forward for debate introduces substantial changes .
Firstly , by means of a Council decision based on Article 34 ( 2 ) of the EU Treaty , it puts forward a much more flexible instrument .
Secondly , the proposal puts forward significant fundamental changes such as converting the Office into a European agency , which will mean giving its staff the status of EU officials and financing it from the Community budget , which is desirable .
Another significant change is the extension of the scope of Europol 's power to cover non-organised crime .
The independent Data Protection Officer is another important step forward in terms of monitoring and guarantees .
The work done by the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs has fulfilled two objectives .
First amending the Council 's proposal in order to give Europol a specific framework for the protection of personal data and , with this in mind , I would like to highlight the need for the Council to adopt the proposal for a framework decision on this as soon as possible .
Secondly , giving Parliament greater control over Europol 's activities ; in order to do this , we have proposed creating of an ad hoc committee made up of members of this House and of national parliaments , involving the European Parliament in the process of appointing and dismissing the Director , as well as other measures aimed at ensuring budgetary control over the new agency and its programme of work .
I sincerely believe that the proposals adopted in our parliamentary committee improve the Council 's original document , which otherwise makes a great deal of changes .
This is why , President-in-Office of the Council , I ask for your support for our report .
I would like to finish with sincere thanks to my colleagues from all the political groups for their valuable contributions , and , in particular , I would like to mention the negotiating efforts of Mr Moraes , Mr Alvaro and Mr Fava , and the contributions of Mrs Buitenweg and Mr Catania .



draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets . - ( DE ) Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , the Committee on Budgets is positive about the Commission 's proposal to lead Europol out of its interstate position and into communitisation .
If Europol is therefore soon to be funded entirely from the European budget , Parliament 's budgetary rights must also be protected by the structures .
The Committee responsible has kindly adopted all our respective amendments .
I also hope that the list that Commissioner Frattini has just read out is not exclusive , because I noticed that a number of amendments were not included .
We have all , however , got it straight that part of the administration would again be financed by operational resources .
We now call upon the Council to sit down at the table with us immediately and come to a mutual agreement on the financing of Europol , because one thing is certain : everything we decide tomorrow applies only under the proviso of the result of the Council negotiations in accordance with Article 47 of the interinstitutional agreement of May 2006 .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats I expressly support the proposal that the Council has put forward for integrating Europol into the framework of the European institutions , on several grounds .
Firstly , because we will have a new legal foundation , which will save us lengthy ratification procedures and therefore make it possible for Europol to adapt quickly and flexibly to new situations , and secondly , because not only will the protocols be adopted , but jurisdiction will be extended to encompass preparatory data and data on procurement of funds , because the operating appropriations are being increased , because the funding comes from the EU budget and therefore greater independence is established for Europol as well and better monitoring opportunities are provided for us as Parliament and last but not least , because in future , data protection will also continue to be safeguarded at a very high level .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for his very realistic amendments , particularly as regards the tasks of the mixed committee , the immunity of Europol employees in their operational commitments , the role of Parliament in appointing the Director and also particularly as regards data protection .
He has done an excellent job here on Parliament 's behalf .
If all these proposals are accepted , Europol will become more effective , more flexible and more manageable .
I have no sympathy for the Liberals ' proposal to postpone all these measures to strengthen Europol to provide more security in the interest of citizens until the Treaty comes into force .
We need security now , which means we need Europol now .
We have to do the work now and then we shall certainly deal with the subject once again - should it be necessary - after the Treaty has come into force .
I would therefore ask the Liberals to reconsider their proposal and if possible withdraw the amendment .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Socialist group welcomes the adoption of the Europol report and the proposal to convert Europol into an EU agency .
After an extremely long period of waiting we are finally in a position to make Europol into a concrete and effective tool in combating organised crime , as well as many other dangerous types of crime which are now manifesting themselves at European level - I am thinking , for instance , of the action that Europol will be able to take on money-laundering .
Our group wanted to strengthen the supervisory powers specified in the proposal into genuine parliamentary supervision , not just restricted to budgetary powers , of course , and we wanted to strengthen the provisions on personal data protection and data security , particularly in the absence of a good framework decision on data protection in the third pillar , which is still taking its time in coming .
We cannot , however , ignore the fact , as pointed out by Mr Díaz de Mera García , that meanwhile the context has changed : the signing of the Lisbon Treaty creates the prospect that in the near future police cooperation will be subject to co-decision by the European Parliament and thus to our full responsibility , to qualified majority voting in Council and to the jurisdiction of the Court of Justice .
This is why we are asking the Slovenian Presidency for a formal undertaking to put a review of the dossier before the European Parliament within six months of the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Finally , the Socialist group still believes that it would have been more appropriate , on a matter as sensitive as this , for the rapporteur to have withdrawn to a certain degree , in view of the events that saw him involved in politics in his country .
Our group has , however , decided not to leave out his contribution to a dossier that we believe to be of strategic importance for the process of European integration .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Mr Vice-President , Minister , before I begin I should like to thank Mr ° Díaz de Mera García Consuegra for his constructive and outstanding cooperation .
Our teamwork , including with colleagues from the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , has been very good despite , incidentally , the isolated case where the Socialists criticised the rapporteur .
We have no misgivings at all about the expansion of Europol , which was founded in 1994 as the European Drug Unit and was converted into Europol , as we now know it , in 1999 .
This is necessary to protect our population in the fight against organised crime , which does not stop at borders , whether these be sea , land or air .
In the same way , Europe 's officials must be able to take action and deal with it .
It must be equally clear , however , that there are certain ground rules in police work .
Immunity of Europol officers , as is regulated in the codicil , does not make sense .
This has to be said .
It does not make sense that Europe 's police officers should have more powers as Europol officers than others do .
Nor does it make sense that there are no parliamentary controls over police cooperation .
After all , we want to create an efficient authority , which can also be called to account for any mistakes it may make , and not the Sheriff of Nottingham !
The same applies to the judicial scrutiny of Europol .
It is inconceivable that a police authority in Europe should be able to act without its actions being subject to judicial review .
As a result we Liberals ( our colleague Mr Pirker has perhaps misunderstood this ) have introduced an amendment , whereby a revision clause is to be adopted , as Mr Fava has already stated , so that the European Parliament is able to deal with this once again six months after the Treaty of Lisbon comes into force .
As for the rest , we - that is the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , at least - also expect a clear statement from the Council here that this revision clause is being considered and included in the negotiations .
In the face of a structural majority , we would not wish to make use of Article 53 or Article 168 of the Rules of procedure , that is , referral to the Committee , because we , too , believe that we need Europol now and that its expansion should not be delayed .
However , when forced to , we must act in this way .

on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( GA ) Mr President , I should like first of all to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Díaz de Mera García Consuegra , on his report .
As we know , we are living in a Union in which citizens can travel freely , but coordination at EU level in the sphere of justice and home affairs nevertheless needs to play a more central role .
Organised crime is tending to become more internationalised , and the onus is thus on the EU to enable Europol to assume an active role in halting the illegal flow of drugs from non-EU countries .
Europol must endeavour to stamp out the illicit trafficking whereby many people are being smuggled into the EU - more often than not against their will - to work in the sex industry , for example .
Ireland will soon be holding a referendum on the European Treaty , and I should like to place it on record that we shall continue in the future to play our full part in the European justice and home affairs sphere - just as we have done up to now .
And that we shall not exercise the option of saying no unless a problem arises as regards domestic legislation .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Díaz de Mera García Consuegra , sincerely for his work .
He had already produced a really good piece of work , and was then very constructive in the way he dealt with the amendments tabled by Members .
My group can therefore endorse his report .
I would like to make it clear to the Council , however , that support for the Díaz de Mera García Consuegra report is not synonymous with support for the Council decision , because there are still some differences between the two , particularly regarding data protection .
The report rules out the unrestrained use of databases , as data may only be used for specific purposes , must be subject to judicial control in the Member States , and may only be processed on a case-by-case basis .
My question is whether the Council would like to respond to those amendments .
Commissioner Frattini has just set a good example by going into the specifics of the report , enabling us to see exactly what the Commission stands for .
I thank him sincerely for this .
I now hope that the President-in-Office can make it clear what the Council thinks of the European Parliament 's additions .
Not everyone in my group is a staunch supporter of a strong police force , but any improvement in judicial and democratic control can count on our strong support .
Therefore , we support the conversion of Europol into an agency , with the associated increase in budgetary control .
We are also in favour of greater judicial control ; and so I consider the proposal of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe to be extremely sensible , and shall give it my support .
As Mr Alvaro has just said , admittedly rather cautiously , we can have another look at this in six months ' time .
As far as I am concerned , we shall not only look at the proposal , but also modify it .
My question to the Council is this : do you plan to accept this proposal ?
If so , what difference do you believe it will make as regards control by the Court of Justice , including over Europol ?
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I also think that we need to have a transnational police force that can specifically tackle international crime , which today is no longer confined within national borders .
Only a few days ago the Italian Parliament 's anti-Mafia commission went to Germany , where it found that an enormous amount of the financial resources invested in Germany have been obtained through a mechanism that directly involves Sicilian and Calabrian criminals .
I believe that this is emblematic of the real need to combat crime on an international basis , and one way to do so is by putting in place European police resources .
I believe that Europol can accomplish this job , but I have some doubts about whether transforming Europol into an agency can immediately salvage it .
We have a duty to evaluate Europol 's activities from 1994 to today , and I believe that we will probably also need to review its specific mission , because I think that its priorities ought to be tackling drug trafficking , money-laundering and transnational Mafia organisations .
I believe that there are also still some problems regarding the need to fully recognise Parliament 's powers .
Parliament should have supervisory powers - this is the case for all national parliaments , which have supervisory powers over the national police - and I believe that the European Parliament should have supervisory powers over a European agency whose key tasks are policing and combating international crime .
I also believe that we need to have some clarifications on data protection .
I am extremely worried because the proposal , as it has been adopted and probably will be adopted in the future by the Council , has serious deficiencies which put the individual data of European citizens at serious risk .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , the rapporteur was , I understand , the Director-General of Spain 's police between 2002 and 2004 .
This means , I assume , that one of his last tasks before leaving office was to deal with the immediate aftermath of the terrible bombings in Madrid .
I , therefore , accept the sincerity with which he now puts the case for extending the powers of EUROPOL in order to deal with new terrorist threats .
However , I will not need to remind him that my country , too , has had a long history of facing up to terrorism and , like his country , that consisted for many years of a threat from separatists , which , in recent years , has been matched by the new threat of Islamic extremism .
What I am saying is that my country is very grateful for help and cooperation from its neighbours where necessary , but , in the final analysis , it must be able to act exactly according to its own methods and procedures and on its own initiative .
But what is being proposed here is not just a further encroachment of EUROPOL into areas that should be left under the control of Member States .
Worse still than that , the Commission wants to change the legal framework governing EUROPOL so that any extension of EUROPOL 's powers does not have to be ratified by Member States .
The rapporteur concludes his statement by saying that we must ensure EUROPOL enjoys maximum democratic legitimacy .
Once again , we see that the EU , as it seeks to take powers from Member States , even in matters of policing , has a very strange idea of democratic legitimacy .
Madam President , whatever the desirability of combating terrorism and organised crime - and it is desirable - it is clear to me that this expansion of the role for EUROPOL and the change in its legal basis and title are about something quite different .
They are , in fact , about giving the apparatus of statehood to the EU .
States naturally and properly have police forces .
Now the EU is to have its own right to have European police officers , funded from the EU budget and staffed by EU officials .
In truth and in fact , they will be EU policemen doing the bidding of the EU and roaming across Europe , meddling in the work of national police forces , particularly since their competence to initiate and lead inquiries is to be extended beyond organised crime into ever increasing areas of criminal law .
Then , to crown what for me is that absurdity , these EU policemen are to have immunity from national constraints and their actions put beyond the reach of judicial review .
That causes me to reject these proposals .
They are but the latest manifestation of super statehood for the EU - all under the framework of the Constitution and none of it with the consent of the peoples of Europe because of the conspiracy amongst EU leaders to subvert democracy and refuse referendums .
( PT ) Vice-President Frattini , ladies and gentlemen , in 1998 the European Parliament rejected all the initiatives presented to it when consulted on matters of detail relating to Europol .
It did so out of consistency as long as Europol continued , in the intergovernmental context , without being subject to democratic and jurisdictional control .
Now this initiative has come in response to what we have constantly been requesting in this plenary , with the aim of converting Europol into an EU agency , financed from the Community budget , and strengthening our role of democratic control .
Despite this proposal being a subject of deep controversy in Council , I think that we should not accept any further postponement .
The European Parliament has an obligation to show its support for the Commission 's initiative to make Europol an EU agency .
Europol 's current legal framework , an international convention , moreover impedes any process of updating or modifying powers , with delays of years .
Indeed , the increase of new threats to security , such as terrorism , which poses new challenges to Europol , requires a new approach .
Hence the importance of this decision , which should not only place Europol on an equal footing with Eurojust and the European Police College but also make it more efficient in operation , extending its mandate to crimes that are not strictly related to organised crime and introducing greater flexibility into its mechanisms .
At the same time greater transparency and democratic and jurisdictional control must be guaranteed .
I therefore support the excellent report that Mr Díaz de Mera has produced , and the important amendments he tabled , notably regarding data protection .
I would like to pay tribute to Mr Díaz de Mera and express my solidarity for the excellent report he has produced and for the person that he is , especially as some Members tried unfairly to diminish his work , raising national struggles that have furthermore already had a full response from the Spanish Supreme Court of Justice .
- ( PL ) The main task that the European Police Office faces is that of improving efficiency of action and cooperation between the authorities in Member States as regards preventing and combating international organised crime .
The agency 's mission is to make a contribution to the sphere of law enforcement in the European Union with reference to this form of crime .
This is becoming increasingly important in the face of the new forms of crime which are constantly appearing and the threat of terrorism .
Life is forcing us to expand Europol 's powers and also to adapt the principles on which it functions through the introduction of more flexible mechanisms .
With the agency proposed by the rapporteur , however , there is an urgent need for the introduction of clear principles for the democratic monitoring of Europol and personal data protection .
- ( EL ) Madam President , in its proposal for the establishment of a European police force , the Commission is seeking to transform Europol from a body based on inter-state agreement into an institutional body of the European Union .
This , in my view , shows how wide ranging Europol 's enforcement operations are and is proof of the overall strengthening of the European Union 's enforcement framework and mechanisms .
Two things grow quickly in the European Union : the profits of companies and of capital , and aggressive enforcement mechanisms .
We have filled all our respective countries with police forces and enforcement mechanisms and now this is happening at EU level too .
This development also expands Europol 's field of activity and includes all punishable acts in its sphere of competence .
It acquires the right to intervene even in the Member States themselves in relation to international events of major significance with consequences for public order , such as international demonstrations .
Alongside the vast SIS II and VIS monitoring systems etc . , the Europol information system will be used to file personal data relating to workers throughout the European Union as well as data relating to political , trade union and social activities and personal convictions . This data will be exchanged not only between the security services and secret services of the EU Member States , but also with private individuals , such as independent assassins operating in Iraq .
The claims that the transformation of Europol is purportedly a democratic development are self-deceiving or at best naïve .
Why ?
Because there is no real possibility of controlling the inaccessible citadel of Europol or of restricting its enforcement activities .
Furthermore , many people have commented on the immunity of Europol police offers and the inadequacy of any national control .
For these reasons we are firmly opposed to the proposal .
( SV ) Madam President , we have created a single market with free movement of goods , services , capital and people .
Almost everyone has agreed to participate in Schengen .
In practice all border controls in the EU have been abolished .
From a liberal point of view , this is a gigantic step forward .
We no longer need to stand with cap in hand in front of officials when we want to study , work , travel or seek health care in another EU country .
However , freedom has its downside .
When border controls disappeared , the scope for organised crime increased enormously .
This eased the way for the drugs trade , the exchange of stolen goods and trafficking .
Sometimes this expansion in organised crime is used as proof that the EU is needed .
That is grotesque .
The expansion is facilitated by the EU , a price we are obliged to pay for increased freedom and prosperity .
How high is that price ?
Well , police resources have to be increased perhaps by 1-2 % of GDP at national level in order to roll back this phenomenon .
Such an increase in national resources is the most important and perhaps the only way to restore an honest , decent Europe .
The rapporteur wants to transfer power over the police to Brussels .
Europol should become an EU body financed from the EU budget .
He makes light of questions of integrity and democratic legitimacy .
We must therefore say no to this report , focus on the expansion of national police resources and let Europol remain a cooperation body subject to intergovernmental procedures .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this report proposes nothing more and nothing less than to give the European Police Office , Europol , a new status by modifying its existing legal bases .
Indeed , the intention is to replace the Europol Convention concluded in 1995 between the Member States with a Council decision converting the agency from an intergovernmental body into a European Union agency financed from the Community budget and applying the Staff Regulations of officials of the European Communities .
The reasons given for this radical change of status are the extension of the mandate of Europol 's activities beyond just organised crime and the Member States ' inability to meet these new and very extensive objectives adequately .
These objectives will obviously be better met at European Union level , the Council assures us .
But this is all smoke and mirrors .
The reality is that we are already engaged with the requirements and application of the Treaty of Lisbon , which transfers almost all of justice and home affairs policy to a qualified majority of the Council of Ministers .
Until now , these fields of judicial and police cooperation have required unanimity .
The reality is that our national and European leaders are in the process of imposing on us institutional reforms that all work towards a more deeply supranational and bureaucratic model .
It is these same reforms that are in the Treaty of Lisbon that were rejected by the French and Dutch in the referendums of May and June 2005 .
The people have been duped , misled and treated with contempt .
Europe cannot be built contrary to its people and contrary to national realities , and it is high time that our pro-European political class realised this and finally left Europe to construct itself from the nations ' and people 's rights to identity , sovereignty , freedom and security .
- ( EL ) Madam President , as a member of the Committee on Budgets and also as an MEP who comes from a region on the European Union 's external borders , I would like to make three observations :
Firstly , turning Europol into a Community agency requires that we receive more value for money from its work .
We want this Community Europol to have a greater presence in places where we need it - in the Balkans , combating the organised mafia - and not in staffrooms or offices .
Secondly , within the Community Europol framework , the national police forces must gradually overcome their distrust of each other .
The Member States ' police authorities must learn to cooperate above and beyond borders and national priorities .
The transformation of Europol into a Community agency allows for this .
Thirdly and most importantly , we have devoted much time to the institutional dimension of this file .
I wish to offer my full support to the rapporteur , Mr Díaz de Mera García Consuegra , who chose a practical and realistic solution .
We cannot paralyse the entire procedure until 2009 while we wait for the perfect institutional solution , nor can we carry on theological debates when issues are pressing .
The time for action is now , and now we must act .
It is within this context , then , that I express my full support for the approach mapped out by the rapporteur , and I hope that this debate will be the first stage in the formation of a genuine European Community police service capable of dealing with problems .
- ( EL ) Madam President , once again we must salute the development of this large police body known as Europol .
We have been doing so since 1992 .
The records of its performance have not been bad .
I have the impression that the new form which we are attempting to give it will create problems , bearing in mind that the British police will be operating in Paris and Greek police officers in Berlin .
We will see how to get around this , but there is always the problem of distrust between police authorities .
I salute Mr Díaz de Mera García Consuegra 's very careful work .
If we need to restrict Europol 's activities to terrorism issues , then among other crimes it must try to find real terrorism , rather than develop a mechanism which , instead of hunting down terrorism , hangs like a noose , stifling the human and political rights of European citizens .
( CS ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am convinced that the change in the legal standing of Europol , which we are now discussing , is not a step in the right direction .
Europol is functioning well at present and does not need any changes to its status .
Police work is the domain of the Member States and the main responsibility for the work therefore rests , logically and rightly , with the national governments , which are controlled by the national parliaments .
This approach is already implicitly respected even in Schengen cooperation , in which the Czech Republic has been fully involved since the end of last year .
Police cooperation at EU level is therefore , logically , subject to an inter-governmental approach .
The Commission now wishes to abandon this correct and logical approach and , in fact , re-shape Europol into a new agency that is subordinate to the European institutions .
However , an agency format is not suitable for Europol and will not bring any benefits .
The national interior ministers will have less and less control of Europol there will be no advantages in terms of the fight against crime .
In my opinion , to start with there should be proper and democratic ratification of the Lisbon Treaty , which also has a bearing on Europol 's legal basis : only after that can negotiations begin on a possible amendment of the legal basis .
For this reason I will be voting against this report .
Madam President , just to show that the PPE-DE Group has a lot of diversity , I completely disagree with the previous speaker and would like to start by congratulating the rapporteur on an excellent report .
I think this report is very good and I think it is good for three reasons .
The first reason is that it expands the powers of EUROPOL .
It brings it into the Community budget , it creates an agency , and it extends its mandate beyond organised crime .
I think that is a very important step forward .
The second reason I think it is good is because it calls for more flexibility .
You do not have to be Sherlock Holmes to figure out that , if an organisation is established in 1995 and its conventions are amended three times from 2000 to 2003 and those changes enter into force only in the year 2007 , the organisation is not working .
It is not flexible enough .
We need more flexibility and I think that is what this report proposes .
There is nothing more conservative in this world than an interior ministry or a police establishment and I think we have seen it with EUROPOL .
The third point is : I think that this is a good report because it increases supranational and communautaire elements and it decreases intergovernmental elements .
It increases judicial scrutiny and democracy - and if there is one area where you have to work together , it is this .
The more free movement you have , the more Schengen you have , the more international crime you have , the more we need cooperation on a European level and I think this report is a good step in that direction .
( ES ) Madam President , a small clarification .
As our Socialist coordinator said , we Socialists still think that the rapporteur is not the most suitable person to produce reports on judicial and police cooperation .
It is true , as Mr Coelho said , that the Supreme Court has closed the case , but it is a question of ethics and political dignity .
I will explain : I should make it clear that the rapporteur refused to cooperate with the Spanish legal system and was fined for it .
This was not a trivial matter : it was the trial of the terrorists accused of the worst attack that has been perpetrated in the European Union .
We therefore think that , for the sake of consistency , a person cannot refuse to cooperate with the legal system in Spain and then lecture Europe on how the Member States should cooperate with each other in police and judicial matters .
Madam President , what we have heard in this debate is the usual confusion between cooperation and integration .
I very much support those who have expressed concern at the EU efforts to expand EUROPOL 's powers and competence .
Of course we need good cooperation between police and security services .
I happen to believe that we have always had that good cooperation at the operational level , but it can always be improved .
Indeed , in my experience at EUROPOL - and I am probably one of the few Members of this House who has been to EUROPOL on a number of occasions - most of its activity is bilateral , which gives the lie to this idea that it has some other great role .
The need for cooperation is very different to the involvement of the European Union institutions , which is merely part of the EU 's wider agenda of political integration .
Madam President , I wanted to add my voice to that of my colleague , Geoffrey Van Orden , and my previous colleague from the Czech Republic , from the ODS .
I disagree with Mr Stubb .
I am also nervous - and I do not think it would be supported by many of my constituents in the United Kingdom - about the idea of turning EUROPOL into a kind of supranational fledging European Union FBI-style organisation .
Like all colleagues , I am , of course , in favour of intergovernmental cooperation in police , intelligence and security matters , particularly when we face growing problems from international organised crime , international terrorism etc .
EUROPOL already has quite an extensive remit in areas like people trafficking as well , but we do not need to extend the powers of EUROPOL .
It should be an agency charged with acting as a gatekeeper in terms of exchange of information and also building up more confidence between our national police forces and our security and intelligence services .
There is a lot of mistrust between some of the Member States ' traditional law enforcement agencies .
Europol should be acting as a kind of coordinator and not be given special rights .
I would particularly object to any idea of EU policemen being able to go into our own Member States with powers of arrest .
Madam President , I cannot resist the temptation of answering my two colleagues Mr Van Orden and Mr Tannock .

We are not trying to create some kind of a US FBI type of organisation here , we are simply trying to have police cooperation which works better , which is more effective , which is more transparent , which is more flexible and which simply works .
That is what we do not have today , that is what we are trying to do .
I do not want to get into the internal UK debate and scaremongering , that we are creating some kind of FBI with some kind of superpowers , with European police coming into your house to arrest you .
That is not what we are trying to do .
We are trying to get the third pillar cooperation of police to work better .
That is all .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) Allow me just a comment or two on this extremely interesting debate , which I am honoured to attend .
My first comment relates to the Council 's attitude towards amendments , of which there are many , although I cannot represent the Council 's opinion here just yet .
As was said in the introduction , the Council is still deliberating on this decision and it will resume deliberation within this framework after the amendments .
However , I can maintain that as the Presidency we will strive for a detailed and mindful debate of all the amendments to be approved .
We will also strive for the greatest possible number to be included in the text of the decision .
I cannot guarantee more that this .
As we know , approval of a decision at this moment in time still requires the consensus of all the Member States .
This leads me to the following comment regarding the revision clause .
There is no Council opinion on this either , but I think that , in the name of the Council , I can express a certain doubt about building into the text of an act such as this mechanisms which should automatically be activated in the period after the Treaty of Lisbon comes into effect .
The Treaty of Lisbon has not yet come into force .
Its enforcement is in the hands of the national parliaments and in at least one case in the hands of the voters .
It is my opinion that by building such a mechanism into acts of this kind , we will not facilitate the approval of acts such as this ; what is more , we will not facilitate ratification procedures that are currently taking place .
I also think that this question received a satisfactory solution in declaration No. 50 attached to the Treaty of Lisbon .
- ( DE ) Madam President , because I had the feeling that the Minister had misunderstood this , I just wanted to take the liberty very briefly of pointing out the fact that the revision clause does not in any way jeopardise or influence ratification of the Treaty , but simply guarantees that after ratification , Parliament will once again deal with the Europol report .
After consultation with other permanent representatives , it does not seem to me that this threat is seen as general .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for all the contributions that have been made .
I will be very brief .
Firstly I will give a general reply to all those who have expressed doubts about the need to strengthen Europol , those who have spoken about the will of the people and the concerns of citizens .
I would like to say that if there is one subject on which the vast majority of European citizens expresses fear regarding the free movement of criminals and asks for more security , it is this very subject of police cooperation .
If there is one subject on which the more is said , as Mr Stubb noted , the more the movement of persons is liberalised , the more need there is for European coordination and action on transnational crime and thus the concept of a European agency is certainly not that of a bureaucratic body , but of a fast , effective operational tool .
This is why I am convinced - and this is not only because I put forward the proposal - of the need to adopt this decision speedily , as the Slovenian Presidency wishes .
Regarding the amendments , I have already mentioned the amendment tabled by Mr Alvaro .
I would like to remind you that the idea of having a regular review of the smooth operation of current ' third pillar ' initiatives is something permitted by Declaration No 50 , which has just been mentioned .
What does this say ?
It says that the Commission , on a case-by-case basis , when the situation is appropriate , following entry into force of the Treaty , shall propose the review of instruments currently falling within the third pillar in order to change them into instruments over which Parliament has full co-decision powers and to which the procedures which Parliament in my view rightly wishes for apply .
Thus the instrument already exists for this purpose .
It is perhaps the imposition of such a restricted time frame to this instrument that poses some problems for me personally , but I also wonder , and I have no preconceptions on this point : is it advisable to plan a review of an instrument such as the Europol decision , which has not yet entered into force ?
I ask the question because you know that if we were to adopt this decision before the end of the Slovenian Presidency - in June 2008 - it would enter into force in January 2010 .
So can we already plan to undertake to review an instrument when its operation will begin in January 2010 ?
I would not be opposed to arguing , when it is in operation , if problems emerge that are linked to insufficient democratic monitoring , that that would be an excellent reason for the European Commission to apply Declaration No 50 and change the instrument from the third pillar to the new system .
One of my reasons for giving this example is to say that we cannot close the door on Parliament 's need for democratic monitoring , but it is perhaps the manner and time frames of this strict compulsory review procedure that pose problems for us .
Madam President , before you start counting the time , I would like to ask you to take the following into consideration : please give me the two minutes that I am entitled to so that I can respond out of courtesy to all of my colleagues , the Council and the Commission , but also , Madam President , I earnestly ask you to give me some separate time to answer the very serious , unjustified allusions that have been made about me .
May I count on your understanding , Madam President ? Thank you very much .
I am very grateful to almost all my colleagues - and I emphasise the word ' almost ' - for their contributions , and I very especially take them on board .
I would like to say that the concerns that have been expressed here are not only the concerns of the rapporteur , but that they are also the concerns of the House .
It has been very gratifying for me to hear how well disposed the Council is and the wise words of compromise and also clarification from Vice-President Frattini .
I would therefore like to thank all my fellow Members , those who have honoured me with their support as well as those who have honoured me with their criticisms .
You should not forget that I have been a Member of Parliament for seventeen years , and still am , and I was the Director-General of Police for the Kingdom of Spain for two years .
I was .
That is how I am able to see both sides of the coin .
President-in-Office of the Council , I would therefore like once again to highlight the issues that concern us : we cannot fight crime on our own .
Crime is transnational .
Crime goes beyond borders , and our police forces , which are national , need to have in Europol an instrument to support and strengthen them .
Not one that interferes or overlaps with their work , but one that supports and strengthens them .
Guarantees are very important to us .
It is very important to us to support and strengthen Europol , but with three criteria : confidence , control and guarantees .
This is naturally what has been made clear in our report and in the contributions of fellow members .
Data protection in the Framework Decision in the third pillar as soon as possible is important to us .
It is extremely important to us that Parliament has control and it is very important to us to decisively and determinedly fight organised crime together .
Now , Madam President , due to the allusions , I would like to answer the second , much more unpleasant , question .
Mr Moreno does not respect judicial decisions .
The Supreme Court of the Kingdom of Spain and the Public Prosecutor at the Supreme Court of the Kingdom of Spain said these exact words in reference to my case . I do not know if they translate well , but they said these exact words , ' no crime whatsoever ' .
However , some people , such as Mr Moreno , have not had and do not have the intellectual and moral integrity to apologise for spreading something that they should not have spread .
What Mr Moreno has done here is to intoxicate Parliament comme d 'habitude with issues that do not have anything to do with the report or with the heart of the matter .
He talks about morality and lack of dignity .
It is immoral and undignified not to respect judicial decisions and , on top of that , to throw them back in the face of a colleague who does have dignity and morality .
I will not say that Mr Moreno is undignified and immoral , but what I will say is that he has behaved in an undignified and immoral way .
What I will say in his defence is that I would like to think that they are not his own ideas , but that he has behaved , not like a messenger boy , but rather that this time he has had the brazenness to act as the messenger boy .
Why ?
In order to unjustifiably discredit and perhaps in the vain attempt to get a few column inches in the Spanish press .
( FR ) The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 17 January 2008 .
Situation in Pakistan following the assassination of Benazir Bhutto ( debate )
( FR ) The next item is the Council and the Commission statements on the situation in Pakistan following the assassination of Benazir Bhutto .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) The assassination of the former Prime Minister and main opposition leader , Benazir Bhutto , aggravated the already complicated situation prior to the elections in Pakistan .
In addition , it had a negative effect on the process of gradual transition to a more democratic system in Pakistan .
Benazir Bhutto was certainly one of those who could have contributed to progress in areas of economic development , reduced corruption and more freedom for the media .
Ever since the introduction of a state of emergency on 3 November last year , The European Union and the European Parliament have emphasised the need for stability and appealed for reconciliation and the reintroduction of democracy .
Stability in Pakistan is certainly in our strategic interest .
That means that we are supporting the struggle of the moderate majority of Pakistanis against the violent minority of extremists .
Our interests - the interests of the European Union in Pakistan - are also closely associated with our priority tasks in Afghanistan and the wider region .
They are associated with our fight against terrorism and against the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction , and with our fight for the respect of human rights , and all this was emphasised many times in our messages to the Pakistani authorities .
President Musharraf will probably come to Brussels next week .
That will be a unique opportunity to pass on our message .
Together with our international partners we have also established contacts with other major parties in Pakistan .
The key message of the Council of the European Union is that to conduct free and honest elections open to all in Pakistan next month is of crucial importance .
The Pakistani government must strive to provide appropriate political and security conditions for carrying out such elections .
In addition , all the parties must accept the decision of the Electoral Commission that the election of 18 February should be carried out with dignity and restraint .
We are also inviting the Pakistani authorities to use the extended period up to the elections to improve the conditions for the elections in accordance with international standards .
Primarily , the authorities must guarantee to do everything in their power to prevent electoral fraud and intimidation and to ensure transparency for free operation of the media , and guarantee to release political prisoners .
All this would contribute to a democratic and transparent electoral process under appropriate security conditions .
As we know , the European Union will dispatch a full election observation mission .
We are hoping that these elections will be followed internationally in their entirety .
At the first meeting of the General Affairs and External Relations Council at the end of this month , foreign affairs ministers will discuss the Pakistan situation in detail and debate the options the EU might have for assisting the successful continuation and strengthening of the democratic processes in that country .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the assassination of Benazir Bhutto is nothing less than a national tragedy and came as a shock to all of us .
Mrs Bhutto was , I think for all of us , a symbol of a moderate and liberal Pakistan .
She enjoyed popular support and she also had the courage to challenge extremism and terrorism .
It was perhaps , unfortunately , this very courage for which she ultimately paid with her life .
Her murder is a loss for the millions of Pakistanis who had placed hope in her for democracy and a better future .
Her death is also a loss for Europe and the world .
It is unfortunate that disturbing news from Pakistan has become all too common , nearly every day .
Hardly a week passes without a major terrorist attack , and some 700 Pakistanis have been killed by suicide bombers over the past six months .
I believe we can draw a lesson from Mrs Bhutto 's death , and that is that Pakistan needs a functioning democracy , the rule of law and a strong civil society to address the country 's mounting challenges .
You will recall that the country was placed under emergency rule on 3 November .
This , of course , greatly undermined confidence in the democratic process in advance of parliamentary elections .
Emergency rule was then lifted on 15 December , but only after new media restrictions had been imposed and most of the senior judiciary replaced .
A number of judges and lawyers remain in detention to this day .
They should be released without delay .
The outpouring of anger following the murder of Mrs Bhutto led to civil unrest and ultimately the decision to postpone elections from 8 January to 18 February .
These elections should now be held as planned , without any further delay .
I think Pakistan has to move ahead , and the way forward is to organise democratic and transparent elections which result in a broad and also a credible popular mandate for new governments , both at the federal but also at the provincial level .
We should jointly pass this message to President Musharraf when he comes to visit Europe next week .
Some players are trying to draw political capital from the Bhutto assassination .
Let us not forget that it is , ultimately , extremist forces who are interested in destabilising Pakistan and who are responsible for this despicable act .
They should not be allowed to succeed .
A credible investigation into the murder can help to calm the waves , but only if everybody keeps a level head .
Let me add that Scotland Yard is doing a commendable job in trying to help in this respect .
President Musharraf spoke of the need for national reconciliation when he addressed the nation on 2 January .
I think this is indeed what is required .
The opposition has to be taken on board in coping with the current situation .
Significantly , all major opposition parties will participate in the forthcoming elections .
But , regrettably , Pakistan has a history of lack of trust in electoral outcomes , which could lead to further political polarisation .
Naturally , the chances for national reconciliation will greatly improve if President Musharraf and the relevant authorities do whatever is necessary to ensure that these elections are held in a fair and transparent manner .
Because these elections are so important , not only for Pakistan but also for the region , I decided to deploy an election observation mission ( EOM ) with the aim of contributing to democracy and stability in the country .
If the elections had really been held on 8 January as originally planned , we could only have fielded a limited observation mission .
However , in view of the time that is now available until the elections , in consultation with the Chief Observer , Mr Michael Gahler , who is a Member of this Parliament , I decided to upgrade the mission to a fully-fledged election observation mission .
We are all very much aware of the important role this mission is likely to play in the coming weeks .
I continue to be very concerned about the conditions in which these elections are held and the potential for this to lead to a critical statement from the EOM if steps are not urgently taken to address these concerns .
Key problems , including lack of confidence in the election administration , lack of transparency in the results process , and the lack of an effective complaints and appeals process in which stakeholders have confidence , are all present in Pakistan .
Concrete steps could still be taken by the state and the electoral authorities to improve the conditions for elections .
I understand that both EU Heads of Mission in Islamabad and the election observation mission on the ground have already outlined the key improvements that are necessary .
I think we should make every effort to stress these points with the Pakistani authorities , including with the President , when he visits Brussels soon .
I also remain concerned about the security situation in Pakistan , particularly in the light of the assassination of Benazir Bhutto , but also recent bomb attacks in Lahore , Karachi and , of course , the North-Western Territory frontier province .
We urge the Pakistani authorities to do all they can to provide a securer environment in which the elections can be held , and we will carefully then assess the security situation in the light of the deployment of EU observers .
President Musharraf has taken off his uniform as promised .
I hope that this will result in progress towards stronger civilian institutions and sustainable democracy in Pakistan .
But it is also important that Pakistan continues to make progress in fighting poverty .
The Commission has , therefore , significantly increased its development cooperation funding to Pakistan for the coming years , including in the field of education .
And I remain committed to this approach , which I also see as a contribution towards fighting extremism .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , once again , following the debate and the resolution that we adopted in December , we are discussing the situation in Pakistan in Parliament .
Since then a whole series of events have taken place , as the Commission and the Council have reminded us .
First the state of emergency was lifted , then came the subsequent freeing , although as the Commissioner reminded us , it was incomplete , of various lawyers , magistrates , judges , journalists and representatives of civil society . This was followed by the assassination of the former Prime Minister Mrs Bhutto , which brought considerable instability to the serious process of dissolution that society is going through in Pakistan , and the subsequent postponement of the electoral process to the upcoming dates in February .
Of course there is also the forthcoming visit and appearance before Parliament 's Committee on Foreign Affairs on Monday of the President of Pakistan .
The first thing that I would like to do , Madam President , on behalf of my political group , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , is express our strongest condemnation of this savage terrorist attack , which really only affirms what the previous rapporteur , Mr Díaz de Mera , said to us : that terrorism is a phenomenon that affects all of us equally .
Before I conclude , Madam President , I would like to leave two questions on the table for the Commission and the Council .
I acknowledge the efforts made by Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner in giving a positive response to Parliament 's request for an electoral observation mission in the light of this situation .
However , she mentioned her concern about the conditions in which the elections are held .
Commissioner , do you think that , given the levels of violence , fear and instability in that country , which is key to the stability of Central Asia , among other things because it is the only Muslim country with nuclear weapons , do you think that the best possible conditions are in place to carry out this process ?
Finally , Madam President , the Commissioner referred to a credible investigation .
The family , both her widower and her son , as well as the Pakistan People 's Party and Mrs Bhutto herself before she died , in a communication that she had with the UK Foreign Secretary , expressed their desire for this investigation to be conducted by the United Nations .
Do the Commission and the Council agree that there needs to be an independent investigation to shed light on this terrible assassination once and for all ?
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , as Chairman of the Delegation for relations with the countries of South Asia , I join the Council and the Commission in the condemnation of the murder of Benazir Bhutto .
This Parliament has always condemned terrorism wherever it occurs and we will continue to fight for the right of politicians to express their views and to campaign in safety .
In going back to Pakistan , Benazir Bhutto knew the risks and , whether you consider her to be brave or foolhardy , you have to respect her commitment to her party and her country .
In her memory and the memory of others who have died in this election period , I believe it is beholden on all of us - Europeans and Pakistanis from President Musharraf downwards - to do everything we can to assist Pakistan .
As Mr Lenarčič said , the key to this must be the continuing battle against terrorism .
We have seen that terrorism is a threat in Pakistan as much as it is in Europe or the USA .
Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner has reminded us that hundreds of innocent civilians have been killed in shootings and suicide bombs in Pakistan , so Europe must continue to fully assist and support the counter-terrorism operations in Pakistan .
Some colleagues here might suggest we should leave Pakistan be and have little to do with it , but I firmly believe the contrary .
As 27 strong democratic nations , we need to work collectively to support the economic , social and political developments in Pakistan .
Again , I agree with the Council : the release of all remaining political detainees will be crucial to this process , as will ensuring free , fair , transparent and safe elections on 18 February 2008 and a safe and satisfactory run-up to that date .
In addition to what the Commissioner said , I think the election will mean that we need to have 90 million voters with proper access to news coverage of all sides of the debate .
It means making a safer environment for the media .
Pakistan has become the most dangerous Asian country for the media : at least six journalists were killed in 2007 , some 30 seriously injured , over 100 arrested and countless harassed .
We need an end to the censorship of the print and broadcast media and to restrictions on what they can say and do without interference from the military or civilian authorities .
The ban on the TV news station GEO News needs to be lifted and the government television channel PTV needs to be more balanced in its news and the information it conveys to the public .
All arrangements for the actual voting , the counting and the reporting of the results need to be above board and clear to everyone , but most especially to the voters of Pakistan .
A mark of democracy is also whether incumbents can accept defeat and whether political transition from one party of government to another , if it occurs , can go smoothly .
All of these will be crucial factors in whether or not the elections can be counted as a true record of the will of the people and whether or not Pakistan can start to emerge from the long shadow cast by that assassin 's bullet on 27 December 2007 .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I too , of course , would like to start by expressing my great sorrow at the tragic death of Benazir Bhutto .
Benazir Bhutto was a laureate of the Liberal International Prize For Freedom , which we presented her the first time she was Prime Minister .
It is true that she is - she was - only human , and as such was not perfect .
We did wonder at one point later on whether we had actually done the right thing .
At that time , I put this question to Asma Jahangir , a Pakistani human rights activist , who is now entrusted with a special mission on behalf of the Secretary-General of the United Nations .
She told me that we did absolutely the right thing , as Benazir Bhutto had set a genuine example in Pakistan in a number of respects , particularly as regards the role of women in Pakistani society .
It is a known fact that Benazir Bhutto was killed by violent terrorists , but who their backers were remains an open question .
I do not believe that reconciliation is possible in Pakistan unless this matter is clarified by an impartial investigation .
I do not know whether this means acceding to the family 's request for a UN investigation , but at all events there must be guarantees of impartiality , as President Musharraf has not exactly shown a great deal of respect for the judicial authorities , even the highest in the country .
I would also like to say that I have been receiving reports from Pakistan of the recent rounding up , arrest and charging of thousands of PPP militants .
This , too , has to stop if we wish the elections to take place under reasonable conditions .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , I would very much like to join my voice to that of my colleagues in thanking both the Council and , indeed , the Commission in particular , for the practical steps that have been outlined in terms of helping to support the electoral administration process and to try and improve the quality and hopefully the outcome as well , of those elections should they take place .
We also welcome the commitment to further financing for development , not least in education , because there are many of us in this House who believe that investment there will prove at least as powerful , if not more powerful than investment in weapons , which seems to have been a priority for some external bodies in their support for Pakistan over the last few years .
We hope that the international community in general will support the efforts of the European Union in these lines .
Like others here , we also want to express our sympathy for the family of Benazir Bhutto , but also for the families of all the bereaved in Pakistan killed in outrageous attacks and indeed through military action .
We would agree that we do need stability , both for the people of Pakistan and indeed , given that it is a nuclear state , for the international community as well .
But , as others have said , I do not think it is enough to try and develop people 's confidence in the electoral system and its outcome .
The judiciary is another key democratic institution .
It needs to be functioning and to be independent .
People need to feel that they will have a fair trial , that they will see an end to detention without charge , an end to secret prisons and , indeed , a commitment from whatever government comes into being after the elections , to continue the inquiries into the disappearances that have also taken place in that country .
We also agree that freedom of the press is vital , but we would also ask that some of our Member States cease contemplating extraditions to Pakistan at the moment until we can be sure that there is a fair and independent functioning judiciary .
( NL ) Madam President , the assassination of Benazir Bhutto is a tragedy for Pakistan and shows the immensity of the problems facing the country .
We are talking about a country that has 165 million inhabitants , is in possession of nuclear weapons and is engaged in a fight against terrorist organisations such as Al Qaeda and the Taliban .
Naturally , it is of the utmost importance that political stability is achieved in Pakistan as soon as possible and that President Musharraf plays a major role in this at this time .
Nevertheless , we must not turn a blind eye to the many major shortcomings in Mr Musharraf 's policy .
For example , his government 's approach to the problem of terrorism has been much too lax .
In large parts of the Afghan border region , for example , the Taliban and Al Qaeda have a free rein , and far too little is being done about this .
By declaring a state of emergency on 3 November , Mr Musharraf also revealed a rather casual attitude to democracy .
In addition , worryingly , fingers had already been pointed at him after the first attack on Benazir Bhutto on 18 October .
The same happened after her actual assassination .
His possible role in this must be clarified as soon as possible , because otherwise public confidence in the government will evaporate , and that can only play into the hands of Islamic extremists .
Madam President , The Economist stated recently that Pakistan is the world 's most dangerous nuclear arms state .
Regrettably , in my view , President Musharraf 's commitment to fully eradicating Islamist terror has always been lukewarm at best , and his control over the ISI or intelligence services , who allegedly are in bed with Islamists , is tenuous as well .
Add to that the combustible issues of Kashmir , Baluchi separatism , Al Qa 'ida and Taliban activity in the North-West Frontier territories and tribal areas causing mischief for NATO in Afghanistan , and you have a country on the point of implosion .
Just as Benazir Bhutto 's return to Pakistan offered the country a glimmer of hope , so her despicable assassination , whose culprits must be identified and punished , has taken the country back to the brink of catastrophe .
A return to democracy is as difficult as ever .
The assumption in the EU and the USA is that Musharraf , for all his autocratic tendencies , represents the safer bet in the war on terrorism .
Pakistan 's experience of democracy in the past 60 years has been troubled .
Perhaps it is time now to abandon the hope that Western-style multiparty democracy can embed itself successfully in Pakistan , which has always been dominated by a tiny élite .
It is more akin to a feudal hereditary monarchy , a fact underlined by the instant elevation of Benazir Bhutto 's 19-year-old son to the leadership of the Pakistani People 's Party , who will no doubt do very well at the imminent 18 February elections .
The apparent choice for the West between Pakistan and India is also a false dichotomy .
It is a hangover from the Cold War .
India , as a strategic ally , is the best hope for progress , prosperity , peace and stability in South Asia .
India 's values are the EU 's values - secular democracy , human rights and the rule of law .
Let us start supporting those who share our values before we try to persuade those who do not .
( ET ) Ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament South Asia Delegation warned the Government of Pakistan of weaknesses in Benazir Bhutto 's security measures as early as November .
Sadly our fears of terrorist attack were proved correct .
Benazir Bhutto will continue to be a hero both for the people of Pakistan and for the international community .
Her absence among the candidates calls the legitimacy of the forthcoming elections into question .
The crisis in Pakistan is also an opportunity to guide the country towards the road of democracy .
The Pakistani people have not elected General Musharraf as President .
However , he now has the opportunity to choose whether to go down in history as a military dictator or a democratic president .
As a statesman Mr Musharraf must surely understand that democracy must be the winner in elections , even if he will personally have to lose power .
And we will want to ask Mr Musharraf this himself next week at a meeting of the international committee in Brussels .
We in the European Union must persist in our dialogue with Pakistan .
That is precisely why , as the committee rightly said , we must send our own observers to the elections of 18 February .
Events in Pakistan must not be a matter solely for the USA .
A transparent international investigation into the assassination of Mrs Bhutto , the full restoration of freedom of the press and free and fair elections in Pakistan are also an essential issue for the European Union .
We will not achieve our targets by playing the by-stander .
We have no alternative but to pursue an active policy in relations with Pakistan .
Madam President , I echo completely the statements made by colleagues , but I want to say something more about the person rather than the situation .
There is a saying in Finnish that war is not dependent on one man .
That might be so , but the war between democracy and extremism might be very dependent on one woman .
I think of the former , and now murdered , Prime Minister of Pakistan , Mrs Benazir Bhutto .
I had the pleasure of meeting her and working with her and was deeply impressed by how warm , intelligent and brave she was .
I am so proud to say that , to me , she was a friend and a political ally .
So much has now been said and written about her that you might ask what more can be said .
I think that I can share something that you did not , perhaps , know .
Her last big project for democracy , human rights and women 's rights was the creation of an organisation called Muslim Women for Democracy and Human Rights .
Together with other brave women like Asma Jehangir from Pakistan and Dr Shrin Ebadi from Iran , she created an organisation to encourage Muslim women around the world to stand up for the rights that the Koran gives women , according to Benazir Bhutto , but that had been denied for centuries .
She was elected by the world 's leading Muslim women democracy activists in May 2007 to be the first chairwoman of this new organisation .
Benazir Bhutto wanted the organisation to comfort Muslim women , to give them legal advice and practical help and , above all , help them to form a network of Muslim women around the world to build a world of peace , where different religions could live in peace and with respect .
She said , ' I want to build a Pakistan where a Jew can go to the synagogue , a Christian to the church and a Muslim to the mosque , all without any fear ' .
Her dream was that the new organisation could help this dream come true all over the world , both in the West and in the Muslim world .
I think that the best way to honour the memory of this brave sister for democracy is to support the organisation that she created as a sign of hope , even after she is gone .
- ( DE ) Mr President , Benazir Bhutto is said to have told her son : implementing democracy in Pakistan is our revenge on military rule .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have to ensure that Benazir Bhutto 's legacy is not just a mandate to her son , but to us all and to the international community to ensure that the conditions for democracy are established in Pakistan and that we help to establish them .
The situation there is not good , as many speakers have already said . And the way in which this attack on Benazir Bhutto was dealt with is truly alarming .
I would also ask that we ensure that there is an international investigation into this assassination .
Scotland Yard may already be doing some preparatory work on this , but I think it would be good if this investigation were to take place by order of the UN .
Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , you have said that stability in Pakistan is in our interest .
Very well , but we are only looking , as ever , at the minority of terrorists .
When you are in Pakistan , you will hear that the military system creates instability and President Musharraf is making a substantial contribution to the worsening situation .
Last year he was here in Parliament .
We outlined all our main criticisms to him . Nothing has improved and a lot has got worse and therefore I really don 't understand how it is that he can come here to this Parliament again next week .
Civil society in Pakistan sees this as covert complicity in that when it comes down to it , the West accepts both the military system and Mr ° Musharraf himself .
I believe we should make this very clear next week .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Pakistan is now truly an extremely dangerous place , the central tangled knot where all the threads of terrorism are interwoven .
At the same time , however , the country is the West 's main ally against terrorism .
There is no escaping this contradiction , just as no end will be possible to the war in Afghanistan without resolving it .
Current European policy is not in a position to resolve very much , at least until it acts in support of the United States ' policy .
We can and must ask President Musharraf to restore the constitution and hold proper elections .
The message of the strange , tragic assassination of Benazir Bhutto is , however , that we are impotent , and this is because terrorism in Pakistan lies behind the structures of the State , and actually stems from the secret services which - let us not forget - built the Taliban and to this day support and assist them .
Now , however , we should ask President Musharraf to carry out a purge and we should ask the United States , which has very close relations with those secret services , to clarify those relations to us , because if Osama bin Laden is still alive , it would be thanks to those services , unless he has already been killed .
What is more , I would like to remind you that Benazir Bhutto spoke of this in an interview for Al Jazeera on 2 November 2007 , and also named bin Laden 's assassin , Omar Sheikh , whom President Musharraf in his latest book claims was a former agent of the British MI6 .
In view of all this , I believe that a request for an international commission of enquiry into the death of Benazir Bhutto would be the right decision on Europe 's part .
Mr President , firstly , I should like to give condolences to the family and friends of Benazir Bhutto .
Her loss is not just Pakistan 's but is a loss to the whole world .
I am very proud to have known her personally .
She invited me to join her on her return to Pakistan , and it was very much a heart-wrenching moment for me when I received her New Year 's greetings days after she had been murdered .
I remember Benazir as a very strong charismatic woman , asserting her right to rule as the first elected female leader , at the age of 35 , of a Muslim state .
I believe she will be remembered as one of the great figures of our century - a leader who inspired both women and men beyond South Asia and represented , above all , hope for a better future for Pakistan .
Benazir 's death has caused upheaval in her country , and I believe the only route to stability will be if questions that are being asked about her assassination are answered .
Many people , not just in Pakistan but also those I represent in the West Midlands , want to know who the real culprits are .
Therefore , I ask the Council to strongly support the calls for international investigation by the United Nations into the murder and I ask the Council and the Commission to inform this House what their position is on this .
Benazir Bhutto fought for a democratic Pakistan and a peaceful transition to civilian rule .
Her fight cost her her life .
Let her death not be in vain .
We need to continue this cause , and I welcome the fact that the Commissioner is sending a strong electoral observation mission .
However , if this observation mission is to have credibility , it needs to indicate now to the Pakistani authorities the benchmarks the election observation mission will be using to judge whether the forthcoming elections are free and fair , and this includes an all-party participation in the review of the electoral rules and procedures and an impartial system of conducting elections and verifying election results that is totally transparent .
But , above all , I would really like to emphasise the need for all press restrictions to be lifted and freedom to assemble for political rallies and campaigns , which , in the last few weeks , have been opposed .
Mr President , the tragic death of Benazir Bhutto has left us a legacy , and that is an important legacy : to believe in what she believed in , and this was the power of the Pakistani people to rule by democracy .
In a recent poll as early as November of last year , 70 % of people in Pakistan confirmed that they wanted all the restrictions lifted on political rallies ; that they were against the banning of political events and opposed the detention of the Supreme Court Chief Justice .
This is the silent majority of Pakistanis who want to live in peace and democracy , and if we are looking for stability in such a volatile country , we can only find it through a political process of reconciliation and democracy .
I welcome the Commission 's appeal to send an observer mission to this election but I have two questions for the Commissioner : one is , we have heard various reports of voting lists being destroyed around the country and how can an election take place in this environment ?
Secondly , President Musharraf has also banned independent exit polls on this election .
I press on the Commission to make a very strong case before the Pakistani authorities to allow independent confirmation of the results of this election .
Mr President , the target of the assassins was not simply Benazir Bhutto , but all of those who are committed to the principle of democracy .
We should be backing the moderate majority in Pakistan who seek to uphold democracy , and Mr Tannock is wrong to say that all in Pakistan reject European values , as 800 000 British people of Pakistani origin could tell him .
I welcome Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner 's strengthening of the EU electoral observation mission and recognise our important role in building confidence in the electoral process .
Through her and through today 's debate , I call on Pakistan to lift all restrictions on political campaigning , to release remaining political detainees , to publish in advance the location of all polling stations and to ensure that all results are posted immediately in public .
We should welcome the lifting of the state of emergency , President Musharraf 's retirement as Army Chief of Staff and the invitation to my own country , the United Kingdom , to assist in the investigation of Mrs Bhutto 's death .
Militant extremists are not simply a threat in Pakistan : they are a threat to us all .
Mr President , on 14 November in this House , I stated that the biggest threat facing Pakistan internally is the terrorist threat .
The abhorrent assassination of Benazir Bhutto is proof of this , if it was required .
Extremists hit that day but they must not be allowed to win the day .
We called for President Musharraf on that day to end the state of emergency , to reinstate the constitution , to reinstate the Supreme Court and move towards free and fair elections .
He has done all of this , albeit not necessarily perfectly , and he has relinquished his army role as well .
We must call upon Pakistan 's politicians to unite and invest in that process .
Pakistan is facing turbulent times and we must stand with it .
Just one further point . I have real concerns regarding the way in which what actually happens in this House is being distorted by some sections of Pakistan 's media in their reporting , particularly the news channel GEO .
This House has always argued for a free and fair media .
We stand by that and I ask them : please do not abuse the freedoms we hold dear .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , I understand very well the concern shared by many , including you and Bernard Kouchner , to send an election mission to Pakistan .
It is actually one of the only ways left to us of exerting pressure on Mr Musharraf , but we should realise that this observation mission would take place under very special conditions .
We usually study and make observations before , during and after .
Regarding what has happened before , we already know how many things have been rigged .
Benazir Bhutto , with Mr Latif Khosa , had written a 160-page report on the possible rigging of these elections , particularly using computers , a report that she was going to give to two American congressmen the evening of the day she died .
Do we currently have the ability to check for computerised rigging in election observation missions ?
If not , we could then decide that even though the ' before ' was more than a little dubious , the ' during ' has been regular even if there has been fraud .
Consequently I would ask for a very special observation mission , and I ask that we do not declare these elections to be democratic when we cannot check this .
( RO ) Benazir Bhutto repeats the tragic destiny of her family , started by her father , Zulfikar Ali Bhutto .
The assassination of Mrs Bhutto was intended to put an end to the democratisation of Pakistan and to undermine the stability of this country which , as we should not forget , is our main ally in the war against terrorism in Afghanistan .
Let me remind you that 25 European Member States currently have civilian or military representatives in Afghanistan .
The Pakistani army is involved in important operations for maintaining a military balance on the Afghan border , particularly in the provinces of Zabol and Helmand , where we are represented mainly by British , Lithuanian , and Romanian troops .
In this respect , it is very important to discuss responsibility for Mrs Bhutto 's assassination , it is very important to discuss the democratisation process and its continuation , but it is equally important to discuss the issue of maintaining a military balance on the Afghan border and who might act as guarantor of this balance , because , Mr President , any failure in Afghanistan owing to instability in Pakistan would be a disgraceful moment for the free , democratic world that we stand for .
Mr President , on a point of order , I would like to reply to Mr Howitt under the ' catch-the-eye ' procedure , because he was incorrect in what he stated .
I was referring to the Indian State and the Pakistani State and the governments of both countries - not the peoples of the countries or the people of descent of those countries who live within the Member States of the European Union .
I was referring to the polities , not the people , so I would like Mr Howitt to withdraw his comments .
I can give you thirty seconds to conclude .
That is very kind but I think I have already said it all .
I was just simply stating that in my speech , I was referring to the fact that India is a secular democracy which respects human rights , does not shut down the media , does not actually persecute Christians or Ahmadi Muslims , and allows the people to express their views and practice their religion .
Regrettably , Pakistan , over the last 50 or so years , has had troubled periods of military dictatorship and repression of religious minorities and ethnic minorities .
That is to do with the state and the governments , not the peoples of either country .
Similarly , I do not in any way doubt that people of Pakistani and Indian descent in London , which I represent , would share EU values .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) I will be brief .
There were a few questions regarding the investigation , several calls for an independent or international investigation and a few questions for the Council regarding its opinion .
I would like to stress that the Council did not discuss this question , so we cannot talk about the Council 's position .
However , I can express the firm belief of the Presidency that the investigation will be carried out in accordance with international standards .
In this respect , we are pleased that at least one Member State , the United Kingdom , is already cooperating by providing appropriate expertise to the appropriate Pakistani authorities .
Regarding the elections , I would like to remind you of the statement published by the Presidency on 3 January of this year , where special emphasis was placed on the need to do everything at this time to maintain , strengthen and continue the process of democratisation and the democracy and democratic process in Pakistan .
In this connection , I would like to welcome again the European Commission 's decision to reinforce the election observation mission in Pakistan , and I would like to repeat our appeal to the Pakistani authorities to use the remaining time leading up to the election to improve the situation and the conduct of the elections .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , let me begin by making some general remarks following this very interesting debate .
I know that some will always argue that stability and democracy are somehow incompatible in Pakistan .
Let me say I think that , without a return to democratic governance and the consolidation of fully accountable civilian institutions , there cannot be enduring stability in the country and the extremists will be the main beneficiaries .
For that reason , it is very important that we are there , that we accompany this country to more progress .
Even though there was this terrible tragic death of Benazir Bhutto and of many other victims , I continue to believe that Pakistan has a chance to make real progress towards stability and a more inclusive form of democracy by electing a new government which enjoys broader popular legitimacy .
For this to happen , the elections will have to be democratic and transparent .
This is a crucial time for Pakistan when President Musharraf should demonstrate to his country and to the world that he is committed to ensuring that these elections will be held democratically and transparently , in accordance with international standards .
What are the best conditions for carrying out elections ?
Other than political and security conditions , as I have already outlined in my opening remarks , the following key elements need to be there for a proper election environment .
Firstly , the election administration to operate in a transparent and consultative manner to promote confidence among voters ; secondly , that all polling station results and all levels of result consolidation are publicly displayed ; thirdly , the counting and tabulation process needs to be fully open to scrutiny ; fourthly , media freedom and , fifthly , an independent framework for a complaints and appeals procedure .
Concerning the public publishing of polling stations , it is well known that they will be the same polling stations as the last elections . So that is clear .
Concerning the question that some voting lists have been destroyed , we know that there were some individual cases , but , fortunately , they were all stored on CDs with the Electoral Commission and the destroyed ones will be restored .
Therefore , they will be available .
Concerning independent exit polls , this is not an essential element for the elections .
However , it is increasingly the practice in many countries that this should also be there .
These are some of the detailed matters :
Let me now turn to the investigations .
As I mentioned in my opening remarks , an investigation is under way in the country , which is being assisted by Scotland Yard .
We should await the outcome of that investigation and we should also trust that , with its experience , Scotland Yard will be able to help the Pakistani authorities .
Of course , it will be necessary to give them full access and support in doing that job .
After the elections , there might be a role then for an international group of eminent persons , but first we have to see what the inquiry will bring .
I think it is too early to take a decision now .
There was only a brief discussion in the Council working group , which was not conclusive .
Having said that , let me also say that it is highly important to help Pakistan in its fight against terrorism , and all the other requests mentioned in the debate , such as the release of all detainees , will be crucial .
I also stated very clearly that for a country like Pakistan it is important that there is a better focus on education .
We have been doing that for some time , and it will take time - we are there for the long haul .
But if we want democracy , this is something where we really have to make a difference and , therefore , I would like to maintain my cooperation projects , particularly in the most difficult areas , i.e. the North-West Frontier Province , Baluchistan , Waziristan and so on .
I would again like to say that with Mr Gahler , your colleague , the Chief Election Observer , I think we have a person who has already shown in those very difficult days in Pakistan how responsibly he has been taking on these things , with 52 long-term observers and with 11 people of a core team who are looking at all the detailed questions of the election observation mission .
It will be a very specific one and it will be a good opportunity for you to tell President Musharraf yourself what you think .
Therefore , it is good that you see him in the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
- ( CS ) Mr President , may I please ask you how a decent woman should draw attention to herself by means of the ' catch-the-eye ' method when she is sitting at the far end of the House ?
I would like to know whether I have been included in the list , or how ladies should go about it here .
Mr President , on a point of order , I was probably the first person to apply this afternoon under the ' catch-the-eye ' procedure .
I do not know why you denied me the opportunity to speak . Indeed , you gave an extra opportunity to one of my colleagues who had already spoken in the debate .
You then gave him more time !
I had no disagreement with what he said .
It was just the procedure that you followed , and I think it was quite wrong that you denied me the opportunity to speak .
I wanted to make the point that we need a stable and reliable government in Pakistan .
? - Mr Van Orden , I was informed that you had already spoken today under the catch-the-eye procedure and , therefore , having regard to the rules which were drawn up to ensure that Members ' speeches covered as broad a spectrum as possible , I took my decision which obviously left you out this time .
I would , however , remind you that there will be other occasions when you will have the opportunity to speak .
In any case , you have been placed on the list and that will certainly be respected .
We must continue , otherwise we shall not have time for questions .
I am sorry , but we cannot continue this dialogue .
Therefore , the next item is questions to the Council .
Mr President , what you have just said is incorrect .
The previous ' catch-your-eye ' opportunity was because there was no one else that wanted to catch the eye , so it seemed to be an opportunity .
I had specifically asked to speak in this Pakistan debate .
I put it in writing and I indicated throughout the debate that I wanted to speak .
There was no excuse , therefore , for denying me that opportunity , and I had important comments that I wanted to make .
I am afraid that I am very disappointed in the way that you have conducted this particular meeting .
Your protest is noted , Mr Van Orden .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time ( B6-0001 / 2008 ) .
The following questions have been submitted to the Council .
Subject : Youth Working Party
How does the Council intend to implement its priorities in the youth field which were presented at the Council 's Youth Working Party in December 2007 and in particular the role of volunteering in this area ?
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) With your help we will certainly succeed more easily .
Regarding the answer to the question by Ms Harkin , I would firstly like to draw attention to the Council 's latest initiative relating to her question .
It concerns the resolution on voluntary youth activities adopted by the Council on 16 November 2007 .
The purpose of this latest initiative is to confirm and consolidate the suitability and validity of common aims concerning voluntary youth activities which were defined back in 2004 .
In addition , this initiative stresses the intersectorial and transversal character of voluntary activities and the importance of encouraging companies to support such youth activities .
In principle , the result confirmed the guidelines for action with which the Member States should comply in invigorating the realisation of common aims in the area of voluntary youth activities .
The resolution invites the Member States to choose from the above-mentioned guidelines for action , by September of this year , those on which they intend to focus particularly , and to define national strategies and concrete measures for the implementation of those guidelines .
Consequently , the Presidency is convinced that the issue of voluntary youth activities will remain among the priority political tasks of the Council and the Parliament .
We are also relying on the Member States to complete the scheduled activities pursuant to this resolution by the given deadline , i.e. by September of this year .
Mr President , my thanks to the Slovenian Presidency for its answer .
President-in-Office , I too wish you well at the start of your Presidency .
I am pleased to see that you are following on from the Portuguese Presidency - and indeed into the French Presidency - with your emphasis on volunteering , and in particular on youth volunteering .
I hear what you say about Member States responding by September , but in the mean time , throughout the next six months of your Presidency , I believe you are looking at issues like youth inclusion and education to improve the employability of young people through volunteering , and looking at intercultural exchange .
I just wanted to ask specifically if you have any plans at all to further inter-generational volunteering .
Older people have a lot more time on their hands - we are living longer - and the whole aspect of inter-generational volunteering offers many positive opportunities .
Do you have any initiatives on that ?
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) Ms Harkin , at this moment I cannot offer you more concrete or more specific initiatives .
We have concentrated on implementing the adopted resolution .
It may be proper to invite the Member States at the appropriate time , i.e. to remind them of the set deadline .
You are right : a range of activities in other areas will in any case offer an opportunity for additional topics and for the additional incorporation of issues regarding voluntary activities , including in the intergenerational sense .
One of those activity channels is certainly an intercultural dialogue .
In any case , we will consider your remark , i.e. we will take it into consideration when planning our activities in the next six months .
- ( LT ) I would like to enquire about other measures to protect young people from addiction .
In Parliament we discussed a European Commission strategy to combat alcohol-related damage .
This is particularly damaging to young people .
What measures besides voluntary activity could reduce that damage and protect young people from addiction ?
Does Slovenia have any experience of this ?
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) Certainly , care for the young will be one of the important topics of the Slovenian Presidency , particularly within the framework of the Lisbon strategy , which is a strategy for increasing growth and creating jobs .
The Slovenian Presidency will pay particular attention to the issues of youth , especially in the context of education and their qualification for more effective inclusion in the labour market .
This is all I personally know in detail of the more specific initiatives which the Slovenian Presidency is planning for its term of office .
On the other hand , there is a whole range of activities in the area of health and the problem of the fight against alcoholism .
I am convinced that , within this framework , appropriate attention will be paid to protecting the young from alcohol abuse .
Subject : Multilateralism and bilateral agreements
Does the Council believe that the proliferation of bilateral trade agreements being signed by the USA , the EU and other international players is compatible with the multilateral principles which underpin the World Trade Organization ?
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) The European Union is committed to multilateralism in many forms , including the World Trade Organisation , which in our view is an excellent example of a multilateral organisation .
Many decades prior to the actual founding of the World Trade Organisation , Europe called for the creation of such an organisation for trade .
Later , the European Union had a key role in the creation of the World Trade Organisation within the Uruguay round of negotiations .
Actually , if I may say so , it had a key role in that last round of the negotiations , which is why the support the European Union gives to multilateralism in trade cannot be doubted .
Similarly , the EU had a key role when the agenda for development was adopted in Doha at the 4th Ministers ' Conference of the World Trade Organisation in 2001 .
During the negotiations which followed , the European Union purposely decided to direct all resources and political will to concluding that round of negotiations .
Prior to that round of negotiations or at the time of the actual negotiations , there were no parallel negotiations concerning bilateral trade agreements .
In October 2006 , the European Commission submitted to the European Parliament and the Council a report entitled " Global Europe , competing in the world ” .
The report discusses recent changes resulting from the globalisation process .
It offers suggestions for the European Union 's response to that process on the basis of the updated Lisbon strategy , especially in respect of trade policies .
On the basis of the report , the European Parliament adopted a resolution and the Council made decisions .
The Council 's decisions clearly show that all future bilateral agreements on free trade are going to form the basis of future multilateral negotiations and , what is possibly even more important , they will be complementary to the World Trade Organisation platform .
Under the terms of the negotiation directives adopted by the Council in the spring of 2007 , negotiations on free trade agreements were started with the member states of ASEAN and with India and Korea .
Those negotiations are ongoing and each individual decision will be finalised in due course .
( ES ) Mr President , I think that the Slovenian Presidency responded correctly to the question I asked , with its typical clarity , and I am grateful for the attentiveness shown .
I have an additional question relating to the relative failure of the Lisbon Summit with the African countries .
It appears that some African countries agreed with the European Union 's proposals and others did not .
Based on the disagreements seen in Lisbon , does the Council Presidency think that it will be necessary to continue with this policy of differentiation ?
In other words , are we going to insist on multilateralism , or do you think that the Lisbon Summit will force us to continue further along the road of bilateral agreements with different countries , for example , in the continent of Africa ?
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) Our commitment to multilateralism continues .
I would like to stress two points , should any bilateral agreements be concluded .
Firstly , the agreements in question are complementary to the multilateral platform , and secondly , by the nature of things , the agreements in question have a bridging character until we manage to resolve these issues within a multilateral framework , the World Trade Organisation , this being the European Union 's preferred framework for resolving such issues .
- ( DE ) Mr President , my question is as follows : how will increased food and energy prices affect the WTO negotiations ?
We do know that the biggest stumbling block so far has been subsidies and the Farm Bill in the United States and that Europe has of course suffered under increased world market prices .
Are there new opportunities here for adjusting quotas and duties accordingly ?
Is the Slovenian Presidency planning an initiative for bringing the WTO negotiations to an end ?
( ES ) Mr President , I agree with the Presidency that we should prioritise or attach greater importance to multilateral agreements than to bilateral agreements but , in the meantime , it is now many years since the Uruguay Round began , and the Doha Round before that , and the World Trade Organization is not reaching any serious conclusions , or at the very least it is putting it off too much .
In the meantime , the United States , for example , has concluded free trade agreements with various South American countries .
I would like to ask about this : what is the Council 's view regarding the agreement between the European Union and Mercosur , which has been so long awaited ?
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) The ever-increasing cost of energy , especially fuel , and of food is a global problem and therefore also a problem for the European Union .
It will most certainly affect relations among those participating in negotiations within the World Trade Organisation .
In that sense it might affect the adaptation , i.e. adjustment , of certain positions .
At the moment , from the perspective of the Slovenian Presidency , it is difficult to speculate on the nature of those effects , but they are very likely and must be expected to arise .
The Slovenian Presidency is not planning any initiatives of its own , but we will study and support appropriate initiatives coming from the Commission , which is of course responsible for the operational management of this process .
As regards the fate of multilateral negotiations so far , the Slovenian Presidency is one of those who regret the fact that there is still no multilateral agreement within the World Trade Organisation .
We will continue striving to bring it to fruition .
In this context , we will debate the trade agreement with the Mercosur countries as well , which also present an opportunity for discussion at the fringes of the summit between the European Union and the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean ( LAC ) .
We are planning a special meeting between the European Union troika and the Mercosur countries , which will take place in May at the fringes of the summit between the EU and the LAC countries in Lima , Peru .
Subject : Measures to promote family-friendly policies
What measures will the Council take to promote family-friendly policies and how does it intend to support the European Alliance for Families decided on by the Council in March 2007 ?
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) The European Union should take advantage of the decisive contribution offered by the European exchange of good practice , in view of the fact that it is the Member States which are responsible for the shaping of appropriate and sustainable family policies .
These exchanges may reinforce social cohesion and in that way contribute to the realisation of the Lisbon strategy objectives , among others .
Therefore , the Presidency is of the opinion that the Alliance for Families is a very useful forum for the exchange of opinions and good practices , as mentioned above .
The Presidency is also convinced that the Alliance for Families reflects the obligation of the European Union and its Member States to discuss , in the light of demographic changes , the issues relating to family-friendly policies .
The Alliance enables the Member States to exchange information and experiences and in that way to help each other in the search for appropriate political responses .
At the same time , the Presidency is of the opinion that there is no need for any new structures at the European level , but we will strive to capitalise on the existing instruments and structures .
Last May the Council adopted extensive decisions on the practical working of the Alliance for Families .
The Council prepared these decisions together with the Member States , thereby respecting the important role of the Member States in this area .
The Council re-emphasised its commitment to the Alliance for Families through the decisions relating to the balanced roles of men and women , recently adopted on 5 December 2007 .
- ( EL ) Mr President , I would like to thank the Slovenian Presidency for their reply and to ask , in addition , what specific exchanges of technological experience it has discovered so far and who is responsible for the management of these provisions of technical assistance .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) These changes are implemented not by the Presidency but through the Alliance for Families .
That is why I do not have the details you are asking about .
However , I may enquire and inform you later .
Mr President , I would like to wish the Slovenian Presidency the best of luck at the start of their Presidency and their first Question Time .
Concerning the question raised by my colleague , three things immediately arise with regard to family friendly policies .
Firstly , children and the rights of children too often are seen as separate from what should be family policy .
Secondly , the whole issue with regard to how we actually encourage - we all have the idea of balancing work and family life - greater participation within family life .
Thirdly , most importantly of all , those people that are forced out of their homes because of migration or being refugees and also the issue of family reunifications .
Are there any proposals coming from the Slovenian Presidency with regard to that ?
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) I would like to reiterate that the Slovenian Presidency is placing particular emphasis on youth employment , especially for young parents .
This is part of the answer to the question .
The Presidency will pay special attention to creating new opportunities for the harmonisation of work and family life : shorter working hours , flexible forms of work , exercising of fathers ' rights , and so on .
Another special area is the stimulation of intergenerational solidarity .
This is a particularly topical idea , especially in those regions where the older generation already represents the majority , which is the case in most of Europe .
Of course , such an incentive will only be effective if it is supported by policies covering different spheres of activity that will stimulate the positive aspects of social life .
In short , there is a whole range of measures which are being planned in various fields of EU activities and which are important for stimulating family-friendly policies .
It would be difficult for me to list all these activities , but they can be found among the many spheres of activity planned by the Slovenian Presidency .
I have just mentioned some of the fields concerned .
Thank you for your reply .
I am really pleased to hear that the Slovenian Presidency is particularly interested in putting forward family-friendly policies .
You yourself mentioned demographic changes .
Of course , because of the fact that we are living longer , it will mean an increased need for carers .
Most carers tend to be family carers .
You spoke about exchange of best practice .
We have competence in the area of employment , for example .
While most carers are unpaid , in that particular area , does the Slovenian Presidency have any initiatives to put forward on the issue of carers and , in that context , family-friendly policies ?
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) No , I do not think that at this moment we are considering a concrete suggestion aimed at protecting the interests of the category of people you are talking about .
However , your question gives cause to consider whether that should be one of the fields .
Naturally , as the Presidency , we are prepared to give it some thought .
Subject : Initiatives by the Slovene Presidency regarding a new approach to neighbourhood policy and energy
A new approach to neighbourhood policy and energy is one of the initiatives adopted by the Slovene Presidency .
In view of the intrinsic link between these two policy areas in the context of EU strategy regarding energy autonomy and independence from neighbouring countries , can the Council indicate how it intends to structure the actions envisaged ?
More specifically , how does it view future relations in the wider Balkan area in the field of energy ?
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) In answering this question I will focus on the energy aspects , because that is how we understood the question .
In March 2006 the European Council adopted the energy policy for Europe .
The three principal political objectives of this policy are : firstly to increase the reliability of supply , secondly to secure the competitiveness of the European economies and the availability of energy at affordable prices , and thirdly to encourage environmental sustainability and strive to solve the climate change problem .
In accordance with these three policy objectives , within the scope of the external energy policy , the Council is cooperating closely with third countries on the implementation and further development of its energy programme .
The international energy policy is also one of the priority policy areas defined by The European Council in its decisions of March 2007 .
The European Council stressed at that time that full advantage should be taken of the existing instruments to strengthen the bilateral cooperation of the European Union with all suppliers .
As regards the western Balkans , the main existing instrument in the field of energy cooperation is the Energy Community Treaty .
The purpose of this treaty is to widen the energy market already existing in the European Community to include the countries of that region , i.e. to the countries of the western Balkans .
In addition , every Stabilisation and Accession Agreement concluded between the European Union and the countries of the western Balkans foresees close cooperation in the area of energy .
The Council is also planning to take full advantage of the existing instruments of the European Neighbourhood Policy .
In short , when developing new initiatives in the area of energy , within the framework of relations between the European Union and third countries , we are striving to take full advantage of existing mechanisms in the case of the countries of the western Balkans .
I have already mentioned the Energy Community Treaty , and we will also use the existing mechanisms within the framework of the European Neighbourhood Policy .
- ( EL ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , please add my own wishes for a successful programming period for the Slovenian Presidency to the many that have already been expressed .
Today we shall debate the South Caucasus and the Black Sea .
I should like to ask the Presidency whether it intends to give priority to the institutionalisation of cross-regional cooperation between the European Union and the Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation . I would specifically like to ask if intensive cooperation is planned in the energy sector , which is of vital importance for southern Europe .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) Thank you for the supplementary question and for your good wishes .
Firstly , we fully agree with the assessment that the Black Sea basin is a very important region as regards the energy policy of the European Union , and above all as regards the external dimensions of the policy .
Secondly , in reply to your question whether it is possible to institutionalise relations with that region in the future , the answer is " yes , it is possible ” .
Perhaps it could be done in the same way it was done with the countries of the western Balkans , i.e. with the Energy Community Treaty , or maybe in some other way .
In any case , the Slovenian Presidency considers the Black Sea basin , the Black Sea region and the Black Sea synergy as one of the important priorities within the European Neighbourhood Policy .
Mr President , may I complement the President-in-Office on the start of the Slovenian Presidency - and of course on the Slovenian Presidency tie , which is actually quite trendy .
My congratulations on that .
My question is more broadly on energy and that is , firstly , what is the Slovenian position on increasing nuclear inside the borders of Europe ?
Secondly , what is the position of the Slovenian Presidency on increasing nuclear power on the neighbourhood side ?
Mr President , I would also like to congratulate Slovenia on this day and to ask a question about this so-called North Stream gas pipeline .
As you know , this pipeline will connect Russia with Germany and some other European states ; as you know , there are some problems concerning the environment , among others .
How does the Presidency evaluate this project ?
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) Thank you for those supplementary questions .
As regards the use of nuclear energy , the Presidency is of the firm opinion that the decision on the introduction , further use and possible increase in the use of nuclear energy is entirely up to the Member States .
The Presidency will adhere to that position .
The second part of your question , Mr Stubb , related to Slovenia .
Slovenia is known to be one of the countries that uses nuclear energy .
There is a possibility , but no decision on the matter , that the use of nuclear energy will increase , i.e. that Slovenia will resort to it in the future as well .
As regards the North Stream project , it is not an EU project but a project of the directly participating countries .
The EU , the Council and the Presidency do not hold any positions regarding this particular case .
However , the EU holds a general position regarding projects which we , as the EU , would like to see realised .
In this respect I would like to mention above all the Nabucco gas pipeline .
This means that we have an opinion about this project because it is an EU project and our opinion is positive .
It is the opinion that the European Union , wishing to develop its energy policy at the European level , must continue with such projects , and , as the Presidency , we will support them .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) There have been already five conferences in Brussels about the shape of the forces : on 3 November last year , on 1 December last year and , most recently , a few days ago on 11 January this year .
As in every operation of this kind , the difficulty of shaping forces has again been demonstrated .
However , I am pleased to inform you that the fifth , i.e. last , conference on the shaping of the forces was successful and the European Union now has all the necessary capabilities at its disposal .
The decision on the starting date for the mission is expected to be adopted at the session of the EU General Affairs and External Relations Council at the end of this month , 28 January 2008 .
The initial operational capability is expected to be reached by the end of January or at the beginning of February .
It will include special units with some infantry units and a selection of technical , logistic and medical means to prepare the ground for major deployment .
General deployment of the peace forces is foreseen for May , before the start of the rainy season .
In this phase , the EUFOR units in Chad should amount to 4000 troops .
As regards the recent military conflict between the rebel and Chad governmental forces in western Chad , the Council deeply deplores the attacks by the rebels which led to the present fighting .
In the decisions of 10 December , the Council expressed its deep concern and called on the Chad government to cooperate with Sudan and Libya in creating the necessary conditions for reaching a lasting political solution based on the Sirta Peace Agreement .
The Council called on the Chad and Sudanese governments to fulfil the obligations they accepted in the Treaty of Tripoli and , in particular , to stop assisting the armed movements that are causing the instability of this region .
In view of the fact that the rebel forces are carrying out their actions from Darfur as well , the Council is reminding the Sudanese government of its responsibility to prevent armed groups from crossing the border with Chad .
The Council is aware of the fact that lasting results may be reached only through political solution , and it is therefore emphasizing the importance of the political agreement on consolidation of the democratic process in Chad , signed on 13 August last year .
I would just like to wish the Slovenians well in their Presidency over the next six months and to thank them for the reply .
In relation to the decision which was taken in mid-September by the EU Council to make an EU force available , I am a bit concerned that the timescale has been allowed to lapse .
I am just wondering whether there is a lesson that we should learn from this : that , before we give a commitment , we have the operation ready to move , because of certain things that have occurred since .
The second part of my question was in relation to humanitarian aid .
We gave humanitarian aid to Chad in 2007 .
Are we going to increase that level of aid for 2008 now that we have a direct involvement in it over the next 12 months ?
Mr President , I would like to wish the Slovenian Presidency every success for its term over the next six months , and also to wish a safe and successful peace-keeping mission to the EU forces that are going to Chad .
I am very proud to say that this mission is being headed by a fellow Irishman , Lieutenant-General Patrick Nash , and I wish him well also .
Does the Council agree that the EU peacekeeping missions must continue to cooperate fully with the United Nations and that the deployment of EU peacekeeping forces should take place only when a United Nations resolution supports such a mission ?
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) Firstly , Mr Burke 's question .
Certainly it is one more lesson in the long line of lessons which perhaps teach us mainly one thing : it is easier to adopt a decision in principle than to ensure its implementation .
Nevertheless , we were successful in that process .
It took a while , but I think that not only the agreement , but also the agreement regarding the implementation itself , was reached at the right moment .
As regards the second question , I would like to say that it is one of principle , which should of course be resolved pursuant to international law and the United Nations Charter .
Naturally , it is proper that peace-keeping and peace-making operations are about cooperation under the patronage of the United Nations .
This does not mean that the European Union is not also capable of independently adopting decisions regarding its own missions of a different nature .
- ( PL ) Mr President , this will be more of an opinion , I think .
Poland provides 10 % of the armed forces in Chad , which means about 400 soldiers , so I would like to appeal to the Slovenian Presidency to do everything it can to ensure that this mission ends successfully .
It must be a well-prepared mission , one which is very well equipped , and we know that the initiator of this mission was France .
I would therefore like to ask Slovenia , as holder of the Presidency , to be very exacting with France , the leader of this mission .
Logistically , this has to be ... or rather , I would once again emphasise that Europe must not compromise itself .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) Only to express gratitude to Poland and , of course , other countries that are contributing forces to this important operation .
Subject : Protection of EU citizens in Muslim countries
In November of last year , a British teacher was accused of insulting Islam while teaching in Sudan after allowing her class of seven-year-olds to name a teddy bear Mohammed .
If convicted she could face 40 lashes , a large fine or a jail sentence .
What can the EU do to give better protection to innocent EU citizens in Muslim countries who find themselves in terrible situations such as this ?

President-in-Office . - ( SL ) The case referred to in Mr Mitchell 's question is the case of a woman of British citizenship who was in a third country and came under the jurisdiction of the national legislation of that country .
On the basis of her citizenship , the above-mentioned citizen was guaranteed consular protection by the country in which she is a citizen .
As we know , the British citizen was released in the meantime and returned to the United Kingdom .
It follows from this that such cases are resolved through bilateral relations between the Member State in question and the third country .
Naturally , cases may arise where additional political measures are appropriate and where EU representatives are asked to get involved in matters of this kind and in resolving such bilateral issues .
In specific cases , this may lead to official statements and initiatives by the European Union .
I would like to reiterate that , in principle , as in this particular case , it is an issue which is usually resolved at the level of relations between the third country and the EU Member State of which the person is a citizen .
I thank the President-in-Office for the reply and wish him well in his Presidency .
The President-in-Office will no doubt be aware that every citizen of an EU Member State is also a citizen of the Union .
My expectation would be that , if an EU citizen was visiting some state where he or she could have his arm or leg amputated , then the Union would see the horror in such a thing .
Does the Union not also see the horror in somebody being treated in this way , potentially sentenced to 40 lashes and also perhaps a jail sentence ?
Will the President-in-Office take steps to try to ensure that EU citizens visiting these regions are aware of the sort of cultural change they are entering into , and will the Presidency also try to ensure that the states we do business with expect us to expect of them better treatment for our citizens and for them not to be treated in this way ?
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) Thank you , Mr Mitchell , for your supplementary question .
It is a question of consular protection for citizens .
Such protection is still the domain of the Member States and it is up to the Member States to warn their citizens who are travelling to third countries about the dangers and traps they have to be aware of .
On the other hand , on the principle of solidarity we already have a guarantee of help from other Member States which have diplomatic , i.e. consular , representation in a third country and which guarantee consular protection for the citizens of other Member States of the European Union which do not have their own consulate in the country in question .
I think that is one important advantage of our Union .
I have already said that , if required , it is certainly very probable , most probable , possible that the Union will also be involved in resolving cases such as the one mentioned .
Luckily , in this case it was not necessary and the case was solved between the two countries , which we are happy about .
- ( DE ) President-in-Office of the Council , you have rightly pointed out that bilateral contacts can help in resolving problem cases such as these .
The Council has , however , signed the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights with the President of this House and the President of the Commission .
In it we refer to human dignity and the ban on degrading and cruel punishment .
Would it not therefore also be the Council 's duty to assert this claim throughout the world on behalf of the European Union ?
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) I repeat that it is still a duty of the Member States which possess the levers of consular protection .
However , it is clear that the European Union gives a framework within which the Member States - and I am going to mention the principle of solidarity again - help each other in this area on the basis of the principle of solidarity .
In any case , the Council , and I am sure other institutions , would not hesitate to do all they could at their level if the need arose .
In other words , that does not exclude the fact that for the time being this protection is offered by the Member States and does not exclude additional action being taken by an individual institution of the European Union .
What follows from the case presented in Mr Mitchell 's question is only that the case was resolved between the two countries , although that does not mean that it would not have been tackled at a higher , even European level , had the need arisen .
Subject : Biodiversity and climate change
According to the IPCC fourth assessment report , during this century ' the resilience of many ecosystems is likely to be exceeded by an unprecedented combination of change in climate and other global drivers ' ( e.g. spread of infectious diseases ) .
The IPCC estimates that roughly 60 % of evaluated ecosystems are currently utilised unsustainably and show increasing signs of degradation .
This alone will likely cause widespread biodiversity loss .
At the EU level , the Commission 's Green Paper on Climate Change Adaptation reminds us that : ' approximately 20-30 % of plant and animal species in Europe ( assessed so far ) are likely to be at increased risk of extinction if increases in global average temperature exceed 1.5-2.5 degrees C ' .
What concrete actions will the Slovenian Presidency take to prioritise the Gothenburg target to halt biodiversity loss by 2010 , and to combat widespread biodiversity loss due to climate change and other global drivers ?
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) I am convinced that Ms Doyle is familiar with the intention of the European Union to contribute to the ambitious outcome of the 9th Conference of the Signatories to the Biodiversity Convention .
It will take place in Bonn in Germany in May 2008 , i.e. during the Slovenian Presidency .
The preservation of biodiversity is high on the list of priorities of our Presidency .
The Council had already stressed the urgency of continuous and committed efforts at all levels to reach the target of perceptibly slowing down the decrease in biodiversity by the year 2010 , and at the same time to reach the target mentioned by Ms Doyle in her question and set by the EU at the session of the European Council in Göteborg .
In addition , the Member States are introducing concrete measures for implementation of the action plan to reduce the loss of biodiversity by 2010 and beyond .
The plan makes provision for measures relating to biodiversity and climate change at the level of the European Union as well as at the global level .
In its efforts to reach the target to slow down the decrease in biodiversity by the year 2010 , the Presidency stresses the need for synergy between policies and activities in the areas of climate change and biodiversity , especially in respect of biodiversity in fresh water and marine environments , as well as biodiversity in forests .
These targets , together with other targets for biodiversity preservation , have been set in the declaration entitled " Countdown to 2010 ” .
Meetings of Council working groups will be organised during the Slovenian Presidency .
One will be among experts in forestry , climate change and biodiversity , and another among experts in international marine policies , fisheries and biodiversity .
Equally , at the informal meeting of environment ministers in Slovenia in April , the biodiversity of forests will be presented as a challenge and an opportunity to prepare measures to alleviate climate change and to adjust to it at the European level .
The Slovenian Presidency will also strive to improve cooperation as well as the implementation of appropriate decisions in various environmental agreements at national and regional levels .
The European Commission amended its communication " Halting the Loss of Biodiversity by 2010 - and Beyond ” with the commitment to include the private sector in partnerships for the preservation of biodiversity .
Recently , in November 2007 , there was a high-level conference in Lisbon which debated the economy and biodiversity within this framework .
The outcome of that conference , which included the Lisbon report on the economy and biodiversity , will be debated at the aforementioned 9th Conference of the Signatory Countries , which will take place in Germany during the Slovenian Presidency .
It will also be discussed at the 5th World Congress of the International Alliance for the Preservation of Nature and Natural Resources , which will take place in Barcelona during the French Presidency .
Thank you , President-in-Office , and best wishes for a very successful Presidency .
It is the countdown to 2010 that concerns me .
There is plenty of talk but no action in this area , and it is one of the great deceptions we have that we are actually going to show any change or any impact on the ground by 2010 .
I mean , I agree with synergies between different policies , but protection of biodiversity can help limit atmospheric greenhouse gas concentrations because forests , peat lands and other man-made ecosystems and habitats store carbon .
Do you think that monitoring change needs the best data available ?
We need better information on the whole effects that climate change is having on Europe 's biodiversity .
If we make any progress towards 2010 we have to improve the indicators and measurements we use to know exactly how serious the situation is .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) Ms Doyle , thank you for your added comment .
I fully agree that we have to have the best possible indicators to establish the status of biodiversity .
The Presidency will take into consideration your comment on the need to think about the necessity to improve these indicators and will reflect on it .
2010 is really close : we have less than two years .
You are right that in a field such as biodiversity it is difficult to imagine that , especially after a period which seems not to have been used to its best potential , this short time that remains will be enough to reach the set targets , namely the slowdown in the loss of biodiversity .
However , this is not to say that it is impossible .
We will do our best .
Slovenia is one of the countries where biodiversity is of enormous importance because the level of biodiversity in our country is still high ; this is well known , if for no other reason because of our bears , which we export to a large part of Europe .
In brief , you can rely on the Slovenian Presidency to do its utmost to reach the target , regardless of the fact that there is very little time left .
Could I just ask the Council to comment on the fact that the Commission is now reviewing the targets for biofuels , because what we thought might be good for climate change is now having unintended consequences when it comes to global food security , and indeed biodiversity .
Is this not one of the difficulties for us human beings in tackling climate change : that we may get it wrong ?
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) This is proof that , perhaps , certain matters did not receive our due attention in the past .
It is clear that the totally unsupervised and unrestrained production of biofuels must have possible negative consequences for the environment , biodiversity , food prices , and so on .
I think it is fitting to devote special attention to that aspect too .
In other words , we should encourage the production and consumption of biofuels to reduce rather than increase the burden on the environment .
I think that should be a major guide for the Union in its policies to encourage the use of biofuels .
Subject : Moving beyond GDP
Could the Council indicate how it intends to work with the Commission proposal to move beyond GDP as an indicator of regional cohesion , and could it say whether it has arrived at any definitive measures to be included in the future , to provide a more accurate measure of a region 's performance ?
Mrs McGuinness takes responsibility for this question originally asked by Jim Higgins .

President-in-Office . - ( SL ) I would like to apologise to Mr Higgins and Ms McGuinness for my answer , which cannot be anything other than very short , because the Council can only discuss these things on the basis of a proposal by the Commission .
Such a proposal has not been put forward , nor has a proposal for any other changes regarding regional cohesion indicators .
Therefore , until such a proposal is made , the Council is unable to discuss it and take a position on any other regional cohesion indicators .

Mr President , can I apologise on behalf of Mr Higgins , who is unwell this evening and cannot be here .
I thank you for your short answer .
I presume this will be linked with plans to redefine disadvantaged areas in Member States as well .
Could I just suggest that , when you do have some information on some of the indicators , you might supply it to Mr Higgins .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) I will try , thank you .
I reiterate that it depends primarily on the Commission and maybe , maybe , but really only just maybe , there will be an opportunity , but not necessarily , to consider the indicators as well as the review of the cohesion policy which is being planned by the Slovenian Presidency at the moment .
That depends on the Commission and not the Council .
Of course , we would be interested to know what will be the contribution of the Commission to the debate on the review of the cohesion policy , which is one of the important tasks for our Presidency .
- ( DE ) Mr President , even the European Parliament respects the Commission 's right of initiative , as the Council has just expressed it .
However , we shall therefore always let the Commission know what we believe is particularly important .
Criteria such as unemployment or greater migration would certainly be subjects that could be introduced into the discussion here .
Because you talked about the Slovenian brown bears in the previous question , as a Styrian I would like to say thank you for this export and I hope that the open Schengen border will lead to even more immigration .
In terms of more accurate measurements of a region 's performance , one must seriously question whether GDP is the right measurement of performance .
Has any consideration been given , or will you be giving consideration ( as you have only been in office for a week ) , to measuring GDP versus GNP versus GNI ?
The big difficulty at the moment is that we are not measuring like with like , so it is very hard to measure performance across different regions - and across different countries , it is not just across regions alone - because the bases or indicators are not standardised at the moment .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) It would be very difficult for me to speak in the name of the Commission and I have no ambition to do so , because I would not be equal to the task .
However , it seems that , at least for the time being , the Commission has not yet found a better indicator than GDP .
I believe that , had the Commission found a better indicator , it would have proposed it .
I would like to repeat my previous remark that the cohesion policy review gives an opportunity to consider your question too .
There are going to be even more opportunities when the complete reform of the European Union budget is discussed , which , as we already know , will be done on the basis of the total analysis to be conducted by the European Commission itself in 2008 and 2009 .
Subject : Investigation into care homes in Bulgaria
The BBC recently broadcast a documentary entitled ' Bulgaria 's Abandoned Children ' which depicted the shocking conditions experienced by the children living in a care home in Mogilino , Bulgaria .
The producer of the programme has publicly stated that this home is not the worst case in Bulgaria .
There is a perception that even though a problem evidently exists in relation to institutional care for children and young adults with disabilities , it does not appear to have been effectively addressed .
Given the EU 's adherence to the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU and the fact that we have just left behind the European Year of Equal Opportunities for All , can the Council make a statement on this very sensitive matter ?
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) The Council has not adopted any position on the particular case cited by Ms McGuinness .
Nevertheless , I can say with pleasure that on 5 December 2007 the Council adopted a resolution to continue with the European year of equal opportunities for all .
That was 2007 , i.e. last year , which according to this decision , i.e. this resolution , will not be a one-year event but will continue .
Said resolution calls on the Member States and the European Commission to strengthen their efforts to prevent discrimination due to disability or for any other reason , to strengthen the fight against discrimination of this kind , to include the question of disability in all relevant policies and to continue the process of concluding , signing and ratifying the United Nations Convention on the Rights of People with Disabilities .
With this resolution the Council is also calling on the Member States and the Commission to cooperate in the common challenges and look for a solution within the framework of the implementation of said convention , i.e. the UN convention .
Allow me to stress here that the Council and the European Parliament recently received a Commission report on the status of the disabled in the European Union , which included the European action plan for 2008 and 2009 .
The Slovenian Presidency is of the opinion that this document should provide valuable guidelines for further endeavours in the enforcement of rights for the disabled , especially disabled children .
The Council is still studying this proposal by the Commission .
President-in-Office , thank you for your diplomacy .
I hope you will understand if I am not diplomatic , because I do not think you realise the extent of anger and upset , particularly in the UK and Ireland , when this documentary was shown .
I think - and I regret to say this - that if this was an animal welfare issue the Council would have a position on it .
We are talking about children who have no voice .
I really believe that it makes the EU look bad in the eyes of Member States and citizens of the European Union that we are slow to act when it comes to cases like this .
I think it would be wonderful and we would get a great reaction from our citizens if we were more swift to act , because this is an unforgivable story .
The pictures spoke for themselves .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) I cannot and do not wish to go into the content of this affair , on which you , probably quite justifiably , have a strong opinion .
However , I would like to stress that , in the opinion of the Council , it is important to respect and take into consideration the division of competences between the Union and the Member States .
In this framework I may express myself only as a representative of the Council - and I am not being diplomatic here , but speaking within the limits of my competences and the competences of the Council , and of course out of respect for the movements within these frameworks .
President-in-Office , can I join in expressing disappointment at the inadequacy of your reply ?
When Bulgaria was being considered for accession , the treatment of people in institutions was made a live issue .
But the mistake that was made was that , when in December 2006 we came to set the benchmarks - looking back upon how Bulgaria had matched its undertakings - mysteriously , this item was omitted from the benchmarks .
Why was that ?
And can it now be reinstated ?
If not , what other steps can you realistically take so that the Council and the Community quite properly can look at the flagrant breaches which are afflicting this sector ?
The speaker is absolutely right : I thought the answer from the Council was not sufficient .
Before accession , we called on all Member States who wanted to come into the European Union to abide by European Union rules .
I know Bulgaria has signed up to the UN Convention on the Rights of People with Disabilities , but it has not ratified it .
Can you put pressure on those countries that have not ratified that Convention to do just that ?
I know the Bulgarian authorities are trying to address this problem , but we need to keep up the pressure .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) I strongly reiterate that it is not within the competence of the Council , or even customary for the Council , to adopt a position regarding individual television programmes or their comments .
In no way does this diminish the enormity of the problem you are talking about .
However , I personally see the solution in what you said in your question , i.e. in the ratification of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of People with Disabilities .
That is precisely why , in my initial answer , I mentioned the resolution adopted by the Council in December 2007 , which calls on the Member States to ratify said convention .
Subject : Negotiating date for Macedonia
Does the Council foresee the possibility this year , i.e. during the Slovenian or French Presidency of the Council , of setting a date for launching accession negotiations with Macedonia ?
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) I still do not know ; sometimes it switches itself on and sometimes it doesn 't .
I apologise for these gaps .
Of course , the Council does not and cannot exclude the possibility cited by Mr Posselt in his question .
As we know , in December 2005 the European Council decided to accord candidate status to the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
In accordance with the Council decisions of 12 December 2005 , i.e. a few days prior to the session of the European Council , the country had to implement the Stabilisation and Association Agreement fully .
The Commission has been preparing progress reports on this basis , and the 2006 and 2007 reports do not contain recommendations for the start of accession negotiations , the argument being that appropriate measures have still not been implemented .
In 2008 the Presidency is expecting the leadership of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , from the entire political spectrum , to join forces in strengthening efforts to reach results in all the various fields where progress is needed , and , in view of the events in the country , especially the progress made over the last month , I would estimate that it should be possible this year to come a step closer to deciding on a date for the start of accession negotiations .
The Slovenian Presidency is very keen on it , very keen on that progress , but it does depend on the country itself and on its success in exercising the measures , as well as the progress of reforms .
- ( DE ) Many thanks for this very good response .
Allow me as an exception to make a personal preliminary remark .
In 1991 , when Slovenia gained independence , I was at the independence celebrations in Ljubljana - as the only EU citizen , I believe .
I was also in favour of the Association Agreement during the war in Ljubljana which , thankfully , was brief , and later as rapporteur for Parliament .
I would simply like to say that today is a historic day for me .
I am very happy .
Please forgive the personal preliminary remark .
Now an even shorter question : do you believe that the naming issue between Macedonia and Greece is a bilateral issue , and can a bilateral issue have an impact on accession negotiations ?

President-in-Office . - ( SL ) I would like to thank Mr Posselt for his support since the days of our independence .
Actually , Slovenia has journeyed a long way , as was said by the President of the European Council this morning .
Regarding your question , it is basically a bilateral matter of the name .
However , we all know that for the resolution of this basically bilateral question , there is a mechanism , under United Nations patronage , involving a special representative , Mr Nimec , who is committed to mediating between both sides to bring about a solution .
Slovenia , i.e. the Slovenian Presidency , supports these efforts and expects both sides to cooperate in a constructive way in this process until a proper solution is found .
In the meantime , we are of the opinion that this question should not affect , let alone hinder , the integration of Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia into international organisations .
I have a question for the Slovenian Presidency .
I know it supports the view that we need long-term peace and stability in south-east Europe and the Balkans as a priority , and indeed economic development goes hand-in-hand with it , but in terms of Macedonia reaching the line to open negotiations on accession - the issue of the name apart ( important though it is ) - how does the Slovenian Presidency consider Macedonia would rate in comparison with other countries in that immediate area in reaching the accession line ?
We want them all in , but some will be more prepared than others .
How do you rate Macedonia 's chances for priority accession ?
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) Thank you very much , Ms Doyle , for your supplementary question .
The Slovenian Presidency classifies countries in the western Balkan region according to the stage they have reached .
In this case , the most advanced country of the region is Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia because it is the only country which has been given candidate status .
Croatia is excluded because it should be in a different category anyway , namely in the expansion category , because it is already negotiating for membership .
I reiterate that , during our Presidency , we wish for every one of the countries , including the one in question , to make progress on its journey towards membership of the European Union , which will not happen soon , i.e. in a year or two , but will need more time and more effort .
The Slovenian Presidency has placed this issue among its highest priorities .
However , it is important to maintain the European perspective for those countries as well as their rate of progress towards this goal .
I repeat that , as the Presidency , we would be very pleased if progress were to continue during our Presidency .
I would like to repeat that this progress also depends largely on the countries of the region .
- ( EL ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate the President-in-Office of the Council on his very specific reply and , as a Greek MEP , I should like to say that we have a particular interest in all the Western Balkan States becoming members of the European Union as soon as possible .
The problem , however , needs to be resolved .
I would also like to say that Greece has made its good intentions clear and continues to do so daily in discussions on a compromise name .
In this sense , then , I would say that account needs to be taken of the position of a Member State that displays considerable goodwill in this regard .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) Thank you for your comment .
The President of the Council mentioned this morning the important achievement of the Greek Presidency in 2003 , when the Thessaloniki Agenda for the Western Balkans was adopted .
This Thessaloniki Agenda remains the foundation of the efforts of the Slovenian Presidency in its endeavour to integrate the western Balkans .
This is why we are particularly counting on the support of Greece in these efforts pertaining the countries of the western Balkans .
Question No 12 has been withdrawn .
Subject : Reduction in VAT rates for environmentally friendly technologies and products
Does the Council agree that Community legislation on value added tax ( VAT ) should be adjusted so that reduced VAT rates can also be applied to technologies and applications involving renewable sources of energy and energy yield efficiency in addition to existing provisions governing the consumption of electricity and natural gas ?
Does a time schedule exist for taking the relevant decisions ?
What moves should we expect from the Council in this matter , and when ?
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) As we know , at its session of 4 December 2007 the Council adopted a decision to arrange for a discussion on the economic effect of reduced rates and whether reduced rates of value added tax are a suitable tool for achieving the targets of sectorial policies .
It was agreed that this question would be debated again at some point during 2008 , not necessarily in the first half of the year .
At the moment , the Slovenian Presidency is searching very hard for the most effective approach to continuing the discussion about value added tax rates , which are not uniform .
As we know from the Commission report , this discussion started during the Portuguese Presidency .
In this period of reflection , which I hope will be as short as possible , we are unable to answer Mr Vakalis more precisely .
However , I would like to stress that this is an important question , which the Presidency is going to tackle with due attention .

- ( EL ) Mr President , I consider the reply to be satisfactory , and I would also simply like to take this opportunity to congratulate the Slovenian Presidency on its successful start . I wish it all the best with the rest of its Presidency .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.30 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Verification of credentials : see Minutes
Membership of committees and delegations : see Minutes
A European strategy on the Roma ( debate )
The next item is the debate on :
the oral question to the Commission by Jan Marinus Wiersma , Hannes Swoboda , Katalin Lévai , Adrian Severin and Jan Andersson , on behalf of the PSE Group , on a European Roma strategy ( O-0081 / 2007 / rev. 1 - B6-0389 / 2007 )
the oral question to the Commission by Viktória Mohácsi , on behalf of the ALDE Group , on a European Roma strategy - B6-0003 / 2008 )
the oral question to the Commission by Lívia Járóka , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on a European Community Action Plan on Roma - B6-0004 / 2008 )
the oral question to the Commission by Roberta Angelilli , on behalf of the UEN Group , on a European Roma strategy - B6-0005 / 2008 )
author . - ( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
Ladies and gentlemen , President-in-Office , many documents , including the 2005 Decision of the European Parliament on the Roma , the 2004 study by the European Commission , the report on Roma women by the European Parliament Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality and the EUROSTAT action plan of 2003 were clearly drafted in order to solve the untenable situation of European Roma .
Nonetheless , neither the Member States nor the European institutions have really moved forward in promoting the inclusion of the Roma , although it is in the interests of both the European labour market and European societies successfully to integrate Europe 's most populous and fastest-growing minority .
The recommendation of the report presented last December by the high-level advisory group set up by Commissioner Špidla was that a Community action plan should be created .
This action plan must be created , although much stronger and more genuine commitment is needed from the Commission in order to take effective , immediate measures .
This also applies to the European Parliament and civil society in many areas affecting the Roma .
The European Commission and Member States must instigate , fund , monitor and implement aid directly from Union sources for the most disadvantaged groups .
If the financial instruments of the European Union are drawn down , it must show the impact on equal opportunities of the given investment as a material and accountable criterion , that is to say , if development is funded from Union sources , it should be compulsory for bidders to carry out or implement an equal opportunities analysis and measures plan .
If the measures plan becomes a compulsory element of competitions in different development sectors and certain regions , this would contribute greatly to ensuring and encouraging equal opportunities for disadvantaged social groups and those that are falling behind .
It is also essential to create a pan-European crisis map , on the basis of which those areas of the European Union can be assessed where abject poverty and social exclusion most seriously afflict the Roma and non-Roma communities , and through which the European Commission , supporting the Member States , can start the work of desegregation , which the governments have been putting off for decades as a result of different political commitments .
It is important that the Commissioners who are directly or indirectly responsible for the integration and inclusion of minorities coordinate their activities through their education , employment , equal opportunities , regional and development portfolios and , developing into a technical working group , prepare the 2008 action plan for Roma affairs in cooperation with Parliament and civil society , and they must start implementing that plan as soon as possible .
Apart from the fact that we adopted a resolution in 2005 which we now see has in fact had a negligible impact , I also consider it important that dialogue should start between the parties as soon as possible , with the involvement of the Commission and civil society .
I also feel in any case that in 2008 we ought to see action and talks relating to the Roma that are organised by all parties .
I feel it is important and I undertake on behalf of the People 's Party to instigate this during 2008 .
Thank you .
author . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this morning the report on an EU strategy on the rights of the child was adopted .
One of its priorities is combating poverty and discrimination .
On this point , we decided to devote a special paragraph to Roma children , who are often excluded from health and social provision and from schooling .
It is a well-known fact that a very high percentage of Roma children do not go to school , or attend only occasionally .
Many Roma children are actually forced to attend special schools , if not institutions for the disabled .
Available data show that in some Member States early school leaving by Roma children exceeds 60 % .
It is clear that children who do not go to school , who are illiterate or in any case have an inadequate level of education or vocational training , are children who have no future , but are forced to beg or to work on the black market .
In any case , their fate is sealed : in the best-case scenario they will be condemned to poverty and social exclusion , while in the worst-case scenario they will be victims of organised crime .
It is worth bearing in mind , by the way , that the Roma population is very young , with approximately 45 % of individuals aged under 16 ; for this very reason it would be extremely useful and important for the Commission to lay down specific , concrete actions for Roma children , particularly with reference to combating early school leaving and the promotion of appropriate , high-quality schooling .
Without a right to education there is no guarantee of equal treatment and , above all , no right to a future .
author . - ( NL ) Mr President , we too have put questions to the Commission , and I expect the Commissioner to answer them .
This evening , we are mainly discussing the efforts of the European Union - the European Commission - to tackle the problems of the Roma , a large group of whom became EU citizens a few years ago , and another last year .
These citizens are living in conditions that are in most cases unacceptable .
We are pleased that we are to receive a response from the European Commission in this House today .
We are also pleased that the European Council devoted attention to the situation of the Roma at the Brussels Summit , and asked the Commission to present more specific proposals for what the European Union itself can do to supplement the policy of Member States with large Roma communities , what we can do in the way of coordination and exchange of best practices , and how the available EU resources can be better deployed in those countries via the funds in order to do something about the situation of the Roma .
I say this particularly because , upon the accession of a number of countries - last year , and also in 2004 - we said , ' All right , come on in ; one of the things we must do together is tackle the problems of the Roma . '
I myself was rapporteur for Slovakia , and I remember the Slovak Government making all kinds of promises , but I have some doubts about the effectiveness of the implementation of those promises .
This remains an important point .
We would also say that the Roma cannot be regarded as a typical national minority , such as the Hungarians in Slovakia or the Russians in the Baltic States .
They are a typical European minority , for which a special European policy could be developed , together with the Member States concerned , with a separate responsibility for the European Union - as , indeed , was recognised in the pronouncements of the Brussels European Council .
We would ask the Commission , in particular , to ensure greater coordination within the Commission itself .
How can we improve cooperation ?
How can we give someone , possibly from the ranks of the Commissioners , central responsibility for Roma policy ?
Maybe we should also look at the possibility of recognising the Roma as a kind of European minority in order to get around , to some extent , the principle of subsidiarity currently applicable to Member States ' minority policy .
To conclude , I believe that everyone 's intentions are good , but that better coordination and more action are required .
author . - ( HU ) Thank you very much .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to remind you that this Parliament drew attention to the lack of integration of the Roma back in 1983 .
It also asked the Commission , the Council and the governments of the Member States in a Resolution of 1994 to do everything in the interests of the social , economic and political integration of the Roma .
As you will remember , in the Resolution adopted by Parliament in April 2005 we asked the Commission to adopt an action plan containing clear recommendations for the Member States and candidate countries relating to the economic , social and political integration of the Roma .
Again in November 2007 the matter of the social integration of the Roma was incorporated into the text of the Parliament 's Resolution on freedom of movement , upon my recommendation , as a European-level Roma strategy .
We asked the Commission again to prepare immediately a European strategy for the social inclusion of the Roma , using the integration fund and structural funds .
In amongst all this , we know for certain that Roma children are still forced to study in segregated classes and in segregated institutions in at least ten Member States of the Union , and we , the Roma , are unjustifiably classed as disabled , put into a determined profession and labelled for all time .
Unfortunately it is well known in every Member State what slums and what terrible conditions the Roma live in .
I regret to state that we also know very well that the average life expectancy of Roma in every Member State is 15 years lower than the life expectancy of Union citizens .
We should repeat that the Roma are over-represented among the unemployed in every single Member State .
In amongst all this , unfortunately , not a single month goes by when there is not a racist attack against Roma in any Member State .
We know from the news - or we would not particularly have heard about it - that on the night of 4 January 2008 , a slum in the Marconi district of Rome , with approximately 250 Roma living there , was set on fire , and then , three days later , also in Italy , Molotov cocktails were thrown at the local gipsy settlement in Aprilia , directly threatening the lives of several hundred people .
Racist motives were behind the attack in both cases .
There is no room for doubt , the calling to account is justified , there must be a proposal for a Resolution , there must be a European-level strategy , and every Member State must prepare an action plan for integrating the Roma .
Nobody is an exception , nobody can act as if there were no Roma in their own country - whether or not they recognise them - and then what has been said would not be true of any of the Member States of the Union , without exception .
Thank you .

Member of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to thank Mrs Járóka , Mrs Angelilli , Mr Wiersma and Mrs Mohácsi for raising these issues , which I am dealing with on behalf of my colleague , Vladimír Špidla , because he is currently in China , and this gives us the opportunity to talk things through on this extremely important subject .
The past year has really shown that both the bodies of the European Union and the Member States themselves are intensifying their efforts to improve the situation of the Roma in the European Union permanently .
We have heard that this is necessary and I agree .
A few important steps have already been taken in this regard .
These range from the European Parliament 's decision in 2005 to introduce the European Year of Equal Opportunities for All to the work of the high-ranking group of experts on the integration of ethnic minorities and the European Economic and Social Committee as well as the conclusions accepted just recently by December 's European Council , to which reference has just been made .
I should say that we cannot really shrug off the difficult issue of discrimination , as members of the Roma experience it , and their exclusion from society and from the labour market .
We have therefore taken the firm decision to use every instrument available to us , such as legislation , structural funds and information and awareness-raising campaigns , in order to improve this situation .
It is obvious that employment and social policy programmes and measures are not being adequately used to promote the social integration of the Roma .
We therefore need to concentrate all our efforts primarily on improving access to these measures with a targeted plan .
It goes without saying that a plan of this kind must be based on an authoritative and long-term commitment by the Member States and the efficient use of Community instruments and policies .
Allow me , therefore , to deal briefly and practically with your questions and outline our proposals for 2008 .
The Commission will adopt guidelines this summer on the revised strategy for combating discrimination - follow-up action as it were , to the European Year of Equal Opportunities for All .
According to the European Council 's conclusions of December 2007 , these guidelines will for the most part deal with the Roma problem and the recommendations of the high-ranking group of experts on the integration of ethnic minorities .
These guidelines will be supplemented by a working paper by the Commission 's services , which analyses the progress and effectiveness of these measures achieved for the benefit of the Roma , both at political and at legislative level , and also when planning programmes for the structural funds .
At the same time we are offering to organise a high-level Roma forum , aimed at bringing together representatives of national governments and parliaments , the European Parliament , the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions as well as leading figures from Roma civil society and other important players .
We are convinced that the rights of the Roma can be strengthened by high-level open discussion and that much more targeted use of resources can be achieved for their benefit .
The staff of my colleague Vladimír Špidla will prepare the initiatives referred to and then focus on the Roma problem in the areas of non-discrimination , the European Social Fund , employment and social integration .
Since the situation of the Roma relates to several of the Commission 's areas of activity , such as regional policy , education , public health and justice , the specialist inter-agency group for Roma issues , which came into existence in 2004 , will be providing the information exchange .
Finally , a few weeks ago , the Commission concluded a partnership framework agreement with the European Roma Information Office , the ERIO .
This partnership will establish permanent , direct contact between the European bodies and Roma civil society .
As for the rest , it should be remembered that several initiatives are being implemented both at national and at European level as part of the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue , which has just begun .
These aim to highlight , and therefore make people even more aware of , the importance of dialogue between cultures and above all the advantages that cultural diversity brings to our society .
In the spring of 2008 , the Commission will publish a Green Paper on educational issues in conjunction with pupils who have a migrant background or belong to a disadvantaged minority .
It will also address the major aspects affecting the Roma , such as educational segregation , for instance .
This Green Paper should trigger wide-ranging debate on the subject and maybe lead to a plan of action at European level .
I should also add - to respond directly to a question from Mrs Mohácsi - that the Commission intends to submit the proposal in 2008 for a directive on the application of the principle of equal treatment beyond employment , i.e. a horizontal directive , as we announced in our work programme .
These are currently the fundamental items we are preparing and I now await the debate with interest , at the end of which I shall perhaps need to add a few comments .
on behalf of PPE-DE . - ( RO ) I think that the organisation of this debate in plenary session is extremely important as it is necessary to draw up a balance sheet of the European actions on Roma population and to analyse the methods of enhancing the efficiency thereof .
Several recent events proved us that there are still important gaps at European policy level in this field and an update and readjustment thereof is necessary for the current challenges .
Mutual tollerance and multi-ethnical integration are fundamental principles of the European Union and Roma is an important community at European level , having a significant impact on the social and political as well as economic life in several Member States of the European Union ..
Therefore , it is mandatory to develop a coherent vision at European level regarding Roma , focussed on their integration and ensuring a common basis of rights and responsibilities .
Although in November I asked the European Commission a question regarding this issue and the answer was that new proposals intending Roma integration would be launched , I hereby ask the Commission to come up with clarifications on these intentions .
Firstly , I would be interested in the way the Commission would approach this issue from institutional point of view so that to ensure an efficient coordination and monitoring of European action for Roma protection and integration .
The role of education , and I would say , the education for tollerance , is not less important as it was pointed out by my colleagues .
From this education all the EU citizens would benefit , it would be an education for tollerance as stimulating factor of Roma integration , interaction and social relation in the European Union .
Their development would make Roma social integration easier and on the other hand it would limit the stigmatization and discrimination against them .
Consequently , I ask the Commission to inform us on the existence of such programmes and the implementation thereof , but especially on wether it intends to consider this issue when drawing up further European policies on Roma .
Thank you and I hope that this debate would result into firm and concrete decisions to improve the European policies on Roma .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , many thanks for your reply , which met us half-way in at least some points .
You have to understand that we are impatient with regard to these issues because the latest incidents have again shown how pressing the problem is .
Firstly , with regard to the Roma forum : approval from our side .
I believe it is a good idea , particularly with the involvement of the Roma themselves .
It is important , however , to act quickly because I am afraid that , now that the proposal has been made , it will simply be discussed to death and there will be too much dithering .
I believe the Roma forum should be set up as quickly as possible , within the current year .
Parliament will certainly provide assistance .
Secondly , it is also important , of course , to engage the local authorities , because governments are often well-intentioned and make promises , but then the problem ends up with the Mayor or somewhere else in the region and is not actually dealt with .
Thirdly , many thanks for your undertaking regarding the proposals for equal treatment beyond the workplace .
This is an important subject generally , which my Group very much supports .
But for all that , Commissioner , I should like to say on behalf of my Group that these interdisciplinary groups - we are all familiar with them from our own administrations - are all arduous and helpful .
In our view it would be important for there to be one Commissioner responsible for coordinating the subject area , or for there to be at least one authorised representative among the Commissioners whose task it is to carry it through .
I still do not know why the Romanian Commissioner has the job that he has .
If he were at least able to attend to it , this would help .
I don 't know .
But we would like to see these matters given great priority .
Things are moving in the right direction .
Thank you , Commissioner , for your report , but a bit more force and a bit more pace would be of great value in the interest of the Roma .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , although this debate has been prompted by oral questions to the Commission , in substance it is the natural continuation of an initiative that Parliament undertook some time ago and which it has recently been emphasising .
It is clear that we need an action plan to improve the situation of the Roma , given this minority 's poor integration into the social and civil framework of the countries of the European Union .
The transnational nature of the Roma , which is one of their special characteristics , gives rise to a requirement , which I personally support , to prepare a European strategy so that they can escape from the worrying degrading conditions in which they live , in many cases bordering on the inhuman , which without doubt is the effect of social exclusion and the trigger for resulting , varied adverse consequences : from alienation from the host country to degeneration into violence , either as a perpetrator or a victim .
As well as guidelines that may help local and national authorities to stem the numbers of Member State minorities descending into social hardship , it is necessary to have adequate funds to back up the actions to be taken .
It is not , however , just a funding problem .
The true goal is to bring about equal access to work , education , housing , health , social services and the environment needed to exercise civil rights , starting with decision-making processes . All this involves an integrated approach to combining actions to achieve these goals .
This is why I am personally opposed to giving responsibility for the Roma issue to a single European Commissioner .
Two years after the launch of the Decade of Roma Inclusion ( 2005-2015 ) there are still a great many commitments that the governments who supported them have yet to get started and fulfil .
What initiatives is the Commission intending to take on this issue ?
I hope that they will begin as soon as possible , straight after the European Year of Equal Opportunities for All , in this European Year of Intercultural Dialogue .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , the current situation of the Roma forces me to begin with a criticism , which is that the European Commission has been slow and lazy in dealing with Roma issues in Europe .
Just look at the Council of Europe and the OSCE , which for the past two decades have had offices fully dedicated to Roma issues .
The Council of Europe has produced many specific recommendations on the Roma , and the OSCE has developed its action plan on improving the situation of the Roma in the OSCE area .
I wonder how much attention the Commission and EU Member States has devoted to those documents , and whether they took seriously the joint EP resolution on the Roma , or the Decade of Roma Inclusion action plans .
However , simply criticising is not my political style , and Ms Ferrero-Waldner has given me some cause for optimism .
I would therefore ask the Commissioner to please share the following message with President Barroso and the college when you meet .
First , a European Roma strategy should be created as soon as possible and should primarily focus on improving the living conditions of the Roma in Europe , creating jobs for the almost 90 % of Roma who are jobless , combating anti-gypsyism , supporting the education of Roma , bringing health into Roma houses and promoting Roma political inclusion .
Second , to facilitate such a strategy , the European Commission needs a permanent Roma unit , hiring Roma staff to serve that body .
I sincerely hope that the Commission will hire Roma staff on the basis of their skills , rather than their skin , as some Member States have done in the past .
Third , a special European fund for Roma projects should be a priority for the European Commission .
The European Parliament should , of course , also make a contribution towards the joint European ' union of works ' to improve the situation of the Roma .
I would like at this juncture to raise again the proposal to have a permanent EP rapporteur on Roma issues , who could give a good overview and make recommendations to this House , other EU institutions and the Member States .
Furthermore , I would like to hear the voice of the Roma more loudly in this House .
Their interests should be represented by their MEPs .
Finally , I would underline that the European Roma strategy should express common political values when it comes to the future enlargement process and the fight against ultra-nationalism and the extreme right in Europe .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the Commissioner for what she has said and for the commitments she has made , which also seem to me to be in line with what the European Parliament has said on many occasions in its resolutions , but these promises to act are not enough in themselves .
I would like to ask what tools the Commission uses and what it can tell us about the use of the funds which , under various expenditure headings , have to date been made available to Member States for Roma inclusion .
Secondly , what checks is it making on the concrete implementation at national level of the directives adopted ?
Thirdly , I join with those asking that there be a single figure within the Commission handling all issues relating to the Roma .
To turn to my country , I must stress that we face a very strong wave of racism and stigmatisation , chiefly towards the Roma , particularly since Italy has not fully transposed Directive 43 / 2000 / EC against ethnic discrimination .
What measures does the Commission intend to take with regard to this ?
Italian law has not transposed the concept of racial harassment , the issue of the sharing of the burden of proof or protection from abuse suffered as a result of racial discrimination .
Further , I ask the Commission if it knows that in one major Italian municipality - namely Milan - migrant children , who in this case are mainly Roma , whose parents are not in a regular position with the law and do not have a residence permit , cannot attend state schools .
This seems to me to run completely counter to all the EU 's documents , to contradict the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union and also the resolution we adopted this morning on the rights of the child .
Finally , I would like to point out that the Italian Government is discussing the nth decree-law on an issue which is in fact really to do with the Roma , and that is whether it is possible to include a reference to economic ends among the grounds that may be given to justify the removal of a citizen of another Member State from the country , in this case from Italy .
Behind the general issue of immigration , this decree is in fact directed specifically at the Roma .
I would like to know your views .
( BG ) Distinguished colleagues , I , too , take the floor so that it can be heard , finally , in this Chamber , how things really stand and so that the hypocritical statements can stop , at least for a while .
What can we gather from the discussion so far ?
We gather that you are concerned for the gypsy population in Europe , which includes also my homeland , Bulgaria .
I can 't even venture to imagine that right now you are concerned by the extremely low pensions of retirees in Bulgaria or for the honest , hard-working Bulgarians who become victims of gypsy crime on a daily basis .
Distinguished MEPs , do show some concern for the fact that the Bulgarian Socialist Party buys gypsy votes on a regular basis during elections in Bulgaria .
Do care that the coalition partner of Bulgarian Socialists , the Movement for Rights and Liberties , represented here in the ALDE group , buys all the remaining votes .
Also cast by gypsies .
Do care that the chairman of the Movement for Rights and Liberties , Ahmed Doghan , calls the buying of votes , of gypsy votes , ' a normal European practice ' .
Do show some concern for the fact that , in Bulgaria , the gypsy population stands at 3-4 % , while the crimes committed by them account for 30-40 % of all criminal offences . And these are not only crimes of poverty , committed because of poverty .
These are extremely shameless and brutal crimes . Because the rape and murder of a 79-year old woman is not a crime of poverty .
You do agree , don 't you ?
The huge amounts of money allocated , it is obvious , do not work .
This funding does not work because this money disappears in dubious foundations and non-government organisations .
In our opinion , that of the patriots from Ataka , the solution of this problem is in abiding by the all the laws in each single country .
Abiding by the law , with no tolerance for a specific minority , will bring success .
Because in Bulgaria crimes committed by gypsies are not investigated in detail . That is a fact .
A fact , and you can see it for yourselves .
The murder of the teenage Belneyski sisters was not investigated .
It was covered up .
These issues should cause our concern . Because tolerating a particular minority at the expense of the majority will not bring any success but the opposite of success .
Thank you for your attention .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I was delighted to listen to the words of Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner , and I was delighted by the initiatives that can be expected to take place in future .
I feel that this really will help the situation of the Roma substantially , but I must agree with my Dutch fellow Member , who has expressed her impatience .
I am impatient too , along with many others , because the situation really is changing very slowly .
There are 7-9 million Roma living in Europe , most of them in poor social circumstances , and they fight the same problems as they have for years : the problems of exclusion and inclusion , the lack of employment , the question of school segregation and multiple discrimination against Roma women .
The majority of Member States do not regard the Roma as a minority of their country , they do not want to make substantial changes to their situation , and indeed the experiences of the past few years have shown instead a reinforcement of radicalism and anti-gipsyism in both the new and old Member States .
I therefore feel that there is no more time to waste , and we need real changes and a harmonised European Roma policy .
Without a European Roma policy there is no national Roma policy ; we have to understand and confront this .
It would be good if we took steps so that the transnational minority status of the Roma is recognised , since it really is a special status .
The European Parliament and , within this , the Socialist Group , has already launched the action plan , and in March we will be doing a tour of Europe and arranging conferences , workshops and visits with the involvement of local Roma , NGOs and governments in order to expose cases of discrimination , and we will draw the attention of European public opinion to the unhappy situation of the Roma and try to remedy it .
Thank you very much .
Mr President , Roma are neither the successors of the ancient Roman Empire , nor the contemporary inhabitants of Rome .
They are neither a nation without a state nor a national minority .
They are an ethnocultural community , still cherishing its tribal tradition , and a pan-European community which was kept in slavery in pre-modern and early modern Europe , which was sent to extermination camps by the Fascist regimes and enclosed in the states turned into prisons by the Communist dictatorship .
They became free European citizens after the end of the Cold War and the first post-bipolar European Union enlargement .
Being marginalised and excluded over the centuries , the Roma community found itself excluded from European wealth and tried to protect itself by challenging the European order .
Today , now that Europe is reconciled with itself , should it be reconciled with the Roma population as well , or should it declare and treat the Roma as second-class citizens who are again to be concentrated in some Member States transformed into Roma ghettos ?
To these questions there is a single answer : the Roma issue is a European issue .
It is not a simple issue but a huge challenge - a common challenge which we must cope with jointly .
Otherwise we will be unable to integrate the Roma community into European society and bring it into the European order .
This is a cultural and social matter .
The European Union should mobilise funds , develop programmes and organise specific institutional structures in order to assist the national authorities of the countries where the Roma choose to settle in order to offer this community a decent material life , a proper education , a fair opportunity to compete with others , free of any discrimination , and a cohesive sense of their existence within European civilisation .
We expect the European Commission to take the right steps in that direction and to keep the European Parliament fully informed on the progress achieved .
( SV ) Mr President , Commissioner , when we discuss the Lisbon Strategy in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , we talk about high growth , a high level of employment , good social conditions , good health care , and one of the things we also say is that the education system and development of skills must be a driving force in achieving these goals .
When we transpose this , all these aims , to the Roma minority in Europe , we find astonishingly high unemployment .
We find social conditions which are not particularly good , health care which is not particularly good , poor housing conditions , a segregated society for them , and even an education system which is segregated .
There are special education provisions for Roma people which do not give them the right to an adequate education .
Yet the Lisbon Strategy is there for everyone .
You had a number of good proposals .
We support them , but it is important that the strategy is followed up by a plan of action .
It is important that we have mainstreaming , but at the same time there must be coordination within the Commission .
It is important that we review our funds so that they take account of the Roma minority .
It is important , when we draw up strategies in the fields of employment and education and in other fields , that we always consider the situation of the Roma so that they are integrated in different strategies .
( HU ) Mr President , the European Union does not have a minority policy for Roma , nor for traditional national minorities , nor for migrant minorities .
I include the Roma among traditional national minorities , but at the same time , because of their specific socially disadvantaged situation , they must still be treated as a separate category .
I am delighted that , as the living conscience of the European Parliament , the two Hungarian Members of Roma descent , Mrs Járóka and Mrs Mohácsi , amongst others , have raised this question , because we rightly condemned the events in Italy in November .
It is right that we should continuously return to this question .
What is the duty of the European Union ?
I am delighted with what Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner has said .
The European Union also has a duty , but it must make a distinction between what is the competence of a Member State and what is the competence of the European Union .
I also agree fully with Mr Swoboda , who is no longer here , not because of the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy , but because he is right , namely in that it is decided at local level whether or not something will succeed .
Specifically , the Member State must be given a national action programme .
I am proud that we prepared Europe 's first medium-term Roma programme under my government department .
Money must be given to the Member State , but everything be decided at local level .
What can the EU do ?
It should monitor what the Member States are doing and it should provide a ' best practice ' method for the best solution .
It is not only a matter of money , but also of whether there are any qualified experts from the majority and Roma society who want to take this matter further .
The future of Europe depends on minorities .
- ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to reject the criticism that Commissioner Špidla is too lazy to attend to this problem .
I do not think this is the right way to conduct discussions in the House .
It is important that we concentrate on improving educational provision for young Roma people .
We are all familiar with the system of compulsory education and I believe that language and literacy , and numeracy skills - quite simply , things that are necessary for a good life - should be made compulsory .
On the other hand , I do understand that not everyone wants to be integrated , of course .
Of course we do have to offer initiatives to all those who do not wish to integrate into our society .
I believe the concept of an open approach to these problems is the main solution for the future .
Mr President , this debate has highlighted a number of the problems which the subject we are debating raises .
It seems to me , Commissioner , that rather than us devising a strategy and telling others what to do , it would perhaps be wise to ask representatives of the Roma community .
We currently have two Roma MEPs .
I remember , too , a very famous Spanish Socialist Member of this House , elected in 1989 , who was particularly engaging and informative on the whole question of Roma culture .
That culture is part of our culture and part of European civilisation , and reflects what kind of a people we are .
It would perhaps be wise to look at the history of the Roma people , to speak with representatives of the Roma culture and to ask them how we can best further their prospects , rather than telling them how they can integrate into our society and how we can best accommodate their social needs .
Member of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mr President , may I sum up once again : it was an extremely interesting debate and we all very clearly see the need to respond to this .
I understand , of course , that you all want the fastest possible response .
I should tell you that there is also a directive , Directive 2000 / 43 / EC , which already guarantees the application of the principle of equal treatment , with no differentiation between race or ethnic origin in the employment , social , and educational sectors and in access to and supply of goods and services , which also applies to the Roma .
I believe this is also fundamental here .
This directive also makes positive measures possible in the Member States .
However , it is true that the Member States are not obliged to incorporate these measures into their national legislative provisions .
The European regulations do have to be applied , however , and I should say that we at the Commission have made the firm decision to ensure that they are implemented .
The Commission has in fact initiated infringement procedures in the past year against 22 Member States that have not implemented the European regulations properly , including Italy , Mr Agnoletto .
As regards the integration of people in the job market , the European Social Fund is also our most important instrument for this .
A substantial proportion of the measures targeted to improving the employability of the Roma can be co-financed by the European Social Fund .
Between 2000 and 2006 , approximately 275 million euros , for example , were earmarked for projects targeted specifically at integrating the Roma .
The high-level group of experts on the integration of ethnic minorities has pointed out that certain projects supported by the ESF , such as the Acceder programme in Spain , for instance , are excellent models of active integration of the Roma .
I should therefore like to renew an urgent appeal to the individual states to make use of this opportunity .
I agree with Mr Swoboda that it is not just the bodies of the nation states , of course , that play an important role here , but also often local organisations , of course .
As we all know , the social exclusion of the Roma is a complex phenomenon and a consistent approach covering all the important aspects of their lives is therefore needed to tackle it .
This includes education , employment , health , housing and infrastructure .
This approach requires efficient coordination at the level of the European institutions .
I am convinced that real progress will be made over the next year with the help of these measures .
I have , of course , heard that many of you - not all - would like a certain Commissioner to take on this subject and I shall , of course , convey this to my colleague , Mr Špidla .
But there is a wide variety of different subjects involved here and the most important thing , therefore , is effective coordination .
You can certainly talk to Mr Špidla once again about the other issue .
I should like very briefly to single out a few items that were raised specifically during the debate .
These included the question of how dialogue with civil society and also with the Roma themselves is going .
I believe that dialogue such as this - and specifically on the course of action for the Roma and their children - is very important for guaranteeing the principle of non-discrimination on the one hand , and combating unemployment and promoting the social development of the regions in which the Roma live on the other hand , as well as toppling the barriers found mainly in the heads of the majority so that the Roma are recognised as a genuine part of this European culture .
I am in agreement here with all those who have raised this issue .
I myself - and all those who know me know that this is perhaps a kind of hobby of mine outside politics - have always advocated human rights education .
It is an education in tolerance .
I can only say that I shall therefore certainly be including the issue of human rights education , which I regard as hugely important , in these guidelines .
Mrs de Groen-Kouwenhoven , I have to say here that the Commission is perhaps slow , but certainly not lazy .
When you see that the European Council and in particular the OSCE have set up numerous programmes , mainly with the support of the European Commission , then you become aware that to all intents and purposes there are some very positive approaches to this .
My final comment applies to the issue of the trans-national minority .
Here I would simply like to say that consideration should be given to the fact that the European Union does not have the authority to define minorities in the Member States themselves .
You also know that it should be borne in mind in this context that social policy measures are not geared to ethnic origin , but always to individual needs .
But as you know , the Member States in particular have a very different idea of what a minority is and how a minority is defined .
This issue can therefore still not be resolved very quickly .
In other respects , I am happy to pass on your comments .
You will certainly be receiving guidelines on this soon .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 31 January 2008 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - It is clear the Roma is a neglected minority in the European Union ; we cannot allow this to continue .
I fully support my colleagues in calling for the Commission to take more action on this issue .
We have a situation whereby there exists a group that is considered the largest ethnic minority group in the EU , living in less than substandard conditions , that we have difficulty in protecting and aiding .
Concrete and swift action from the Commission to assist the integration of the Roma community in all aspects of society , be it economic , social or political , is desperately needed .
The EU needs to take the lead on this problem .
A more effective EU policy for the South Caucasus - A Black Sea Regional Policy Approach ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
the report by Lydie Polfer , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on a more effective EU policy for the South Caucasus : from promises to actions , and
the report by Roberta Alma Anastase , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on a Black Sea Regional Policy Approach
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , I would like to thank the members of the Committee on International Trade , and above all my colleagues in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , who have actively contributed to shaping this report , which we wanted to be balanced , and which in the end was adopted unanimously .
Yes , there is great interest in the three countries in the Caucasus .
Armenia , Azerbaijan and Georgia , all three of which came out of the collapse of the USSR , are still suffering from the legacy of those times today , especially through the unresolved conflicts in Nagorno-Karabakh , Abkhazia and Ossetia , which are poisoning the atmosphere between them and their neighbours and have set off a damaging arms race .
Nevertheless , these three countries chose to adopt European values , in the 1980s , by becoming members of the Council of Europe and , later , by signing partnership and cooperation agreements with the European Union .
Their geographical proximity and situation as a transit area between Iran , Turkey , Russia , the Caspian Sea and the Black Sea mean that we have an interest in helping these countries to strengthen democracy and the rule of law in this region and to set up a viable framework for regional cooperation and development that permits political stability .
This is particularly important because these countries , though they have experienced strong growth , still have high levels of poverty and unemployment .
We have analysed the possibilities for taking action in different sections that I will briefly summarise .
Firstly , within the framework of the European Neighbourhood Policy , we have insisted upon a differentiated approach based on individual merits , while making regional cooperation a key objective .
We are asking the Commission to extend these contacts with civil society , and we particularly support the initiative of undertaking a feasibility study on a free-trade agreement with Georgia and Armenia and of supporting Azerbaijan in its process of accession to the WTO .
Democracy , human rights and the rule of law are obviously a fundamental part of this and we commend the efforts made by Armenia following the constitutional reform , but we encourage it to continue with the establishment of an independent judiciary and civil service .
Regarding Azerbaijan , although we are concerned by the deterioration of the human rights situation and media freedom , on the other hand we commend the presidential pardon that has enabled several journalists to be released , and we ask for an investigation into allegations of police violence .
As for Georgia , which has undertaken wide-ranging reforms since 2003 and experienced the turbulence we know about , we are pleased that the presidential elections went off peacefully , but the very tense climate and allegations of human rights abuses lead us to ask the authorities to set up an inquiry into the complaints lodged , without delay .
We also ask the opposition forces to behave responsibly and respect the election .
To sum up , we are asking these three countries to guarantee freedom of expression , freedom of assembly and freedom of the media as well as fair and honest access to the media for the opposition , and we are asking them to step up the fight against corruption and establish a favourable investment climate .
As regards the negotiations to come up with procedures for granting visas to Georgia , we can only recommend the Commission and the Council to launch them in view of what is happening in Abkhazia and Ossetia .
As for the peaceful settlement of the conflicts , this is obviously the condition sine qua non for lasting stability in the region .
We have dealt with this , I believe , in a balanced way .
I will not go over it again in detail ; I will simply mention - as we pointed out - that the contradiction between the principle of self-determination and territorial integrity has up to now contributed to the perpetuation of the conflicts in the region , and that this problem can be overcome only through negotiations on the basis of the UN Charter and the Helsinki Final Act .
Let us hope that the latest proposals from the Minsk Group will help to bridge these rifts .
This would be the best present for the hundreds of thousands of refugees and displaced persons who are suffering cruelly from this situation .
Finally , as regards cooperation on energy and transport , although it is clear that the new initiatives increase the possibilities for openness , it is becoming increasingly evident that Armenia 's isolation is only worsening .
In conclusion , I would like to recall that the sole objective of this report is to show our sincere interest in the South Caucasus region , its inhabitants , their history , their goals and their hopes , and that we would like to get to know them better so we can better help them to achieve them .
Rapporteur . - ( RO ) A year ago , in January 2007 , in this very room , we were celebrating Romania and Bulgaria 's accession .
We were reflecting then on the new opportunities available both to the two new Member States and to the European Union as a whole .
Active and consistent involvement in the Black Sea region , along with the development of a genuine regional cooperation policy , comparable to those related to the Mediterranean and the Northern Dimension , were necessary and obvious requirements .
Now , in January 2008 , as rapporteur for Black Sea Cooperation , I have the privilege of opening this plenary debate to discuss Parliament 's recommendations on developing synergy in the Black Sea area , proposed in April by the European Commission .
These recommendations are the result of a broad process of reflection and consultation with all interested colleagues as well as independent experts and civil servants .
The report emphasises the strategic importance of the Black Sea to the European Union while defining with extreme clarity the objective of the cooperation policy in this area : creating a common space of security , democracy and prosperity .
The report stresses the importance of regional cooperation in mobilizing ten adjoining countries towards dialogue and joint action , bringing together their diversity and their enormous potential , which we cannot ignore .
Consequently , a primary responsibility for the European Union is to take the lead in promoting active regional cooperation in the Black Sea region .
The key question that this report attempts to answer is the following : how can we strengthen and effectively implement the European policy of regional cooperation in the Black Sea region in order to achieve the objective of creating a common space of security , democracy and prosperity ?
First of all , we need firm , coherent , and results-driven action on the part of the European Union .
In this regard , the report identifies three fundamental issues : mobilizing all the relevant financial instruments , enhanced cooperation with other institutions and bodies in the area , and , not least , monitoring actions to ensure their continuity and effectiveness , and devising an action plan .
The report also recommends that the European Union should focus on five priority areas .
The Black Sea region arguably is of strategic importance for the security and diversification of energy supply in the European Union and requires a comprehensive approach with that in mind .
However , it is imperative that the European Union should not confine itself to economic cooperation , but rather aim to create a region where stability , democracy and good governance prevail .
The EU 's Black Sea policy will only be complete when the European Union commits to resolving existing conflicts , and civil society development , personal contact and good relations between neighbours are essential in this regard .
Since we are also discussing Mrs Polfer 's report on the South Caucasus , and countries in that region are part of the wider Black Sea area , I welcome the drafting of this report .
It is important that the two reports concur in their main ideas and in stressing the importance of cooperation and dialogue among all States as a premise for development and prosperity , as well as in stressing the need for consistent involvement on the part of the European Union .
In conclusion , I would like to thank all the contributors to the report on Black Sea synergy .
I appreciate the cooperation and unanimous support of my colleagues from all groups .
I hope that the same spirit will guide the European Union and the Black Sea countries in their joint effort to develop regional cooperation in this area .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , may I say that I will be slightly longer , because I am answering on two reports .
They are two excellent reports that bring to our agenda today , on the one hand , the complex area of the neighbourhood policy and , on the other hand , the question of the Black Sea region .
Reading the reports has indeed reinforced my conviction that , while bilateral differentiated relations remain the cornerstone of the European neighbourhood policy ( ENP ) , many of the challenges and opportunities before us require , I think , a response at subregional or regional level , as we have already said .
Now let me speak first on the South Caucasus region .
We concur with most of the opinions contained in the very good report on the South Caucasus .
The inclusion of Armenia , Azerbaijan and Georgia in our neighbourhood policy will , step by step , bring all three of them closer to the European Union on the basis of shared European values .
The Commission will publish in spring its progress reports on the implementation of the three ENP action plans , providing an update on the current state of play in our joint undertaking .
We know that much remains to be done .
Compliance with democracy , human rights and the rule of law is still fragile and needs improvement .
Today , for instance , I had an exchange of views about these countries with Mr Hammarberg , Commissioner for Human Rights at the Council of Europe .
We remain concerned about human rights and media freedom in Azerbaijan .
Recent political events in Georgia show that the freedom of expression of political views through the media is essential for stability and , for instance , despite progress in Armenia , further efforts are needed to fight corruption and fully comply with human rights standards .
Notwithstanding rapid economic growth , poverty is still widespread in the region and we continue to promote economic reforms , steps to improve the business climate but also to strengthen the rule of law .
And I also agree with the need stressed in Ms Polfer 's report for more regional cooperation activities , in particular in the areas of energy , transport and the environment .
It is our hope that the European Union will be able to take a more courageous and more proactive stance in supporting conflict settlement in the region .
As mentioned in the recent ENP communication , the European Union could provide even more help by working around the conflict issues by tackling the underlying causes and , indeed , by building trust on both sides of the boundary lines .
As stressed in the report , concrete steps undertaken by the Commission to spread aid and information can at least serve these purposes .
Addressing the challenges I have briefly described remains , therefore , a main priority of my Commission for the South Caucasus in the coming months .
To do this , we will continue to employ the whole range of appropriate EU financial assistance programmes .
The upgrading of our delegation in Armenia and the opening of a delegation in Azerbaijan in early 2008 will certainly also allow us to increase visibility and operate more efficiently .
Let me make a special comment on the present presidential elections in Georgia .
As you know , the international election observation mission , to which the European Parliament has contributed , has confirmed that the elections were , overall , in line with OSCE and Council of Europe standards .
However , the international election observation mission has identified several irregularities and shortcomings .
And the most urgent task now is to address these problems : to investigate all electoral complaints and to create the proper conditions for the upcoming legislative elections .
We stand ready to continue supporting Georgia in carrying out these duties in a speedy and in a thorough way .
Regarding the Black Sea , I find myself in agreement with much of the report on a Black Sea regional policy approach as well .
It provides valuable political impetus for our April communication on Black Sea synergy and I think it is significant that , after the Council conclusions last May and the present discussion in the European Parliament , all the key EU institutions will have reaffirmed the need to implement a regional and a comprehensive approach to our policies applied in the Black Sea region .
The timing of Parliament 's report is very appropriate .
As a result of our initiative , EU foreign ministers will meet in less than one month 's time in Kiev with their Black Sea counterparts at a Black Sea synergy meeting .
I will , of course , personally attend this meeting .
International and Black Sea regional organisations will also participate and we look forward to discussions that would welcome and endorse increased EU support to Black Sea regional cooperation and determine the priority areas for coordinated action .
Let me mention just a few of those .
The Commission promotes a Black Sea dialogue on energy security , making use of the INOGATE structure .
We continue to encourage legal and regulatory harmonisation through the Baku process .
Our intention is to carry on working closely with our partners in the construction of new energy infrastructure , developing a trans-Black Sea energy corridor .
And Black Sea cooperation will improve coordination between TRACECA , the pan-European transport access programme , and the transport programmes of our partners .
We are also about to initiate a regional dialogue on Black Sea maritime policies and the establishment of regional fisheries coordination .
The Commission is working on strengthening the Black Sea-Danube connection and we intend to join the Black Sea Commission , which deals with environmental tasks .
So the Commission has been developing some proposals for regional schemes to combat climate change and we have also begun the implementation of our Black Sea cross-border cooperation programme focusing on civil society and on local authorities .
There are a number of proposals under discussion with our Black Sea partners in the areas of the fight against organised crime , trade and culture , and we have developed contacts with Black Sea regional organisations , notably with the Organisation of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation .
Concerning the funding for Black Sea synergy , cofinancing will be the main rule .
The European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument will certainly be at the heart of the EU 's financial contribution , but other EU instruments , including thematic ones and the Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance , in the case of Turkey , will be used as well .
The Kiev ministerial meeting will provide a forum to discuss and bring forward and coordinate EU initiatives with ideas coming from our partners .
And it is our expectation that the Black Sea regional context will open up a new space for cooperation based on equal partnership with all eastern ENP countries and important partners like Russia and Turkey .
Our engagement in the Black Sea region can develop into a long-term endeavour with clear potential to enhance stability , progress and prosperity in the whole region , and Parliament 's support is extremely important for that success .
rapporteur for the opinion of INTA . - ( BG ) Madam President , Madam Commissioner , colleagues , the Committee on International Trade congratulates the European Commission and the rapporteur on their timeliness and on their balanced approach to the Black Sea and the region .
The Black Sea is a border of the European Union , a geostrategic crossroad and a transit region , an area of cooperation trade , fishing , tourism , shipping , a strategic area in the European energy policy .
The Committee on International Trade calls for a better coordination of cooperation through a separate Black Sea strategy and brings to attention the participation of the Union in infrastructural projects related to the transmission of energy resources .
It is important to promote investment in environmental protection , risk prevention , disaster recovery and rescue operations in case of accidents such as the Kerch Strait ones and the shipwreck of the Bulgarian vessel Vanessa .
To ensure open procedures and high standards in the region , the European Parliament needs to list the Bourgas - Alexandroupolis oil pipeline , together with the rest of the gas and oil transmission networks , since it involves European Union Member States .
Congratulations to the European Union on the responsibility with which it addresses ' the Black Sea challenge ' and the responsibility for the people who live in this region .
Firstly , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Polfer , for a very precise analysis of the problems of such a sensitive region as the South Caucasus as well as the proposals and measures presented , which we are considering today .
Traditionally , EU policies in the South Caucasus region mostly evaluate the energy and transport aspects in economic terms .
I would like to draw your attention more to the significance of effective EU trade policy in this region , because it enables the economy to be restructured more quickly , business to be developed and the poverty rate to be reduced , whereas countries do not always find energy projects helpful .
When talking about effective EU policies , which is very important in the South Caucasus region , I would like to emphasise two points .
Firstly , we still await the Commission 's feasibility study evaluating free-trade agreements with both Armenia and Georgia that are as broad as possible and we also encourage the Commission and the Council to implement measures that would help the countries of the South Caucasus to benefit as much as possible from the Generalised System of Preferences .
Rapporteur for the opinion , Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - ( RO ) Through the accession of Romania and Bulgaria , the Union has become a major player in the Black Sea area .
The region has geostrategic importance for the Union 's security and diversification of energy supply , due to its closeness to the Caspian Sea , the Middle East and Central Asia .
The Union 's principles cannot be promoted solely on the basis of political values .
It is necessary to foster open , transparent markets in the region .
The ITRE committee stresses the importance of the Nabucco project for the diversification of supply , and calls on the Member States to ensure its implementation , together with their partners .
We welcome the appointment of a coordinator for this priority project of European interest .
In order to ensure international trade and the transport of oil and gas in the area , it is essential to develop the infrastructure of community ports on the Black Sea coast and the Danube .
The ITRE committee deplores the lack of coordination of investment in energy , transport and tourism projects in the area and draws attention to the risk of pollution in the Black Sea .
While acknowledging the importance of the Black Sea Forum and the Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organisation , the ITRE committee recommends that a European dimension be established for the Black Sea , based on the model of the Northern Dimension .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , we cannot discuss the South Caucasus without thinking of our former fellow Member Ursula Schleicher , who cared about this region in a special way and to whom we are grateful for the fact that the colonialist expression ' Transcaucasus ' has been replaced by the term ' South Caucasus ' .
The region comprises three very different countries with ancient cultures , which have nevertheless suffered in the recent past under colonialism and neo-colonialism .
We must therefore approach this region with great sensitivity .
Armenians in Western Armenia were victims of genocide , which means that even today , Turkey thinks of the Armenia of today - that is , Eastern Armenia - in terms of an unacceptable blockade .
Georgia was a colony of Russia and the Soviet Union in a particular way , which means that today separatist powers in Georgia are still being used and abused by Moscow in order to destabilise this country .
Azerbaijan is in a similar situation .
For all these reasons , we in the European Union must have a strong role in this region , as this was once a region where , for once , it was not us Europeans who were spearheading misguided developments , but others .
We therefore have a unique opportunity to mediate , democratise and stabilise here and we must reconcile conflicting principles and interests . These naturally include stable borders , but also the peoples ' right of self-determination .
We have to support the rights of minorities to the fullest extent possible , but at the same time prevent destructive separatism .
We have to preserve commodity interests and geopolitical interests , but at the same time we must see that these are not colonies , but partners , with their own interests and their own dignity and deserve to have their dignity acknowledged at last .
Therefore , the Polfer report does justice to this difficult challenge in a distinguished manner and I also thank the Commissioner for the enormous effort she is making on behalf of this region .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , the South Caucasus is a region of utmost importance , not only for the European Union , but for most of the global players .
I believe that the European Union should define its interests in the region .
Basically , those interests consist in having a peaceful and stable place in the South Caucasus , in having a large enough free and integrated market , in having an open area for the safe transit of strategic merchandise , and in having institutions and legislation that are interoperable with European Union ones .
In order to promote our interest , the European Union should develop appropriate nuanced and specific bilateral relations with the Member States of the region .
The substance of the bilateral relations should result from our regional strategic approach , and not the other way round .
Since we cannot offer the South Caucasus countries European Union membership , we must offer them the European Union model and assist them , in a substantial way , to enhance it .
The European Union should not hesitate to use all its means in order to reach its regional goals in South Caucasus .
At the same time we must acknowledge that the other international operators have an interest in the region and we have acknowledged the fact that the European Union could not possibly move its priorities without cooperation with the other global actors .
Some of the unsolved conflicts in the area are , in fact , part of a broader coherent problem which is linked to the post-Soviet status of Russia .
Therefore , the European Union should courageously address that problem and try to find a negotiated solution concerning the way in which Russia , the European Union and other global players must share responsibilities for guaranteeing the sustainable regional and global stability and security .
On the other hand , we must admit that principles of territorial integrity and self-determination are clashing in the South Caucasus .
My opinion is that one could overcome this clash of principles by combining regional integration following the European Union communitarian model with an appropriate use of the internal self-determination , devolution and autonomy .
This would require good-faith negotiations , political will , a pragmatic spirit and respect for international law provisions .
It is the right time for the European Union to pass from promises to action in the South Caucasus .
I hope that this will indeed happen .
Madam President , I wish to refer to the previous speaker 's concluding words .
What this is about is making transport routes for gas and oil through the Black Sea a reality .
All of us in the European Union say that these are strategic projects , and the Nabucco project is a strategic project .
We have been saying this for years , only nothing is ever done about it .
The question is this : why , if there are such difficulties , can we not make use of some fund or other , as was done with the Galileo project , to turn this project into a reality ?
If no practical and visible moves are made in this regard , the Russians will soon build their own gas pipelines through the Black Sea , and the result will be that our extensive programme of diversification of transport routes all comes tumbling down .
This is also about something else .
That something else is Europe obtaining supplies from the whole Caspian Sea region .
Azerbaijan alone can supply Europe for five years with one third of the gas that Europe currently takes from Russia , but there is also Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan .
However , in order to run gas pipelines from those territories that do not pass through Russian territory , we would need to resolve the problem of the status of the Caspian Sea ; in other words we would have to make a final decision on whether it should be treated as a lake or as a sea .
A much more sensible and helpful way forward would appear to be to go for general recognition that the Caspian Sea is a sea , because that would make it very much easier to build gas pipelines or other pipelines through its waters , be it from Turkmenistan or from Kazakhstan .
In this connection , then , may I urge the European Union authorities to cease the continual reiteration of the statement that the Nabucco problem and the Odessa-Brody-Gdańsk pipeline problem are important problems for the European Union .
We need to start acting , or else others will get in there before us .
Madam President , I too would like to congratulate Mrs Polfer on drawing up this excellent report .
Our discussion today is on the subject of a region that is of particular importance to the whole of the European Union , a region that is of unusual significance with respect to EU energy security .
The title of the report - A more effective EU policy for South Caucasus : from promises to actions - bears clear witness that the European Union has been unusually passive in recent years where this region is concerned .
However , this is a region that is an arena for competition between the most important international players ; not only the European Union , but also Russia , the United States and China .
It is a region of uncommonly rapid economic growth .
Suffice it to say that in 2006 economic development in Azerbaijan exceeded 35 % .
This year , however , may be the watershed ; 2008 may be a year of crisis .
Let us not delude ourselves : the example of Kosovo may be used by Georgia 's northern neighbour as a pretext for infringing the territorial integrity of that country .
I hope , therefore , that the European Union will not allow Russia to support separatist strivings in Abkhazia and Ossetia .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , congratulations , first of all , to our two rapporteurs .
The report by Mrs Polfer comes just at the right time because , with the events in Georgia , we can see firsthand the difficulties of building democracy .
This report is balanced , and sets out the major geostrategic challenges of the South Caucasus .
It is important to remember that the neighbourhood policies commit us to supporting and accompanying these countries .
We have a political and moral responsibility towards them , but they also have one towards us , particularly as regards human rights and freedom of expression , as you pointed out , Commissioner .
For these three countries our support should also be more concerned with resolving the conflicts .
Currently , the EU is only managing them .
Without a political compromise between Armenia and Azerbaijan over Nagorno-Karabakh , without a peace plan between Georgia on the one hand and South Ossetia and Abkhazia on the other , these countries will not be able to restore relationships of trust or establish lasting stability between themselves and with their larger neighbours .
As regards supporting democracy , we are doing this every day .
Unfortunately , the events that shook Georgia pushed it into a political crisis that it has still not found a way out of , with the opposition taking to the streets to challenge the results of the first round of the presidential elections .
Of course , by responding to the call for the President to resign , Mr Saakashvili caught the opposition unawares , leaving it very little time to organise the elections .
Of course , this election campaign was not fair because two candidates were able to deploy considerably greater resources than the others .
Of course , the campaign was marred by allegations and revelations of the orchestration of a post-election coup d 'état by an opposition candidate , but nevertheless it should be noted that on election day - and we were there as observers - no major incidents were reported by the observers , and there had never been so many of them in such a small country to observe elections .
With the international community and national and international NGOs , we were able to witness the freedom of expression of citizens generally , even if many irregularities and much intimidation were noted , though nothing systematic .
In our conclusion , we stressed the obligation to continue the legal proceedings , to take all the complaints into consideration and not to consider the results definitive until all the disputes had been looked into , and dozens of polling stations were thus cancelled .
Today , however , the situation has not been settled at all , and we must continue to appeal to Georgia 's leaders , on all political sides , to resume and continue the dialogue ; we must appeal to the authorities to hear the opposition 's claims ; and we must appeal to the opposition , which gained credibility during these elections , to assume its share of the responsibility for suggesting compromises , because Georgia really needs to get back to where it was before , the place it occupied after the Rose Revolution , that of a country that has turned the page on violence and instability .
That is what Georgia 's people are demanding , and that is what they are also asking of the European Union today , and we must stick by them .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( EL ) Madam President , I would like to express our great unease about the developments emerging in this region inhabited by millions of workers of dozens of different nationalities .
These developments greatly endanger them because of the intensification of imperialist clashes between the United States of America , Russia and the European Union in relation to energy sources and control of markets and of transport routes for energy .
The rest is rhetoric .
Unfortunately , the expansion of ΝΑΤΟ to include countries in the region - and the impending affiliation of Ukraine and Georgia - are yet more factors contributing to destabilisation in the region .
Also contributing to instability are foreign bases and armies stationed in sensitive locations of intersection , as if preparing for serious new military conflicts .
The recent news that 3 000 US soldiers are expected to be based in the region of Burgas in Bulgaria , from where the new Burgas-Alexandroupolis oil pipeline starts , confirms all that we are saying and is a cause for great concern .
Similarly worrying is the information on preparations for the permanent presence of foreign naval forces in the Black Sea and the Caspian Sea from countries that do not belong to the region , such as the United States .
Commissioner , the impending independence of Kosovo , supported by the United States and the European Union , will open up a Pandora 's box for a whole series of similar issues in the region we are discussing : Abkhazia , South Ossetia , Crimea , Transdnestria and Nagorno-Karabakh , and other minority issues , whether already existing or heralded by disputes .
The policy of double standards that you are adopting will wreck the region and will give rise to further bloodshed .
You are merely pretending to be interested in the territorial integrity of Georgia and Azerbaijan .
As the European Union is interested only in finding ways to infiltrate the region , it is proposing the organisation of a ' three-plus-three ' conference on security and cooperation in the South Caucasus , involving participation by the three-plus-three states : the three of the South Caucasus plus the European Union , the United States and Russia .
This is really a proposal for the legalisation of the US presence .
We believe that you have no right to involve the peoples of Europe in opportunistic plans serving the interests of multinationals , which are making a fortune in a bid to pocket greater profits from the pumping of oil .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , the importance of the South Caucasus as an energy corridor for the European Union cannot be underestimated .
What will otherwise become of our objective of energy diversification ?
Thus , we are entirely in agreement with the line of Mrs Polfer 's report .
The analyst Vladimir Socor expressed this corridor function of the South Caucasus succinctly , saying that the Azerbaijan-Georgia-Turkey railway would break Russia 's monopoly on rail transport from Kazakhstan and other Central Asian states in the same way as pipelines through the South Caucasus eliminate Russia 's monopoly on the transport of oil and gas from Central Asia .
We can add to this the Azerbaijani energy supplies necessary to implement the Nabucco project .
If the European Union wants to draw maximum benefit from the South Caucasus as an energy corridor , it is above all essential for internal political stability to prevail in Georgia , Armenia and Azerbaijan .
Regrettably , there is no social consensus on this in these countries .
This presents the EU with a direct task .
The desirability of political stability also applies at regional level .
Brussels is entitled and obliged to engage Turkey , a candidate country , on this issue , as an outbreak of military confrontation in the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict is a very real possibility in the long run , given the quadrupling of Azerbaijani military capacity and the increasing external assistance Baku is currently receiving with this .
- ( PL ) Madam President , we are following the situation in the Caucasus with great concern and interest .
Armenia and Georgia are countries that are very close to Europe , not only geographically , but also in terms of civilisation .
I wish to express my support for all the democratic forces in these countries and for initiatives aimed at supporting democracy and economic development for the peoples of the Caucasus .
Stabilisation in this region is in the interests both of all countries in the region , and of their partners and neighbours , including European Union countries .
It is in our interests to support all the peoples of the region , not least in the spheres of human rights and freedom of the media .
I hope that the authorities in Armenia , Azerbaijan and Georgia will ensure freedom of speech and freedom of the media in the run-up to the elections that the region is looking forward to in 2008 .
In recent days Georgian citizens have had the opportunity to express their democratic will in Presidential elections .
Although President Saakashvili has come out on top in this plebiscite , I am disturbed by the large-scale protests from the opposition , which is trying to undermine the election result , and also by recent events in Georgia that ended in the brutal suppression of peaceful demonstrations , closure of independent media outlets and the introduction of a state of emergency .
I also wish to express my doubts concerning the deteriorating situation of human rights and freedom of the media in Azerbaijan .
Let us not forget the small and historic peoples of the Caucasus , the Abkhazians and Ossetians , whose right to self-determination should be taken into account in the framework of multilateral dialogue with the Georgian authorities .
Mutual understanding and dialogue are also required in the situation in Nagorno-Karabakh , where the independent aspirations of the Armenian section of society should be taken into account and reconciled with the expectations of the Azeri populace and nationality .
All sides should realise that their future and wellbeing depend on the potential to come to an understanding and build mutual relations based on peace and mutual trust .
( HU ) Thank you very much , Madam President .
We regularly dedicate attention to the situation and development of the South Caucasus region .
The gradual implementation of the document on interparliamentary cooperation and strengthening the ENP , and of the action plans , will result in positive development .
I would like to show all my appreciation to Mrs Polfer , who has done a good job of summarising and formulating concisely and resolutely these very complicated problems .
The report she has produced clearly sets out the objectives : building up the market economy , supporting economic development effectively and creating energy security , in addition to creating democracy , the rule of law , welfare and security .
Economic growth is faster from one year to the next , but it is true that the effect it should have on the economic and social conditions of the population still cannot be observed .
There needs to be an effective EU policy for strengthening the fragile democracy and ensuring genuine freedom of assembly , the media and speech .
The example of Georgia proves how important a role is played by regular dialogue between the authorities and civil society , or with the enemy .
The fundamental problem is creating political stability in a region bogged down by three conflicts .
In the meantime , we need to confront a factor that signifies permanent insecurity , namely the subversive endeavours of Russian superpower policy .
I am convinced that the EU must act more resolutely against Russia in this matter .
The problem of Nagorno-Karabakh is particularly worrying .
The Minsk Group is carrying out consistent work , but despite this we have not moved from our standstill .
The negotiation process must be maintained , and so I consider both fundamental principles to be important : the equal treatment of regional integrity and the right of self-determination .
However , the first step is inevitably the liberation of the occupied territories surrounding Nagorno-Karabakh , the return of the refugees and the stabilisation of the region .
Only in this way can the future status of Nagorno-Karabakh be decided upon .
Thank you for your attention .
Madam President , first of all I would like to thank Ms Polfer for her excellent work and excellent cooperation .
The European Parliament sends out loud and clear messages with this report : the message that the EU should get strongly involved in the South Caucasus , the message that the EU can play a decisive role in the region and the message that the EU should increase financial and technical assistance to help Georgia , Armenia and Azerbaijan to reform their administration and to develop their democratic institutions , to encourage civil society to interact and to strengthen these nations ' commitments to the European values of respect for human rights , fundamental freedoms and the rule of law .
These are the core principles of the EU but , as I have said again and again in this House , we have to accept that the improvements in those areas are a step-by-step process , which will take time .
My conclusion in that situation is that all three countries are moving in the right direction , slowly and sometimes with setbacks , but I hold on to the fact that the situation is better than it was a couple of years ago .
On the Georgian elections , I have nothing to add to what my colleagues have already said .
The situation is , as I have just said , a step forward , but a lot remains to be done .
Concerning the answer to frozen conflicts , everybody agrees that finding a peaceful solution is the key to achieving political stability .
Especially with regard to the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict , I am one of those who support a solution based on the principles of territorial integrity and the right of self-determination .
I am also one of those who believe that new security arrangements are needed to build trust between the different sides and put an end to the slow but steady and warring process of the demilitarisation of the region .
As I said before , more intensive engagement is needed from the EU and the international community .
A ' no war , no peace ' situation is a source of instability and , most of all , the EU can and should transfer its experience and achievements in peace-building , economic prosperity and democracy in the region .
( FI ) Madam President , first of all I wish to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Polfer , for an excellent report , which represents a thorough survey of the situation in South Caucasus and the opportunities afforded by the European Neighbourhood Policy in the region .
Extending the European Neighbourhood Policy to Armenia , Azerbaijan and Georgia is an important step forward in the Union 's engagement with the region .
Just the name of the report , ' from promises to actions ' , however , is enough to encourage the Union to be more actively involved in this region .
At the same time , the ENP will be an opportunity for the countries of South Caucasus for closer cooperation with the Union .
The region 's many challenges , however , call for more effective action on the part of the Union and , furthermore , require the countries of South Caucasus to show more responsibility and commitment to this partnership .
One of the main aims is a peaceful resolution of the many local conflicts .
That would bring stability to the region and improve its chances of developing independently .
I want to stress the importance of supporting civil society and developing people-to-people contacts in building democracy and the rule of law .
For example , EU-funded cross-border projects are tools for resuming dialogue and increasing confidence between the parties , but that requires the relevant countries to agree not to hamper the programmes and projects designed to bring this about .
Furthermore , closer relations will only really be achieved by reducing the restrictions on border traffic , with student and pupil exchange programmes , and by facilitating the movement of researchers , investigators , artists , entrepreneurs and journalists .
Developing the visa regime between the countries of South Caucasus and the EU would also enhance trade and economic cooperation , as the Committee on International Trade has stated .
- ( LV ) Ladies and gentlemen , in a situation where , in the South Caucasus , the interests of several influential geopolitical participants are in competition , it is important to distinguish their true influence .
The report has to a great extent avoided acknowledging Russia 's real role in this region .
Our experience in the Baltic States has shown us that the cause of many problems is Russia 's neo-imperialist foreign policy and its wish to regain influence in the territories it has lost .
I cannot agree with the view expressed in the report that membership of NATO could foster a renewal of conflict in Abkhazia and South Ossetia .
We should note that more than 70 % of Georgia 's inhabitants in fact voted for NATO membership , but in truth Russia has complicated the situation by encouraging changes in the ethnic make-up and altering the make-up of citizens .
We must not ignore the people 's wish to get closer to Western democracy .
Proof of Georgia 's democratic progress is also provided by the presidential elections of 5 January which , by and large , were held in accordance with international standards .
It is possible that we have been too critical of Azerbaijan , since a desire to respect human rights has been displayed - 119 prisoners were released in December 's presidential decree , including journalists .
The European Union must be more actively involved in the resolution of protracted conflicts , which is a precondition for stability and development .
The first step could be to encourage an exchange of Russian military forces for international peace-keepers .
We must speak to Russia in clear language .
Using the language of fables is not the way to move from promises to action .
Thank you .
( CS ) Madam President , to start with I would like to say many thanks to the Commissioner for her reply to my question , which concerned the criminal liability of persons in Georgia .
It is a very sensitive issue , which was also dealt with in the pre-election discussions in Georgia .
I would like to mention that the previous speaker stated that Russia has imperialistic intentions .
Yes , that is possible .
However , I have to say that the Caucasus is neither the Alps nor the Pyrenees .
The Caucasus is just the Caucasus , and for us it is necessary to understand it in its geographical context .
I had prepared a longer speech , but I will summarise my mission as an electoral observer in Georgia in seven points .
Firstly , just like the large majority of the people in the Caucasus region , we in Western , Central and Eastern Europe also want to see stability in this region .
It is possible that this stability will be achieved with the support of the United States or the European Union .
Secondly , it is our duty as Members of the European Parliament to question the use of the financial resources that the European Union provided for relevant programmes .
They should not be used for the election of President Saakashvili .
Thirdly , it is charming that the old-new President is suggesting a dialogue with Russia ; however , a rule applies that , just like at an official ball , if you offer an arm to a lady it does not mean that you will be dancing the way she wishes .
What I want to say is : if President Saakashvili is suggesting dialogue with Russia , it is necessary for the other party to understand that this is a genuine invitation to dance .
Fourthly , all countries are interested in the Caucasus , including the United States and the countries of the European Union .
Unfortunately , the European Union barely registers in the Caucasus .
Commissioner , I have to admit that the European Union 's concern for this region is not obvious , and that includes its concern for the poverty there .
In this sense our common European policy will have to be better formulated ; it should not just be words , but also actions and finances .
Madam President , I cannot support a Black Sea policy .
It will consume vast amounts of money .
My country is the EU 's second biggest paymaster , and our Government has just decided to reduce our EU rebate by a UKP 1 billion per annum .
Initially , one of the thrusts of this policy will be to facilitate the supply of gas and oil to the West .
Two years ago we saw Russia cut the supply of gas to Ukraine at Christmas time .
They were just flexing their muscles , and once Russia has an even bigger share of Western energy supplies , who is to say they will not do this again - to all of us ?
Europe must become more self-sufficient in energy - not by useless wind power , nor by biofuels .
When there is a world shortage of grain , it is madness to replace a fuel shortage with a food shortage .
My Government has , almost too late in the day , announced a programme to build a new generation of nuclear power stations , hopefully catching up with France - that is , 70 % of electricity by nuclear .
We should and must do more and use the access power to produce hydrogen and develop the technology to use that in place of oil .
If the EU really wants to make a difference , it should fund the building of nuclear power stations across the continent , to reduce our dependence on unstable regimes and overlong delivery lines .
Then , and only then , would we have the money available to help the poorer regions around the Black Sea .
Pumping money in now will only further delay the promised funding of the 10 new eastern EU members - a promise yet to be kept .
Promises - in Britain we were promised a referendum on the European Constitution , Lisbon Treaty , call it what you will .
In this Chamber , I now demand that the EU hold a referendum on the Treaty in all Member States , including the UK .
Ask the people .
- ( EL ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation is quite a mature regional body involved in constant intensive and extensive cooperation .
Furthermore , it constitutes a forum for contact between Europe and Asia .
It is a forum for creative expression , different cultures , different ethnic identities and religions .
The BSEC is called upon to play an important role in securing peace , stability and prosperity in regions facing considerable challenges , such as the Balkans and the Caucasus , as well as in the creation of a Eurasian economic area .
The geostrategic and economic importance of the rapidly developing Black Sea region is undeniable .
Of particular importance is the development of marine links , road transport and corridors as well as cooperation in the energy sphere , together with the promotion of sustainable development .
Relations between the EU and the Black Sea region have taken on a new dynamic thanks to the Commission 's communication on cooperation with the Black Sea region . This communication bears the stamp of Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner .
I think , nevertheless , that a broad , cohesive , strategic approach to the area is required .
I also support the institutionalisation of interparliamentary cooperation between the European Parliament and the Parliamentary Assembly of the BSEC .
Finally , allow me to highlight the particularly constructive part being played by my country , Greece , with its dual identity as a Member State of the EU and of the BSEC , in strengthening cooperation both within the BSEC and at cross-regional level within the EU .
I would like to end by congratulating the two rapporteurs , particularly Mrs Anastase , as well as the Commissioner for her productive contribution in revealing the common priorities of these two structures .
Commissioner , I still think that we should be even more courageous and should establish institutionalised cross-regional cooperation between the EU and the Black Sea region .
( DE ) Madam President , I would firstly like to thank both rapporteurs for their excellent and highly cooperative work .
I would also like to thank the Commissioner , because I know that she is rightly very committed to this area and because I believe that she wants to do even more than many Member States have perhaps wanted .
We offer her our utmost support in this .
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank Mr Semneby sincerely , as he represents the Council and is also very active in this region .
I believe that we have to achieve something that at least in its approach corresponds to what I and my colleagues constantly refer to as the EU Black Sea region .
Mr Sarkozy has used it in another way for the Mediterranean region , namely in terms of a split in the European Union .
No , the entire European Union and this region surrounding the Black Sea and the South Caucasus must work together in terms of a partnership - as others , too , have already stated - in order to resolve the common problems that exist : the political problems , e.g. in terms of stability , migration , and of course also economic problems , and here I am simply thinking of energy transit .
For example , anyone who would like to be just a little bit less dependent on Russia must ensure that there are other channels , and these eventually cross this region , in particular Turkey .
Whatever you think about membership - I know that there are differing opinions on this - Turkey remains an important partner for the European Union in this region and therefore we must , of course , include Turkey in this matter .
I concede to my colleague Mr ° Severin , who has said that we ought to try to resolve these matters together with the Russian mainland .
This should not mean , however , that we push aside the independence , autonomy and power of spontaneous healing of countries in this region , and say that we can resolve matters only with Russia .
Russia must also know that we support these countries in their aspiration to independence and also in the resolution of conflicts .
Europe must be a partner here , clearly standing alongside these countries .
This means that the Black Sea region is a very important one for the European Union .
We should not forego the opportunity to develop this field together .
Only when we face Russia together will we be able to assert our interests together .
( SV ) Madam President , I want to say a big word of thanks to the rapporteur , Lydie Polfer , for a quite excellent report .
It is time to stop making empty promises and instead act to ensure better integration of the South Caucasus with the European Union .
As Parliament 's rapporteur on the visa code , I would like to direct attention to freedom of movement and strongly urge both the Commission and the Member States to work to make this possible .
For the EU 's neighbour countries and countries in the Caucasus to build up democratic societies subject to the rule of law and functioning market economies , their citizens must be able to adapt smoothly to the EU in order to benefit from our experience in the field .
That is not the case at present .
It is generally known that the consular services of the EU Member States are woefully inadequate in many countries of the South Caucasus .
They are deficient in both subsidiarity and effectiveness .
I therefore call on the Member States to increase their cooperation .
I see two possibilities .
One is mentioned in the report we are now discussing , that is the call to create common application centres for EU visas .
Unfortunately the road to that is long .
I therefore also propose an alternative solution , namely that nationals of the countries affected in the South Caucasus should have the right , irrespective of the purpose of their journey , to apply for a visa at the EU or Schengen country consulate located within easiest reach of them .
- ( PL ) Madam President , this is an important debate and an important report from Mrs Polfer .
This voice from the European Parliament is striving to make up for 10 to 20 years of delay .
During this time the Union has not in practice had any real policy regarding the countries of the South Caucasus .
Now at last we have come to understand that Azerbaijan , Armenia and Georgia are not a natural zone for the economic and political influences of Russia .
I am saying this precisely 11 days after the elections in Georgia , where I was one of six observers from the European Parliament , monitoring elections that were once again won by a representative of the pro-Western option , a proponent of maximum convergence with the Union and entry into NATO .
I say this also in the context of a political conflict that threatens us all - the whole of Europe - and may even develop into a military conflict between Georgia and Russia over Ossetia and Abkhazia , but Erevan , Baku and Tbilisi are equally of significance for the Union 's energy policy and for diversification of energy sources .
So let us move from words to deeds , as it says in the report 's title ; let us make the transition from idle words to action .
Madam President , after more than a century and a half of neglect , the Black Sea area is again at the pinnacle of international economics and politics .
This area is currently striving to reach a new balance following the entrance of new actors , the EU included , after being considered a closed lake for so many years during the Cold War .
After the Commission 's communication entitled ' Black Sea synergy : a new regional cooperation initiative ' , the current first report in Parliament is another step in the right direction .
But unfortunately , both are still not enough .
The lack of identity of the area itself and the traditional sensitivities of certain EU countries towards Russia , both political ( for example Ukraine , Moldova , the Southern Caucasus and the frozen conflicts ) and economic ( the increased European dependence on Russian gas and the delicate status of the EU-Turkey negotiations ) , are probably among the reasons why the EU has limited itself to synergy instead of strategy .
While strategy means clear objectives , concrete means to attain them and , eventually , a detailed calendar , all tailored to the merit of the area itself , synergy suggests simply connecting to neighbouring areas of interest to the EU .
A strategy could be arrived at through concrete measures on how the EU deals with a multitude of local organisations ; on physically linking the area to the rest of the continent in which the River Danube is crucial ; and on strengthening the instrument of neighbourhood policy towards the Black Sea area , as suggested through my group 's amendments .
In conclusion , one word on Moldova , the last piece of continental Latinity outside EU borders .
Although part of the same regrettable experience at the beginning of the Second World War , Moldova could not share the positive destiny of the three Baltic countries after the Cold War .
I believe Europe has a duty to correct that situation and thus continue to encourage and respond to Moldova 's efforts to join the Union .
My hope is that her case will be finally judged on its own merit and not remain a de facto prisoner of other EU relations , no matter how strategic that relation might be .
( SV ) Madam President , let me thank the rapporteur for an excellent report on a region which merits our attention .
The South Caucasus occupies an increasingly strategic position from both a political and an economic point of view .
We all note the increasing interest in the region , not least in this assembly .
Regrettably there are many potential flashpoints , and Russian interference is considerable .
Russia wants to increase its influence and signal its interest in dominating and controlling processes such as oil and gas supplies to Europe .
The EU must see the danger in Russia 's conduct and therefore strengthen its ties with the South Caucasus .
By this means we could also acquire a useful and necessary supplement to Russian oil and gas with distribution routes in northern Europe .
The EU has everything to gain from greater involvement .
I am a member of a Swedish organisation - I actually helped to found it - which aims to increase contacts between Sweden and Azerbaijan .
I therefore say this as a friend .
The Nagorno-Karabakh conflict in 1991-1994 put a million people to flight , and the conflict is still unresolved .
According to Amnesty International , 600 000 internal refugees are living in appalling conditions in Azerbaijan .
Some years ago I visited a refugee camp in Azerbaijan close to the border with Iran .
I myself have never witnessed such abject poverty .
It is wholly unacceptable that , after all these years , hundreds of thousands of people should still be living in such degrading conditions .
In this respect Azerbaijan 's leaders , headed by President Aliyev , deserve serious criticism .
The EU and the Commission must do more in this area .
These refugees must not be forgotten people .
It is also important that we act forcefully to ensure that such a basic right as freedom of expression is upheld .
Opposition politicians and journalists must not be subjected to threats and intimidation or be imprisoned .
If Azerbaijan wants to be a nation respected in Europe , it must uphold the fundamental principles of a democratic state subject to the rule of law .
. - ( PL ) Madam President , the problems we are debating today - as those who have spoken before me have said - are of unusual importance .
They mark out a vector for Community action that has been and still is greatly neglected .
If it is not to lose its element of Europeanness , the European Union may naturally enlarge itself and spread its influence only towards the East .
However , the discussions that stretch out into infinity concerning , for example , the membership prospects for certain countries in this region do not instil optimism .
There is no need for analysis and immersion in documents to be able to state that this region , compared with Africa , for instance , is treated as a remote province of our continent .
All cooperation mechanisms , as part of the European Neighbourhood Policy , for example , are important , but this is not the target prospect for this region , as it does not stipulate true partnership in mutual relations .
For the Union , serious involvement in this region is linked to entry into the sphere of influence of Russia , and this , surely , means the continuing use of half-measures in the region .
What we must remember , however , is that in the long term this policy will not stabilise the area : it will do the opposite , perhaps generating new tensions , and we already have plenty of those to be going on with .
Madam President , the rapporteur on the Black Sea regional policy reminds us that the European Union supports new energy infrastructure and viable transport corridors , diversifying both suppliers and routes .
The prime example of such an undertaking is the Nabucco Gas Pipeline , already recognised as a priority project of European interest .
It is , therefore , regrettable that this project is being undermined by an alternative Russian-Italian pipeline by the name of South Stream .
As a Member from Poland , I see many parallels between South Stream and the Nord Stream Baltic Gas Pipeline .
Both are much more expensive than overland routes .
Indeed , South Stream may prove to be USD 4 billion more expensive than Nabucco .
Both may disturb the fragile ecological balance of sensitive marine environments .
Furthermore , in both cases , the pipelines may be seen as a political weapon in the hands of Russia .
Nord Stream will isolate Poland , the Baltic States and Ukraine ; South Stream will play the same role with respect to Turkey , the South Caucasus and , possibly , Romania , which may now be bypassed in favour of Serbia .
South Stream goes against the principle of energy security in Europe , based on diverse sources and routes .
Thus , if South Stream does go ahead , it should not receive EU funding at any stage .
If Russia is going to push forward economically unviable and environmentally questionable projects , because they serve its foreign policy aims , then it should not be at our expense .
( NL ) Madam President , I welcome the fact that this evening we are discussing in context the situation in the South Caucasus and our ambitions as the European Union and as Parliament with regard to the Black Sea region .
After all , we are talking about regions with regional problems , where regional solutions have to be found for the sake of the countries forming part of that region .
We are talking here about security , energy , trade , transport - or , more generally , about stability and the development of the regions bordering on the EU , regions where we have major interests .
These are interests that , in my opinion , must be reflected in a more active policy on the part of the EU and the European Commission .
We are obliged to the Commissioner for the initiatives she has developed under the umbrella of ' Black Sea Synergy ' .
As other Members have already said , it is important to emphasise that there is also a role for Russia and Turkey in this kind of cooperation .
These countries have already assumed this role , and it is particularly important that the EU makes sure that they retain it .
After all , we have good relations with Turkey - we are conducting negotiations with it about its membership - although Turkey also has a broader role to play in the region , as well as a traditional role .
Russia is important within the region , but relations with that country are rather more complicated .
I believe that , if the EU positions itself as a partner rather than a driver within this cooperation , Moscow will come to feel that responsibility for the region is being shared , that we can cooperate as partners without the EU playing the leading role .

Synergy is a good idea - it is a good summary of the bundling of the EU 's - the Commission 's - policy activities - but , to provide this with a little more structure , Mr Swoboda and I have suggested giving it a parliamentary dimension , with ministerial consultations at the level of the Black Sea region .
We would welcome a little more structure .
Indeed , we have even talked of an EU-Black Sea Community , although , following Mr Sarkozy 's initiatives , we have perhaps become more modest when it comes to using that kind of terminology .
It is important to emphasise that , whilst our suggestions and your vision are no replacement for the EU 's bilateral relations with all these countries , they could nevertheless spur our eastern neighbours on to more regional cooperation .
I believe that this is also of key importance to the EU .
( ET ) Commissioner , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen .
The European Union 's interest and objective in South Caucasus is to support and encourage the development currently under way in the three countries in the region towards the establishment of peaceful and stable countries .
The neighbourhood policy is in operation but it is also necessary to draw up a regional policy to operate alongside it .
At the same time we must not be indifferent to the distinctive features of the three countries , otherwise our policies will not be effective .
I should stress once again , the countries of South Caucasus - Armenia , Azerbaijan and Georgia , are very different in terms of culture , customs , religion and geopolitics .
However , they have in common their background - they have all broken loose from the influence of Soviet ideology , an influence which lasted for nearly 100 years .
They have not yet fully rid themselves of the military presence of the Soviet Union 's successor - Russia .
These countries need , and their people want , democratic reforms ; they need the real , targeted assistance of the European Union .
The expectation and need is for work to start immediately by the Commission Delegations in Yerevan and Baku .
At the same time the work of the European Union Special Representative for South Caucasus is not enough in its current form .
There has been no explanation as to why the special representative 's reports over the years have not been available to the European Parliament .
This situation should be changed .
All of us are working with the same objective in view .
We must not forget that democracy is not a thing , it is a way of thinking and cannot simply be removed one day or shifted from one country to another .
Full democracy does not appear overnight .
We are not at ease with everything that is going on in Armenia or Azerbaijan or Georgia , whether it be in relation to combating corruption or the judiciary or the situation of the media in the region .
The countries themselves are not happy with these aspects either .
It is in our power to provide them with active support both for their institutions and in the form of expert and financial assistance .
The region welcomes all real aid today .
Therefore I call upon the Commission and the European Parliament to make more use of the know-how of today 's European Union Member States who were recently in the same situation as South Caucasus .
We know what the local conditions and problems are , and our experience of establishing states based on the rule of law and a market economy would be of practical assistance to them .
- ( PL ) Madam President , in taking the floor in a debate devoted to the countries of the South Caucasus and regional policy in the Black Sea basin , I wish to draw attention to the following issues .
To begin with , this is a vast area for the production and transmission of energy , and one that is of exceptional importance from the aspect of diversification and security of energy raw material supplies to the Union .
However , support is needed for projects involving energy raw material transport from this area , not only to the south of Europe , as has been happening so far , but also to the north - to Ukraine and Poland - and on to the west .
Secondly , only EU support for political stability and democratisation processes in this region , and also the peaceful resolution of conflicts between neighbours , can provide the opportunity for rapid economic development in these countries and a genuine cut in the enormous unemployment and poverty rates .
Thirdly , the strong economic growth throughout the region , which in some countries is above 30 % of GDP annually , is based solely and exclusively on the production and export of crude oil and natural gas .
What is needed in this area , therefore , is support for alternative sources of income , especially the development of tourism and the associated infrastructure .
Madam President , the author of the Commission communication on a Black Sea synergy , Janos Herman , is to be congratulated on an outstanding piece of work .
Parliament 's rapporteur , Ms Anastase , has also produced an extremely important report .
Madam Commissioner , you said at the outset of this debate that you agreed with much of Ms Anastase 's report .
In your response winding-up this debate , could you refer specifically to paragraphs 29 and 36 of the report ?
Paragraph 29 calls on you to promote an intercultural dialogue in the Black Sea region , and paragraph 36 to set up an NGO platform for civil society exchanges .
Could you give Parliament your assurance that you will implement those two recommendations ?
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , please allow me in my short speech to concentrate on just one of the aspects of today 's topics , which is regional cooperation .
If we consider two areas , the Southern Caucasus and the Black Sea area , we can see that the mutual relationships between the countries are usually under-developed , whether they are bilateral or multilateral .
More significant political dialogue is usually lacking , the level of trade between these countries is very low , and a modern and effective transport or energy infrastructure is lacking nearly everywhere .
I therefore welcome the invitations of both rapporteurs to strengthen this very aspect : mutual regional cooperation in these regions , in addition to bilateral relations with the European Union .
It is vital to strengthen regional cooperation in the area of human and citizens ' rights , to develop democracy and educational systems ; to strengthen regional cooperation in the fields of transport , energy and the environment ; to strengthen regional cooperation in the fields of trade , tourism and investment .
In other words , it is vital to create gradually , step by step , a solid canvas of human , cultural , economic and political relationships between the nations and the states of the Southern Caucasus and the Black Sea area .
If this succeeds , I am convinced that even in that geographical area the lingering conflicts will be gradually sorted out and finally resolved , and an area of stability , democracy and prosperity will be created .
( SV ) Madam President , with its clear geostrategic position , the Black Sea region is one which is important to both the EU and the countries in the wider area , not simply for security-political reasons but also because of its cultural diversity and cultural wealth .
However , regions in which many routes intersect and in which there is a variety of political and other interests are often at risk of conflicts of one kind or another .
I myself was born in the Balkans and I know what protracted and unresolved conflicts can mean , not just for the security situation in a whole region but also for its economic potential and for the normalisation of life for the people who live there .
I also know that the EU has an important role to play .
The EU can and must have as its aim , together with people of the Black Sea countries , to develop the region into one which is stable and secure and in which democratic principles and the rule of law prevail .
Increasing cooperation in the energy field is also an important element in that work .
By investing in new infrastructure and increasing the spread of suppliers , we shall contribute to economic and commercial development in the region , which in turn will improve the chances of stability and security .
To strengthen ties between the EU and the Black Sea region is therefore not just good but necessary .
Hence it is self-evident that the Black Sea region needs a new and clearer regional policy .
I must emphasise that regional policy should not be used as an alternative to EU membership for those countries which may be eligible .
It must also not be used as an excuse to delay the process of integrating the region with Europe .
Finally I want to thank the two rapporteurs for their excellent work and offer a special word of thanks to Mrs Ferrero-Waldner for her personal interest and proven personal commitment to matters affecting this region .
( BG ) Madam President , Madam Commissioner , colleagues , I would like to express my satisfaction with the fact that the two reports , on the Black Sea and on the Southern Caucasus , were prepared and discussed in the Committee on Foreign Affairs in an atmosphere of agreement , and were adopted practically unanimously .
This is an encouraging sign that we are aware how important it is to build a clearer , more systematic , more structured and unified policy towards the Black Sea region and adjacent countries .
This is not an easy task .
The Black Sea region consists of countries with diverse traditions , cultures , political practices , territorial spans and population sizes .
Also , these countries are at different stages in their cooperation with the European Union , ranging from Member States , candidate countries , to countries from the European Neighbourhood Policy and , of course , Russia , whose constructive approach would be key to the success of this initiative .
This mix , however , provides a number of opportunities for a combination of the various policies to produce a much larger aggregate effect .
I would like to make three points .
Firstly , the region is of extreme strategic importance for the European Union in terms of security , energy supplies , transportation and trade , environment , etc .
That is why , while appreciating highly the Commission initiative on Black Sea synergy , we would like to see a more ambitious project based on the achievements within the Nordic dimension or the EU-Mediterranean cooperation .
At a time of promoting the idea for an EU-Mediterranean Union , there is nothing more natural than to find a more ambitious formula for the Black Sea region .
Secondly , the whole region has an underdeveloped transport and energy transmission infrastructure .
That is why I think it appropriate to support all transnational projects planned in that respect because they are mutually complementary , and not alternatives .
This means more security , facilitation of economic exchanges and linking the countries in the region with the European Union .
This will diversify not only the sources but also the routes along which oil and natural gas will reach the European Union .
Thirdly , most countries in the region suffer from serious social problems and we would like to make sure that social issues are not pushed into the background .
Long-term prospects for countries on the Black Sea and in the Southern Caucasus are linked to human potential development , investment in education , ensuring adequate health services and child care .
Thank you .
Madam President , I would inform the Commissioner that , along with several colleagues , I am convinced the EU has to demonstrate increased engagement in the South Caucasus .
After all , all the states in that region are already members of the Council of Europe and , as such , are part of Europe .
The extended neighbourhood policies will be a valuable tool for applying such an engagement in real terms .
Our challenge and chance is to play the role of a reliable stabiliser , but also that of an independent mediator and supporter of the democratic process .
We therefore need to leave behind hesitations and ambiguity .
It is high time to profile EU policies more clearly in this area .
The EU representative , Peter Semneby , has done an outstanding job , and I am glad , Commissioner , that you spoke about increasing and widening our representations in the region .
Long-term , active EU engagement will certainly contribute to also finding a solution to the frozen conflicts which the Committee on Foreign Affairs has decided to term , more realistically , ' unresolved , post-Soviet conflicts ' .
Therefore , it is significant that the report rejects attempts by any foreign power to create exclusive zones of interest in the region , and urges Russia not to oppose EU engagement in conflict management and peacekeeping operations .
Equally important , however , will be the EU 's role in advancing the culture of democratic dialogue in the region .
The European Parliament will have an important part to play in this .
Members of Parliament can mediate and encourage normal political dialogue between opposing parties .
Finally , it is important that the report encourages the Commission to move towards possible free trade agreements with Armenia and Georgia , and to make preparations for a mobility partnership agreement between the EU and Georgia .
So , the South Caucasus has become increasingly close and important for us .
That region deserves our firm commitment .
Madam President , the EU is able and willing to help strengthen stability and democracy and improve living standards in the Black Sea and South Caucasus region .
The involvement of large states such as Turkey , Ukraine and Russia is important , although they all have a different status in terms of their relations with the EU .
Poland brings its potential and experience to this region , despite not being directly connected to it , because of its shared history with the Baltic States .
However , just when intensified dialogue and cooperation with our neighbours is badly needed , the EU has drawn down another curtain through some aspects of the expanded Schengen area .
For many Eastern Europeans , 1 January 2008 brought with it a four-fold price rise in visas for travel to neighbouring countries , thus drawing down a financial curtain in Europe .
I disagree with statements made by officials of the Commission to the effect that our Southern and Eastern neighbours should be treated equally from this point of view .
Our Eastern neighbours are on the same continent , and not long ago some of us lived in one country with them , with no borders .
I look to my colleagues for support for the PSE Group 's Amendment 10 to the Black Sea strategy report .
We urge the Council and Commission to decrease visa fees to a more acceptable level for ordinary citizens of countries participating in the EU 's neighbourhood policy or having a strategic partnership with the EU .
( RO ) First of all , allow me to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Anastase , as well as my colleagues on the various committees that delivered their opinions , on the report under discussion , which is as momentous as the problems involved in the establishment of a regional Black Sea policy .
I would also like to thank my colleagues in the Committee on Regional Development for their support to the amendments proposed to the opinion of the Committee that I 'm a member of .
I am referring to the inclusion in the final draft of the Black Sea report of my request for strengthening the European assistance mission on the Moldovan and Ukrainian border and the need for improved management of illegal migration and immigration in the area .
I believe we need the Commission 's encouragement in the form of action in the region , at both country and regional levels , for this area to become truly democratic and stable .
A more active European involvement would mean a real opportunity for this area which has a huge , insufficiently exploited potential , considering the frozen conflicts and tense relations between some countries in the area .
Institutionally speaking , I am in favour of the idea of Member States in the area assuming leadership ( Romania , Bulgaria , Greece ) , and I think that the Union and the countries in the region should strengthen and coordinate regional cooperation activities and mechanisms .
It is only in this way that the doubling of funds available via the European Neighbourhood Instrument and the principles governing the Structural Funds , such as partnership , sustainability , effectiveness , non-discrimination and decentralisation , will yield the beneficial effects that we all expect .
- ( PL ) Madam President , the rapporteurs cannot hide their satisfaction at having presented the European Parliament with an initiative to strengthen Black Sea synergy , a proposal put forward by the German Presidency and fleshed out by the European Commission .
This idea has also received support from the countries of the southern and eastern part of the Baltic that have recently been integrated into the European Union .
Their stance also provides evidence of a conviction that there is a need for the close bundling of Black Sea synergy together with what is known as the EU 's Eastern dimension .
In this way local cooperation acquires a more general significance , and a realisation potential in line with the basic Community message .
In other words , Black Sea synergy should express itself simply in the identification and synthesis of multilateral undertakings , by identifying them with the best interests of both the Black Sea region and the entire eastern part of an integrated Europe .
One important factor that enhances the particular role of the Black Sea is the special geographic , historic and politico-economic situation of this body of water .
European and Asiatic influences have been criss-crossing here for thousands of years .
European Union involvement in the Black Sea basin must therefore be shorn of superfluous institutionalisation and political influences , and restrictions threatening an attenuation of the conditions for rational cooperation , and even destabilisation in this region , both in the security sphere and in the sphere of functioning of the communications network , protection of the environment , and so on .
It should also create additional favourable conditions for a stronger engagement by the Black Sea in the process of diversification of energy supply routes , perhaps involving new sources , especially from what is known as the Caspian direction .
Many EU countries are known to be interested in this .
( RO ) The essence of the European neighbourhood policy is cooperation based on a set of common values and concerns which the Union shares with the countries involved in this policy .
It is necessary to strengthen a stable neighbourhood area , which would have a positive influence on the Union 's internal security and would be a prerequisite for the economic prosperity and development of the countries concerned .
The countries in South Caucasus have certain features which are necessary to the success of European projects in key areas such as energy and transport .
The geopolitical significance of these countries is linked to their strategic position in relation to energy resources in Central Asia .
This is an essential transit area , being one of the few corridors that may enable the Union to diversify its access to energy resources from the Caspian .
Possible alternative transit routes for gas pipes from the Caspian and pipeline projects across the Black Sea are largely dependent on stability in the South Caucasus .
The European Union is not the only actor with a strategic interest in the area .
Two other major players on the international scene have developed strong initiatives as well as long-term strategies in the area .
The United States have an action plan on energy security involving the initiation and development of alternate routes for the transport of oil and gas .
Russia is funding projects of its own , and is strengthening its position on the Central Asian market .
In the current context , given the obvious importance of the energy issue and dependence on Russia , the European Union 's low degree of involvement in the area may lead to negative consequences for all the Member States .
The European Union must develop a single energy security policy as soon as possible , with Member States renouncing individual interests and necessarily involving South Caucasian countries .
( BG ) Madam President , Madam Commissioner , I congratulate the European Commission for initiating , by its communication , this debate on strengthening cooperation with the Black Sea region by complementing existing bilateral policies by a new regional approach .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , Ms. Anastase , for her very well balanced and innovative report .
I fully share in the understanding that with the accession of Bulgaria and Romania to the European Union , the Black Sea has acquired a new strategic importance - not just for the countries in the region but for all Member States , and for the Union 's policies and principles implemented .
I appeal to the Commission and insist that it call upon the national governments , in cases of implementations of large infrastructure , energy and environmental projects affecting the livelihoods , health and quality of life of the citizens in the settlements and municipalities where these projects are to be implemented , to provide , on an obligatory basis , local communities with information on the technical parameters of such projects in line with the highest world standards adopted for projects of that kind .
Sharing the report 's deep concern for the environmental status of the Black Sea region , and in particular the status of the Black Sea , which is affected by uncontrolled pollution , exacerbated by many environmental disasters , I insist that independent assessments should be made of the impact of developing new oil and gas transmission infrastructure on the environment and the social life of citizens and that national governments should prepare reports on possible damages that could be caused by such projects , and present them for public referendums and debates .
A case in point is the project for the construction of the Bourgas - Alexandroupolos oil pipeline in Bulgaria .
In full agreement with the principles of ensuring sustainable development and environmental disaster recovery as stated in the report and in the context of the two recent tragic accidents in the area of Kerch last November and in the first week of the current year , it is necessary to set up a mechanism to take into consideration the interest of local communities in coastal municipalities where there is a threat to the clean waters of the Black Sea , to the livelihoods and quality of life of citizens in these towns and villages .
Thank you for your attention .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the rapporteurs for their comprehensive and well-structured reports , and I would like to talk briefly about one aspect .
In Georgia we have had the elections , confirmed as regular by the OSCE but challenged by Russia , in which outgoing President Saakashvili was re-elected .
Amid countless difficulties he attempted to bring democracy to the country , dismantling the old post-Soviet diplomacy and opening up to the West , NATO and the EU .
It was this opening up that caused the retaliation by Putin 's Russia , which , amongst other things , has always favoured the independence movements in South Ossetia and Abkhazia .
Apart from the geopolitical situation , however , another cause of friction with Russia is , objectively , the oil and gas pipelines in Georgian territory , designed to carry Azerbaijan 's oil and gas westwards .
I believe that in the Caucasus region which , as we should bear in mind , is affected by the insidious war between Armenia and Azerbaijan , the Chechen issue , the conflict between Turkey and Armenia and many other problems , having a democratic country which is our ally and , above all , offers an alternative energy source to Moscow , is a factor of strategic importance .
We should therefore take concrete steps to strengthen this synergy .
( RO ) The Member States and the Commission should step up the implementation of priority projects in the field of trans-European transport on axes 7 , 18 , 22 and 21 and their progressive integration within TRACECA and with the 5 axes defined in Commission Communication 32 / 2007 on extending the main trans-European transport routes to neighbouring countries .
The European Black Sea Dimension should be similar to the Northern Dimension and based on equal partnership and adequate infrastructure for priority projects in the fields of nuclear power , research and safety , transport , tourism , and combating climate change .
Ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the economic development of Black Sea countries requires high-speed motorways and railways connecting the central and western parts of the European Union to its Black Sea coast .
The European Union should promote the single maritime policy in the Black Sea region .
This will ensure an integrated approach to environmental protection , coastal area development , maritime research , and tourism .
Madam President , I put two questions to the Commissioner and when she replies regarding the implementation of paragraph 29 , on the promotion of intercultural dialogue , and paragraph 36 , on the creation of an NGO platform for exchanges between civil society , perhaps she might bear in mind the precedent that we have in the Balkans under an organisation called CLIO .
It is independent of governments and involves history teachers from all the countries in the Balkans , who meet together to discuss the common historical and cultural background of the past in order to produce books and documents on the history of their region that are devoid of national conflict .
Perhaps in the Black Sea region there might also be a lesson : for historians and researchers from all the countries around the Black Sea to meet together , independent of government pressure , to promote a common understanding of the Black Sea 's history , devoid of national conflict .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I must say that was one of the best debates I have ever had , and at this very late moment of the day .
It was about the European neighbourhood policy , which is already there .
Many of you have said the European Union has to do a lot , but the European Union has done a lot , as others have said .
I would like to thank the two rapporteurs , Ms Anastase and Ms Polfer , because I think you have brought about a very interesting debate .
But what is the new element of this Black Sea synergy ?
It is the regional element and , as was rightly said by some Members who unfortunately are no longer here ; it was under the German Presidency , to which I would like to pay tribute , that there was the idea of having a regional dimension .
This is now the regional dimension of the bilateral part of the neighbourhood policy to the east .
That means that , to achieve a synergy , we are trying to bring together not only the neighbourhood policy countries , but also two other very important players : Turkey and Russia .
Therefore , it is not a strategy but a synergy , because there are , of course , different strategies .
If you think : we have a neighbourhood policy , we have a particular strategy towards Russia and , of course , we have a candidate country - Turkey .
But , still , we think that a policy on working together is very important .
In the framework of the troika , I am going , together with other colleagues , to this region very soon - I think in two weeks ' time - and I will certainly take a lot of what has been said here with me .
I shall now come to a few points , because there is such a lot to be said that I could speak for another half an hour , but I do not want to do that , because I think we have had a very interesting debate , and a lot will have to be said in the future .
Trade is one of the important parts .
You have spoken about energy , about transport , about climate change , as I have myself .
There are other aspects , but trade is a very important one , and there is a feasibility study on trade already on the way .
There is a Commission initiative .
What is the aim ?
The aim is to evaluate the prospect of further trade openings , for instance in the case of Georgia , in the case of Armenia , but of course we have to see how things are going to evolve .
This is one thing .
Secondly , my personal idea when I presented the neighbourhood policy in one of my last communications - not in the very last but the one before - was to say that we need an economic neighbourhood area , an economic space , and this is also what some Members have mentioned here .
So the idea is to have a sort of free trade in the future .
But of course we have to get there step by step .
An area of justice , freedom and liberty will also be there in future , but , of course , it is again a step-by-step approach .
Many have spoken about a visa policy .
I can tell you that , as a Commission , we have been quite open to that .
But you know very well that this is the Member States ' competence , so if you speak about visa fees , you know there is a possibility for Member States , in principle , to concede visa freedom and there is also a possibility for Member States to say they would like to go ahead with visa facilitation .
But it is clearly not the competence of the Commission .
I just wanted to mention that , because the Commission is always addressed on things where it has tried but has not gone further because of the realities .
I shall now move on to energy .
Of course , it is a very important region for energy , and we need coordinated decisions by many - by state and by private players - for long-distance pipelines .
You know that the Commission uses South Caucasus and Black Sea regional cooperation to facilitate decisions and to diversify sources and routes of supply .
This includes contacts , for instance , regarding the trans-Caspian gas pipeline , Nabucco .
You know there is now a coordinator , but , again , it is not only the Commission .
It is a matter of the Commission and the Member States .
And again , some Member States have already gone for some different ideas , which are not always within our unified approach .
I think another very important aspect is port development .
This is high on our agenda in the framework of our Motorways of the Sea programme .
So this will also be reflected in the next phase of the TRACECA project .
Let me now answer Mr Beazley .
Yes , indeed , there is also the role of intercultural dialogue in this respect .
But , for instance , yesterday I was in Madrid , where the Alliance of Civilisations was launched , which is now a project on a global scale , within the framework of the United Nations .
Certainly , one of the local and regional aspects will be this aspect , but I think we should put it into this new global framework .
Then , on the other hand , you mentioned NGO exchanges .
On this , I can tell you that the Black Sea cross-border cooperation programme already supports contact between NGOs .
The Commission is planning some NGO events this year concerning economic cooperation and freedom of the press , and we are cooperating closely in this field with the Black Sea Forum , an initiative of Romania .
Finally , I think what Mr Beazley mentioned about history books is certainly one of those interesting elements .
By the way , of course , for the many projects that are being mentioned facility funds are necessary .
Therefore , we have created in the neighbourhood policy the Neighbourhood Investment Fund which , in principle , targets the South and the East .
But within regional cooperation there is also a possibility for projects to be brought up .
I think these are the major points that I would like to make at this stage , but I am sure we can come back to this topic again , maybe after the meetings have taken place .
And you also know that we are trying , at least as a Commission , to facilitate the questions of how we can help to resolve the frozen conflicts .
This is , of course , a much more difficult area , because every one is very different , but we are at least trying with our projects to help and to get the right environment in order to facilitate settlements .
We do hope , together with the Member States and the Council , to come to a good solution .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Madam President , very briefly , I would like to thank all my fellow Members who have spoken , and those who worked with me .
I have noted with great pleasure that there is a widespread convergence of views on the need to deepen our relations with the countries of the South Caucasus , to share our experience with them , and to support them on the path of reform , both political and economic .
I would especially like to thank the Commissioner for making herself available this evening , but also for being available and communicating with us to share information and keep track of this dossier .
I can assure her that she has won our interest , attention and friendship .
Rapporteur . - ( RO ) I , too , would like to thank all the speakers for their meaningful contributions concerning major aspects of Black Sea cooperation .
I fully agree that a separate policy , perhaps even a strategy , should be developed for the Black Sea region , and I would like to stress once again its importance .
I welcome the organisation of an interministerial conference on Black Sea politics and I hope that one of the outcomes of this conference will be concrete , firm measures concerning all the areas of cooperation among Black Sea countries and between these countries and the European Union .
I won 't dwell on any other issues for the moment ; of course , the debate has been very interesting , but there is one major idea to reiterate : that this synergy and the cooperation policy in the Black Sea region should not preclude new prospects for accession .
Dialogue with the institutionalised civil society is very important , because , indeed , institution building can only be achieved if the people involved are willing to bring about real change .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Thursday , at 12 p.m.
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( HU ) The report discussing Black Sea synergy rightly elucidates those areas where strengthening dialogue could have mutual benefits for the EU and the states of the region .
Among these , energy policy will play an unavoidable role .
Deepening cooperation between the Union and the Black Sea countries could lead to valuable steps forward in the field of the security of Community supplies .
The construction of gas pipelines to ease greatly Europe 's dependency on energy is inconceivable without the active cooperation of the states in the region .
Developing a transparent , non-discriminatory framework programme for transport is crucial , not only for the Member States of the Union but also for the welfare of the many states in the region .
We cannot emphasise enough the importance of the Nabucco gas pipeline , since it would mean an alternative for Europe , both in respect of resources and partners and in respect of transportation routes .
On this point it is particularly important that the relevant countries resist the alluring attempts to divide up the short-term benefits .
Nabucco may be a symbol not only of the common energy policy that is taking shape but also of Black Sea cooperation .
When discussing this theme , it would be worthwhile for us to draw attention to the increased activity of Russia in the region .
The European Union must make it clear that it considers unacceptable her monopolistic endeavours on energy resources that can be discerned here .
As the Committee on Industry states in its opinion on the report , access to resources is a legitimate Community interest .
The principles of free competition must prevail when the Union prepares its policy on this .
in writing . - ( ET ) The report tackles the area on a regional basis , and although this approach has its advantages , it does not allow the differences between the countries of South Caucasus to be highlighted sufficiently .
I urge the differences between the countries to be brought out more strongly because otherwise we would be doing something to them which we would not like to be done to us .
Secondly , the wording of the report may give the impression that Georgia is the most problematic country in the region ; I have also seen this happen in debates in various Parliamentary Committees and in groups where Ambassadors have said this themselves .
In view of recent events , however , this is not in fact true and we know full well that that is the case .
Regrettably the violence of demonstrations in Tbilisi has received much greater world attention than everyday violations of human rights in for example Azerbaijan , which frequently are not brought to our attention because of the country 's large energy resources .
When considering the situation of the economy or human rights , progress of democratic institutions and media freedom , Georgia 's performance is that of a country which has very clearly chosen the road of democracy and is moving forward more successfully than the rest .
And this too merits greater support on our part .
in writing . - As a Member of the European Parliament from Estonia I am glad to inform you that one fifth of the Members of the Estonian Parliament took part in election observation missions in Georgia .
According to the international election observation mission , the elections held on January 5 were ' in essence consistent with most international standards for democratic elections , but significant challenges were revealed which need to be addressed urgently ' .
Although some irregularities were discovered and pointed out , it is utterly irresponsible to give way to more friction in Georgia .
Especially by endangering the legitimacy of the elections in the eyes of the Georgian people by creating a doubt that in principle the elections were not held free and fair .
It is my belief that the politicians in the neighbouring countries and even in the EU , who have chosen to remain sceptical and extremely vocal as well , have not acted in the best interest of further sustainable development and consolidation of democracy in Georgia , the importance of which this report clearly stresses .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.50 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 10 a.m. )
Documents received : see Minutes
The role of women in industry ( debate )
The next item is the report by Ilda Figueiredo , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , on the role of women in industry .
This report is very important and is likely to receive a great deal of media attention .
rapporteur . - ( PT ) I must start by thanking the members and staff of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality and the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy for their support and valuable contributions , particularly through their proposals on this report which enabled its unanimous approval .
This work took several months and included a public hearing with valuable contributions being made by members of both parliamentary committees and external guests , particularly social organisations .
This report seeks to highlight the role of women in industry .
On average , over 14 % of women in employment in the European Union work in industry .
In some countries this percentage exceeds 25 % , such as in Bulgaria and the Czech Republic , and in others it is around 20 % , such as in Portugal , Greece and Hungary .
We know that in some industrial sectors women represent the majority of workers , such as in textiles , garments and footwear , areas of the food industry , cork , cabling , and electrical and electronic equipment , whereas their participation in cutting-edge technology sectors is limited .
This means that we need different approaches , but with one common goal of promoting the women working in these sectors , guaranteeing non-discriminatory practices in access to employment and contracting , wage equality , creation of career opportunities , vocational training , good working conditions and better pay , and respecting maternity and paternity as fundamental social values .
The need to guarantee employment with rights for women working in industry and to keep facilitating their access to jobs in this important sector of production also requires more attention to be paid to the situation in various industries in the European Union , to the challenges facing them and to the appropriate responses which must be found , including in international trade and in monitoring the situation of imports of sensitive products such as those in the textile sector .
Particular attention must be paid to the restructuring and relocation of multinationals which significantly affect the employment of women and increase their unemployment , particularly in regions where there is no alternative employment .
The fight against the wage discrimination which still exists and which affects female workers , in particular indirect discrimination , requires us to look into establishing a methodology for analysing exactly what jobs entail , which will guarantee the right to equal pay for women and men , give proper recognition to individuals and occupations and , at the same time , establish work as a structural factor , with a view to increasing the productivity , competitiveness and quality of undertakings and improving the lives of workers , both women and men .
We must therefore encourage initiatives that contribute to the development in companies of positive measures and human resources policies promoting gender equality .
We must also encourage information and training measures making it possible to promote , transfer and incorporate successful practices .
I would highlight in this respect certain projects developed with the support of the EQUAL programme which I have had the opportunity to experience in Portugal .
This programme deserves the European Commission 's full attention to ensure its continuation and expansion .
As underlined in the report , negotiations and collective bargaining are vitally important in the fight to abolish discrimination against women , in particular with regard to access to employment , wages , occupational health and safety conditions , career progression , and vocational training .
However , the Member States and the Commission have a particular responsibility and an important role to play in promoting equality and fighting all kinds of discrimination , in guaranteeing employment with rights and in combating the precariousness of work which particularly affects women .
We therefore call on them to act , whether by defining high standards for health protection at work that take account of the gender dimension , notably maternity protection , or through working time and organisation that respect family life , or by creating effective inspection mechanisms ensuring respect for employment rights and trade union freedom , or by guaranteeing comprehensive access to good public social security and affordable social services , in particular crèches , nurseries and support for elderly people .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission warmly welcomes the motion for a resolution on the role of women in industry .
I congratulate the rapporteur , Ms Figueiredo , on addressing this issue of the situation and role of women in industry , which is complex .
One of the several reasons is that , as shown in the report , the gender equality challenges in industry are even more acute than in other sectors .
In industry , the problems of working conditions , the pay gap and the reconciliation of work and private life tend to be even more pronounced .
It is also a complex issue because it goes beyond equality policy to relate to the general situation in industry in Europe and the way Community policies can support industry and workers - both men and women - in the difficult context of globalisation .
As you know , the adoption of the Roadmap for Gender Equality in 2006 underlined the Union 's full commitment to do its utmost to make progress towards a situation of real equality between men and women .
The six priorities of the roadmap are linked to improving the situation of women on the labour market .
The first is economic independence for women and men , the second is reconciliation of private and professional life , the third is equal representation in decision-making and the fourth is the elimination of stereotypes .
The Commission welcomes the fact that Parliament 's motion for a resolution highlights precisely these areas .
Whilst the progress made in the area of gender equality is unquestionable , major challenges remain .
The Commission shares the rapporteur 's view that we must continue our efforts and consolidate what has been achieved .
As far as women 's participation in industry is concerned , two issues should be tackled .
Firstly , there are still very few women in industry compared to the services sector .
Secondly , those women who work in industry tend to be in typically female sectors which are very labour-intensive and characterised by poor working conditions and low wages .
The Commission is conducting various policies to meet these challenges .
Combating stereotypes in education will , in the long term , lead to there being more highly skilled women in technical and scientific occupations and will also help to meet the needs of certain industrial sectors for manpower or womanpower .
It is also important to support the careers of female engineers via networking , mentoring and measures to balance work and private life .
In order to diversify women 's employment in industry , it is vital to provide every opportunity for training and retraining .
The European Social Fund provides essential support in this area .
It is also vital to improve the current situation of women working in industry .
For example , there is still an unjustifiably large gap between women and men .
In industry , this gap is as much as 30 % .
For this reason , in July 2007 the Commission adopted a communication on tackling the pay gap between women and men .
The communication examined all the resources that must be mobilised to achieve this aim .
The involvement of enterprises is an important way of making progress in the areas of equality between men and women at work , the gender pay gap , training , work-life balance and career development .
In addition to the laws on equal treatment , which all enterprises must obey , it is important to encourage them to adopt voluntary measures to promote equality , in particular in the context of corporate social responsibility .
Finally , the Commission will shortly relaunch an awareness-raising campaign for enterprises about gender stereotypes .
The report on women in industry underlines the vital role of work-life balance in order to achieve real gender equality and the Commission shares this analysis .
This point was mentioned during the adoption by Parliament of the Kauppi report in September 2007 .
The Commission will report in 2008 on progress towards the Barcelona objectives in the area of childcare .
The second phase of the consultation of social partners on work-life balance concluded in July .
The Commission takes the view that this issue should be tackled using a combination of different instruments , including the amendment of current Community legislation in order to better take account of new challenges .
As I stressed , the issue of women in industry also reflects the general situation of industry in Europe .
The Commission will continue to pursue all the necessary policies to face up to globalisation , ensure a future for industry in the Member States and help workers of both sexes when the companies for which they work are restructured .
European laws on employee information and consultation , social dialogue and the European Social Fund are all instruments designed to achieve this .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , launched in 2007 , will provide assistance of up to EUR 500 million per year and its rules provide specifically for gender equality to be taken into account .
The Commission is , therefore , responding to all the challenges identified by the report on the role of women in industry by taking measures of various kinds : improving equality , working conditions and the role of women in industry , combating stereotypes , creating better conditions for reconciling work and family life and providing general support for companies and workers in industrial sectors in difficulty .
I should like to make a personal statement : I sincerely support this way of tackling the difficulties in this specific area .
Draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - Mr President , I warmly welcome this report , which I fully support .
The British Conservatives support it , as does the PPE-DE Group .
If Europe is to play a leading part in a very competitive , a fiercely competitive , global world , we need all the resources available at the highest possible level .
Whilst I disagree that there should be quotas saying how many ladies there should be at various levels in companies - and I particularly disagree with any compulsion in that regard - what I do want to see is as many ladies as possible rise to the highest possible levels based on their ability .
It often depends on what we define as ' industry ' , and industry is changing ; everything is much more flexible nowadays , and I am delighted that ladies are playing their role in industry in their various positions .
I do not agree that there needs to be any handicap or under-representation in the new technologies , because ladies have the brains , the intelligence and the know-how to more than make their worth felt .
Firstly , I would endorse the view that we should always go for equal pay wherever possible .
Regarding this report , I was extremely pleased that the rapporteur embraced the views of people from the various groups and that we reached unanimity .
I wanted to see better facilities for pensions for ladies - for portability within pensions from one employer to another to make sure they get higher pensions as they get through their working lives , and more flexibility in terms of facilities so that ladies can balance their family lives with their working lives .
As I say , I fully support this report .
It is a step forward .
We need ladies at all levels and I wish them well .
I welcome in particular our new Commissioner , who is very capable indeed .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( SK ) I would like to say thank you for the work that has been done on this report by Mrs Figueiredo .
The report to some extent lists the problems facing women employed in various sectors of industry .
Some of the problems seem to be perennial problems , such as the gender pay gap , the inadequate representation of women on company boards of directors or the inadequate reconciliation of work and family life .
The report also brings up issues that are less frequently discussed , such as the insufficient attention given to specific requirements for the protection of women in the work place or the social problems that arise as a result of transfers of production to areas with lower production costs .
Some of the proposals in the report interfere with the principle of subsidiarity or lay down requirements that encroach on the competence of the social partners and the processes of collective bargaining .
The PPE-DE Group will not support these proposals .
Despite the fact that the report is more or less a summary of problems that are reasonably well known , it points at the fact that changes in these areas are slow , as can be seen , for example , in the development of differences between the salaries of men and women .
The research clearly indicates that the turning point comes when children arrive : from that point the careers of men and women take different directions .
Most difficult to break are the critical stereotypes , and this is the case even when we do not identify with them verbally any more .
The report also highlights the issue of the transferability and flexibility of pension rights , which is becoming more and more sensitive with the progressive unification of the labour market , and with the requirement for higher mobility of the workforce .
This , I think , is an issue that should be given appropriate attention .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would first also like to thank the rapporteur for her help and cooperation .
We made the most of our opportunities to work together across political boundaries and I would like to express my warmest thanks for this .
I would begin by pointing out that we have already presented a large number of reports on this subject .
The demand for equal pay for equal work goes back more than 30 years and we have still not been able to make it a reality .
Of course we are taking small steps forward and we are producing paper after paper , but the situation of women in industry still remains a long way behind what we have been working towards all this time .
In the manufacturing industry , for example , 85 % of the employees are women , and in the ICT sector the figure is 15 % , and indeed women are very poorly represented in the high-technology industries .
This does not imply that women are less educated , it only means - and this applies especially to rural areas - that there are simply no opportunities to take up other jobs .
Women continue to work in the low-wage sector and even here there is differentiation between male and female workers .
There is still inequality and discrimination , and not just in respect of wage levels but working conditions too .
We are therefore also appealing to the trade unions to do more to prevent this type of wage discrimination when taking part in pay negotiations .
Support for professional and vocational training programmes is still lacking or is woefully inadequate .
Education and training is needed in order to provide female employees with career prospects , even in low-skill sectors .
We also call on companies to apply family and women-friendly policies in their workforce management plans , which will work to everyone 's advantage : when everyone has that feel-good feeling , business runs better and this also benefits the women who work in it .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for her excellent report and levels of cooperation , and , in particular , for highlighting the way men and women are treated differently , despite the fact that we hardly ever get a sympathetic hearing .
The Member of the Commission is , I am sure , personally committed to the issue , but when I was listening to your official reply in which you said that the Roadmap had been adopted , and that there was commitment to it , afterwards one might naturally have expected to hear an account of what had actually happened .
Unfortunately , we have to say that hardly anything has happened in matters of equality during this Commission 's term .
That is regrettable .
It is perhaps not the sort of important issue the Commissioners or others could score points on ; nevertheless , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to encourage us all to do more because we are responsible for the status of women in Europe .
I will give you one example .
In Finland women got the right to vote when it was part of a very conservative Russia in 1905 .
That was amazing .
Looking ahead now , I do not think it will be possible , now we are part of Europe , for women in the different Member States to earn the same pay and receive the same kind of treatment in the EU , even if the EU speaks of human rights and is progressive .
I think the EU could take a look at the decisions that were taken in tsarist times and make bold decisions on equality of pay and equality in the workplace .
The tsar had the courage to give women the vote , but the EU does not have the courage to do anything to bring about equality of pay in the Member States of the EU .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I have clear memories of the 1950s in Poland . We used to see many huge billboards with pictures of smiling girls driving tractors .
These were girls from the so-called Polish Service organisation . We saw them shouldering pickaxes and spades and marching joyfully off to work .
There were also women tending looms and lathes .
Times have changed .
We now see women working in design offices , on computers , or on the new production lines for electronic equipment , mobile telephones and televisions . We also see the tired faces of women hurrying home after many hours of hard work to undertake other daily tasks .
Those were the images that came to my mind as I read Mrs Figueiredo 's report on the role of women in industry .
For many years now , efforts have been made to protect women , reduce their workload and treat them in the same way as men are treated .
Unfortunately , differences persist to this day .
The list of expectations is very appropriate , though perhaps not complete .
Differences still persist in the way men and women are treated at work , both regarding pay and career development as well as assessment of their work and qualifications .
The most unfortunate thing of all is that it has not proved possible to create the conditions for women 's hopes and aspirations to be realised , so that they can be sure of job stability and opportunities for career development .
on behalf of the Verts / ALDE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , the role of women in industry is clearly conditioned - this has already been stated , and I wish to remind you of it - as in many other cases , by a number of stereotypes , some of which are clearly pernicious .
We need to make headway on overcoming such stereotypes and that is precisely why I feel the Figueiredo report is a fundamental and important concept and , similarly , why it enjoys the support of our group .
There is much evidence to justify this report and the submission of a number of proposals , which we trust will be welcomed not only by the Community institutions , but by business itself , which , after all , has to adopt them and implement them .
One such piece of evidence is the fact that the European Union average in terms of women employed in industry is a mere 14 % .
It must nevertheless also be borne in mind that , of this percentage , 21 % accounts for part-time employees ; indeed , women account for 65 % of part-time employees in the industrial sector .
I feel that this is one of the key aspects , and by no means a minor issue in this debate .
The second piece of evidence is the fact that it is precisely women with precarious employment conditions , women working part-time , carrying out temporary employment in atypical conditions , that are most frequently affected by wage discrimination or , when they wish to take maternity leave , have fewer possibilities in terms of basic , permanent and vocational training .
Thus the proposals in this report include the proposal for urgent measures to be adopted for full and effective application of Directive 75 / 117 EEC on the principle of equal pay for men and women as a means of opposing wage discrimination . We have been calling for this for some time now , and hope to see it implemented as soon as possible .
Secondly , we want incentives to be provided for initiatives , positive courses of action and policies for human resources to promote equality .
We want the Member States and the Commission to provide more and better tax breaks for companies in terms of compliance with codes of conduct and corporate social responsibility criteria in their day-to-day business . We want to see better working conditions , with particular emphasis on working hours , and maternity and paternity leave - here responsibility is shared on both sides by the couple or the family - thereby guaranteeing working men and women the opportunity to take up their posts again after such leave .
Attention must also be paid to reconciling work and family life . Thus , for all this to be transformed into reality , the report calls for these rights to be implemented in legislation across the European Union .
Finally , I beg to differ with Mr Dover on the subject of quotas .
For some of us , female and male , these constitute a necessary instrument , and thus we feel the point must be made that the European Union ought to follow the Norwegian example of applying measures to increase the numbers of female board members of public utilities to at least 40 % , and use regulations to impose a 40 % quota of female representation on boards of private companies .
It is obvious that this is not the solution , but I must insist that this is a path and a means that is proving useful in other aspects , which we would like to see copied within the European Union .
, on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Mr Chairman , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , my committee colleague Ilda Figueiredo has , as always , done an excellent job .
She has documented facts that I myself consider fundamental , in particular the fact that working women account for the dominant share of employment in the processing industry , where the majority of jobs require fewer qualifications , are manual and are badly paid .
The stereotype that it is a woman 's lot to do auxiliary work is well illustrated here .
I had the opportunity to visit several production plants in the food industry in different countries .
These plants are very similar , despite their geographical diversity .
The men hold the managerial jobs and the unskilled work on the production line is done by women .
They earn little , they work mechanically in a stupefying rhythm , without any motivation for professional growth , and they work under unfavourable conditions .
This is , of course , wrong .
A great deal of work is still needed to put an end to gender inequality .
We must realise that this area is still not sufficiently covered by statistics and that the gender issue is a relatively new statistical phenomenon .
In the real world , the disadvantages experienced by women in industry , compared with men , are even more noticeable .
However , it is necessary to focus on the issues that the rapporteur rightly designated as priorities : the disadvantages facing women in terms of pay and the fact that there are few women in technical fields that are , in comparison to the significant processing industry , technologically more demanding and better paid .
Women need to be able to gain access to higher education ; professional qualifications are of relevance here .
They should also be given the opportunity to return from maternity leave to the labour market , but also to further studies .
This right , of course , applies to men who look after children too .
Some regions of the European Union , particularly in the East , are undergoing changes in the structure of their industries .
These changes are enforcing greater workforce mobility and retraining .
I know about these trends from my own experience , because I come from the industrial part of the Czech Republic , which has been industrialised , and I am aware of their impact , especially on working women .
Another related problem is the transfer of factories to countries outside the European Union , where the workforce is cheaper .
Women 's employment is also threatened by the influx of cheap goods from Asia , but also from other countries that produce high volumes of consumer goods for foreign markets , rather than supplying their own market , which does not have the purchasing power .
All these factors have a noticeable influence on the employment of women in industry and their negative consequences should be gradually mitigated .

on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the statistics tell us that across the European Union there are more men than women in employment in every age group . This can be due to personal choice or to tradition , but is often the result of discrimination in the workplace .
In addition , on average women earn less than men in every Member State of the European Union . It is therefore important to use legislative and regulatory means to remind entrepreneurs and employers of their duty to comply fully with the principle of equal treatment , and not just as regards pay .
The issue of the unequal participation of women in industry should be approached rationally , because the branches of industry defined as ' female ' may involve less physical and mental effort . Women could be advised to consider them but that need not imply lower pay .
It is difficult to imagine more men than women being employed in the embroidery industry or more women than men being employed in the smelting industry .
Furthermore , the embroidery industry I referred to as an example may be better paid because of the artistic element involved than the food industry , for instance .
It is important to ensure that men and women receive equal pay across the different areas , and to eliminate exploitation and other unfair practices and conditions from the workplace .
Opportunities for part-time work should be promoted , especially for women , alongside different types of flexibility facilitating retraining and learning .
In my speeches and in the amendments I have tabled I have repeatedly proposed not only that a return to one 's job be guaranteed after maternity or parental leave , but also that such maternity or parental leave be classed as time at work , and the relevant monetary payment made in due course . This would pre-empt low retirement pensions and also help to reduce unemployment .
Above all , it would ensure the proper upbringing and development of children , who are the future of every family and every nation and the future of the European Union .
( FR ) Mr President , on reading this report one might be tempted to say ' All quiet on the western front ' : nothing new , in other words .
The panorama is always the same : the persistence of stereotypes in the choice of educational and professional guidelines , over-representation of women in certain sectors such as the textile industry , the pay gap , working conditions and career prospects .
The recommendations never change , however : promoting equality between men and women in professional spheres in terms of pay , their presence on company boards , or developing structures for child care and employment flexibility .
This is fine , but what then ?
What exactly is this umpteenth report on women 's rights going to change , within or outside the industrial sector ?
Despite coercive policies based on ' positive action ' - a misleading formulation , since what it really means is compulsory quotas - gender mindsets have great difficulty moving forward .
It is not by imposing structures that may occasionally be unnatural , in the name of the principles of equality and non-discrimination , that women will more naturally take up their role within companies , whatever they may be .
Women do not have such a severe handicap that they must be systematically imposed to be accepted .
Incentive measures must not be coercion measures .
Moreover , when applying the Charter of Fundamental Rights we should not forget that we must also leave all entrepreneurs free to hire whomever they choose , as long as all employees are treated in the same manner , regardless of their sex .
( SK ) A higher concentration of textile and clothing industries on which female employment depends is typical for some European regions , and the Prešov region in north-east Slovakia is among them .
If we want to preserve work opportunities for women specifically in these disadvantaged regions , where the textile and clothing industries have their own tradition , we must support these industries as a productive industrial sector through suitable measures : creating new programmes focusing , for example , on the presentation and advertising of new products at specialist and international fairs .
The wider application of the Strategic Research Agenda of the European Technological Platform and the need to introduce innovative technology and new business models are , in my opinion , a contribution to the future of the textile and clothing industries .
We all know that despite an increase in the number of females studying technical and scientific subjects , the obstacles they encounter in the workplace result in women abandoning scientific careers in industry .
Given the importance of maintaining a certain standard in education and knowledge , scientific work must be continuous .
In some scientific institutions no provision is made for women to work for part of their working time at home unless they absolutely have to be in the workplace .
The mentality surrounding overtime may be one of the specific barriers .
Those are the reasons why we are registering below average representation of women in high-tech sectors .
Primary responsibility rests with the Member States .
We would therefore ask the relevant national institutions to prepare and introduce policies aimed at reconciling work and private life , to facilitate greater flexibility in working time and to improve the general approach to childcare services .
It is also important to encourage employers - especially of small and medium-sized companies - to make sure that they put these policies and procedures into practice , through effective technical measures and if possible financial support too .
In conclusion , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Ilda Figueiredo , for her work and our shadow rapporteur , Edit Bauer , through whom we were able to enrich the report by way of our opinions .
I also value highly the opinion of my colleague Mr Dover from the ITRE Committee .
Mr Chairman , in conclusion I would like to bring up one technical issue .
It is very cold in this House during the debates , including today 's debate .
The coldness of this Chamber does not create a good working environment for our work as Members and has serious consequences for our health .
I would like to ask you to see to it that the conditions are improved .
( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , our policies for industrial development and the manufacturing sectors can help the European economy become a leader in competitiveness , knowledge and sustainability , in line with the Lisbon objectives .
Lisbon stands for growth in employment rates , significant increase in the employment of women , demand for the provision of proper conditions for the employment of female employees , and wide-ranging support for equal opportunities - over and above the positive role of women in the economy .
Equal opportunities must be underpinned in every area of industry : in employment , pay , promotion , the provision of vocational education and training , the availability and monitoring of different forms of flexible work , and the reconciliation of work and private life .
Overall , decent working conditions must be provided for women in industry and proper representation in the organisations whose job it is to safeguard their interests .
These areas do not constitute an exception from the requirements of ensuring gender equality and the principles and practice of gender mainstreaming must be applied consistently here too .
It is important that we have the right information about actual work relations in the many , essentially different sectors of industry and the differences between the sectors themselves .
A wide range of statistical information is required for shaping and drafting strategies and concrete proposals .
Innumerable international management research projects have shown that the special leadership qualities of women can make a big contribution to business success .
Europe must not lose this opportunity . Thank you .
Mr President , I congratulate the rapporteurs and those who have been working on this report on the excellent mapping of the current statistics and the current situation in Europe when it comes to women in industry .
Still , one cannot avoid being disappointed , because documents like this have been produced since the 1950s and we still have very little change . This applies to women in industry , the health situation and health care for women , and to career opportunities , learning opportunities and opportunities to improve their skills , not to mention the situation of the work and family combination .
I would like , therefore , to spend half of my speaking time on questions to the Commission .
Firstly , it is appalling that , after decades , we still have such a bad statistics situation .
This is something where the Commission can really ask for an improvement when it comes to European statistics .
I see that responsibility for this lies mainly with the Commission .
When I was a university teacher 25 years ago , I taught my students about the rules on equal pay deriving from Brussels and from the European Member States at the time .
The cases from the Court ( Danfoss I and II ) happened more than 25 years ago .
Is it not time for a new regulation with more teeth ?
This is also the responsibility of the Commission .
I would also like a mid-term health check when it comes to the roadmap for gender equality , which contains a lot of nice words , but no regulation so far on the horizon .
Fourthly , the Spring Summit will work with the Lisbon resolution .
These issues should be mentioned in March .
And fifthly , when the Commission - and Parliament - arrange seminars with high-level groups , we should apply the same rules as Norway for industrial boards , i.e. the 40 : 60 percentage .
( PL ) Mr President , the role of women in the economy is going to grow if only because of demographic problems .
It is therefore worth giving careful consideration to this issue .
As a Pole , a woman , and a physicist by training , I can state that in my country the average level of education of women is higher than that of men .
Women are also more involved in business in the SME sector .
I have not observed any gender-based discrimination in the scientific world .
Nonetheless , women earn between 15 % and 20 % less than men do and women 's involvement at managerial level in companies is significantly lower than that of men .
In addition , more women than men are in insecure employment .
The result , therefore , is that although training and different ways of improving one 's qualifications are important , they are not enough to reduce discrimination .
Female poverty is due not only to low pay , but also to the way pension schemes are devised .
Following the reform of the Polish pension scheme , a provision was introduced whereby pension contributions for persons taking maternity leave and parental leave were financed from the State budget .
This was a great help to women , as pension systems tend to penalise them heavily for motherhood .
The report has noted the need to deal with the matter .
I also attach great importance to considering issues relating to health and safety from a gender-specific point of view , notably as regards burdening women with tasks causing musculoskeletal disorders .
These issues have also been covered in the report .
Mr President , in 1996 an underwear company closed its factory in my constituency .
It left 160 unemployed - almost all women - of middle age , with little or no skills outside the factory .
Only 100 of these women managed ever to work again .
The women who found work needed , after 30 years of service in this plant , to begin again at minimum wage , as they had not been given any continuous training and their previous experience went unrecognised .
This factory moved to a less expensive area of the EU and has since moved to Asia .
Companies will continue to relocate for cheaper labour forces , and we need to protect women - particularly in areas like textiles - by offering the opportunity to upskill and by giving continuous education .
I also want to talk briefly about apprenticeships : in Ireland only 5 % of women are in apprenticeships .
It is a double problem .
Are they encouraged to become plumbers and carpenters ?
Is there not also the problem that , in most areas , apprenticeships have now disappeared ?
Apprenticeships themselves were a very good way to pass on information and skills and be recognised for them , and with the loss of apprenticeships we are denying many people - both men and women - the ability to pass on skills and be recognised .
( SK ) I would like to stress three key points in relation to this issue .
Employers must learn not to put women in unsuitable jobs or jobs where their abilities are not sufficiently valued .
The European Union institutions must keep an eye on those bodies that are receiving their help to make sure they respect the acquis communautaire .
Even though different opinions exist , society should respect the fact that men and women are different , but at the same time complement each other .
It is the basic principle of life and it should also be the basic principle of the policy on equal opportunities for women and men .
Diversity and compatibility in the job market and in society are fundamental .
The report by Mrs Figueiredo outlines our responsibility in implementing the Lisbon Strategy , in Europe 's ' demographic winter ' .
The report correctly underlines the health risks and various types of occupational diseases that can be different in men and women .
I fully support the rapporteur in her request for a full analysis of the existing situations and their consequences .
Such analysis must also include the specific impact on motherhood .
Nothing can justify , for the sake of future careers , future mothers being exposed to health risks that can have a negative influence on motherhood .
Equally , it is the responsibility of the industrial sector not to punish women if they want to have children , and the sector should make it possible for them to be able to return to their original position after maternity leave .
( PT ) Mr President , the Beijing Platform for Action asserts that , without the active participation of women and the incorporation of women 's perspective at all levels of decision-making , the goals of equality , development and peace cannot be achieved .
Furthermore , to achieve the objectives of the Lisbon Strategy , the participation of women in the labour market needs to be increased .
As women represent 59 % of graduates , it is difficult to understand why the majority of new jobs for women are part-time , sometimes insecure and precarious , poorly paid and with few prospects of career progression .
This report by Mrs Figueiredo , whom I congratulate , contains two proposals that I must highlight : the first is the promotion of female entrepreneurship .
Given that 61 % of women take account of family circumstances when considering setting up a business , compared with only 49 % of men , measures are needed to help reconcile professional with family and private life .
The other proposal concerns long working hours .
It is essential for the Commission to carry out a study into the negative consequences of long working hours , namely the family , personal and social consequences , such as children being left alone for many hours , which often leads to failure at school and crime .
The Member States should also be urged to improve the monitoring of undertakings that force their employees to work beyond the statutory working hours and to impose harsher penalties .
( BG ) Madam Commissioner , Mr. President , colleagues , equal participation of women and men on the labour market is a precondition for sustainable economic growth and harmonious social development .
Over the past decades Europe has made considerable progress in promoting gender equality .
The report on the role of women in industry summarizes some of these achievements , while insisting for a stricter application of the principle of equality .
It can regrettably be noted , however , that despite the existing relevant legal framework , a number of EU directives and resolutions remain without proper implementation .
The role of women in industry ought to be based on the principles of equal pay and equal involvement in decision-making .
The labour market situation in Member States shows that women are inconsistently represented in the various sectors .
They account for a large percentage of those employed in the service sectors and are underrepresented in the high-tech area , for example .
Promoting decent jobs is an integral part of the European Union values and Member States need to take effective measures to ensure that standards are met and decent jobs are guaranteed in the various industry sectors .
I believe that we are all faced with the serious challenge of applying a set of policies with a focus of combining work , personal and family life .
European citizens , both women and men , deserve to enjoy equal opportunities and should be equal not just on paper but in real terms . Thank you .
- ( DA ) Mr President , I should very much like to thank the rapporteur for a very relevant report , which focuses on the growing gender inequality in the labour market at a time when we are all promising each other to combat wage discrimination and work towards genuine equality .
Women currently hold the lowest-paid unskilled jobs in industry , and there is a risk that their conditions will deteriorate further if we do not immediately introduce targeted in-service training .
We need to make it compulsory to compile gender-differentiated statistics on both wage levels and the gender balance in the individual sectors .
It is totally unacceptable that we still have such a poor level of knowledge in these areas .
How can we change things if we do not have a clear overview of what the status quo actually is ?
We also need to develop an industrial policy that takes account of the gender dimension and the specific challenges women face in terms of pay , childbirth , job insecurity and monotonous , repetitive work .
This should be done in cooperation with the social partners , and the latter must also ensure that women are sufficiently represented in their organisations .
Mr President , the proposal before us deals with a very important issue , one that continues to spark debate globally .
The role of women in industry affects all facets of society and has wide-ranging implications for employment and welfare policy , family and child policy , not to mention economic policy .
Yes , equality legislation ensures women get maternity leave , but all the evidence shows that they expose themselves to promotional and financial discrimination , albeit subtly ( to comply with the law ) but nonetheless pervasively in an inflexible business culture .
There was an outcry in Ireland in recent weeks when a media accountant made this very point and he was roundly handbagged .
There is no point denying the blindly obvious .
Perhaps this report before us should be subtitled , ' Motherhood and misogyny ' , as an editorial in the Sunday Tribune at home screamed last week .
We in the European Parliament must endorse the proposal before us - with which I largely agree - because , on the one hand , industry needs women at all levels and , on the other hand , society needs children .
We all - including employers and industrialists - must respect maternity and paternity leave as fundamental social values .
While I still baulk at compulsory quotas for women 's participation , albeit in politics or business , my faith in a meritocracy is being sorely tested the older and , hopefully , the wiser I get .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur .
There might be one or two paragraphs that I have to think about , but I will be supporting her report , and I think it behoves all of us in the House to support a very good report on which an awful lot of work has been done .
( ES ) Mr President , I also wish to congratulate the rapporteur for her work and her open disposition , which has allowed us all to transform the general duty of companies in terms of respect for the principle of equality between working women and men into specific measures .
Her report includes measures to guarantee equal opportunities in terms of access to employment , training and professional promotion ; measures to respect women 's and men 's employment rights , including - and this must be emphasised - protection against sexual harassment ; and measures to enhance the reconciliation of personal and family life and employment relations .
Perhaps , however , the most novel contributions have been , firstly , power-sharing measures : this could , for example , produce a balanced number of women and men on company boards and in all decision-making posts in line with the new law introduced in my country , Spain .
Secondly , there is the recommendation that each company implement its own negotiated equality plan .
This makes it a key report for a strategic sector for the European Union .
( FR ) Mr President , I welcome the fact that Parliament has taken the initiative of producing this report since , if the role of women in industry is utterly crucial , their professional situation overall remains much more precarious than that of men .
Thus the report points to a considerable number of discriminatory situations involving women that must be tackled immediately , especially their confinement to certain sectors and certain types of jobs with low pay and limited career prospects , their over-representation among atypical employees , particularly those subjected to part-time employment , or the difficulties they encounter in rejoining the labour market after maternity leave .
I feel that one of the courses of action mentioned to rectify this circumstance , the idea of a reward for companies encouraging reconciliation between professional life and family life , is quite interesting , and indeed the improvement of women 's career prospects ought to be encouraged by enhancing life-long learning .
I must , however , voice certain regrets as to the format of the report .
I feel that the text is too long and not properly structured , and this impairs its readability and effectiveness .

( RO ) The report may create the impression that we are talking about the absence of women in industry .
This is indeed one of its topics .
However , what the report emphasises is the presence of women in industry : women have low-paid jobs in low-paid industry branches , they are in the majority where there are no trade unions , and consequently no guarantees under collective agreements ; women work in vulnerable industry branches , and they are the first to be laid off in the event of mass redundancy .
Women are present at the workplace , but they are nowhere to be seen in management .
They only get to do the work ; they don 't get to decide .
This report talks about what is missing , but it also talks about the things that women have .
Women have an education , but hold no qualifications ; they suffer from occupational diseases which are not recognised as such ; they are willing to learn after they 've turned forty , but they have no opportunity to do so .
They are mothers , but there are no nurseries available .
Men become parents and have no nurseries either , but they have their wives .
What is to be done ?
Existing regulations , our reports , the Commission 's roadmap on gender mainstreaming , all these show that we know what should be done .
What we and the Commission should remember , and most importantly what we should remind Member States of , is that citizens , especially women , do not judge our efficiency by the number of decisions we pass , but by our ability and will to enforce them .
And the latter seem to be lacking .

( PL ) Madam President , only between 14 % and 25 % of working women in the European Union are employed in industry . In addition , their participation in different sectors of industry is uneven , due to the stereotypes affecting educational and professional choices .
Women are employed mainly in the textile , clothing , footwear , food and food processing sectors , where pay is generally low . Women are significantly under-represented in the more highly-paid advanced technology sectors .
The Member States should develop programmes aimed at educating women and fostering their entrepreneurial spirit .
They should also offer financial support for such programmes . In addition , incentives should be provided for women working in industry to improve their qualifications on a regular basis .
Every Member State has a duty to comply with the principle of equal pay , to provide dignified working conditions and the opportunity to develop a professional career , while at the same time respecting social values such as motherhood and fatherhood .
Compliance with social standards such as the right to safety , social protection and freedom of association will help to eliminate all forms of discrimination against women in the workplace .
Finally , I should like to congratulate Mrs Figueiredo on a very well-prepared report .
( SL ) What we are saying about women in industry could equally be said of women in business and health care .
By nature men and women have different physical abilities and therefore some work is more suited to women and some more suited to men .
However , in cases where the quality of work and effectiveness are not dependent on physical strength , it is not permissible for women to be paid less than their male colleagues .
Moreover , it is precisely female occupations that are automatically less well paid as it is , even though they are by no means easy and require a great deal of effort .
We have heard our fellow Member who said that we adopted similar reports on the inequalities of women 30 years ago .
Why has nothing changed ?
Or why is change very slow ?
Or are businesses guilty of this ?
I believe that we must clearly identify the guilty parties and make a responsible and more decisive effort to ensure that the situation in this area finally takes a more positive direction for women .
( RO ) When talking about women in industry , we should also be talking about education , research , and entrepreneurship .
In the Committee on Women 's Rights we 've had a presentation from the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy concerning the role of women in industry .
15 % of people with higher education are women .
In 2006 , women made up 33 % of the total number of European researchers and only 18 % of researchers operating in the private sector .
However , it should be emphasised that only 28 % of women researchers have children .
Wages are higher in industry , particularly in the oil and chemicals industries , transport , electricity , and the automotive industry .
However , throughout Europe there is a gender gap as far as payment is concerned ( roughly 20 % in corporate management and 19 % in engineering / science ) .
34 % of women working in industry have children and we should stress that only 20 % of industrial entrepreneurs are women .
Therefore , we should concern ourselves more with women 's education and training and in particular with child-care facilities .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I wish to thank Members of for a very interesting discussion , and will take this opportunity to answer some of their questions .
In reply to Ms Figueiredo , it is true that the Equal programme finishes in 2008 , but the European Social Fund Regulation for 2007-2013 incorporates gender equality as a horizontal priority .
In reply to Ms Bauer , we had the first reading of the important legislation issue you mentioned - the transferability of pension rights - in June 2007 , and the EPSCO Council dealt with it in December 2007 .
We hope to make quick progress during 2008 .
In reply to Ms Jäätteenmäki - I realise that she is not in the Chamber , but her question was very important , so I would like to answer it - the Commission adopted , in July 2007 , the communication on ' Tackling the pay gap between men and women ' .
In that communication , the Commission announced that in 2008 it would examine the relevance of current legislation from the point of view of the relevance of legal instruments with regard to the causes of the pay gap and , where necessary , propose amendments to the Community legal framework . Following this examination the Commission could propose any necessary changes to the current legal framework .
In reply to Ms Romeva i Rueda , anti-discrimination and gender equality legislation does not preclude Member States from developing and implementing positive actions .
The Commission supports there being a higher proportion of women in decision-making .
We will create a network of women in decision-making posts , probably during 2008 .
In reply to Ms Flasarová , we cannot prevent companies from delocalising , but we have instruments to tackle that issue .
In 2007 , the European Globalisation Fund was quite promptly set up for this purpose .
In reply to Ms Ek , concerning statistics , the Commission continues to cooperate with Eurostat to develop specific statistics on equality .
The Dublin Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions takes into account gender equality in its regular reports .
In 2009 , there will be a regular publication on the research statistics on women .
In reply to Mrs Doyle , concerning maternity leave , the Commission is to prepare an impact evaluation on possible legislative measures introducing new forms of leave - adoption leave , and leave to care for family members other than children .
rapporteur . - ( PT ) Madam President , I firstly want to thank my fellow Members and also the Commissioner for their words today and for their contributions which have enabled this debate to assume even greater consequence .
However , as others have already done , I must also of course call for further practical measures to be taken .
These proposals that we have made must be felt on the ground , in the lives of undertakings , female workers and families , because it is not acceptable , as various people have said here today , that 30 years after a directive provided for equal pay , we still have this clear disparity of 30 % between the average wages of men and women working in industry .
This figure is double the average wage difference in the European Union .
We cannot therefore allow this situation to continue for a further 30 years and that is why I call on the Commission , and also the Member States , to take concrete measures .
These could be legislative or they could involve better monitoring , but they must ensure increased promotion of equal rights and opportunities and increased promotion of this objective which must be put into practice through education and training .
We must also fight stereotyping , as highlighted here today , and we must ensure that the organisation of working hours , working time and jobs better responds to women 's rights , and also to the right to maternity and paternity which are recognised as fundamental social values of the European Union .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing - ( HU ) I welcome this important report and would stress that women in particular suffer from occupational illnesses .
One new study mentions that in the EU 140 000 people , three and a half percent in this context , die every year as a result of occupational illness , and one of the main causes is chemicals .
And chemicals are implicated in 86 % of cancer-related occupational illnesses .
An important point here is that women , who generally live longer than men , are , as a group , more sensitive to chemicals and more vulnerable , as chemicals gradually build up in their adipose tissue and can be transferred to their unborn children .
So we need to have a properly thought out European strategy to minimise the occurrence of occupational illnesses and the number of deaths and give women maximum protection .
in writing . - ( FR ) Although the report on the role of women in industry rightly emphasises the many difficulties facing women in the labour market and certain economic sectors , the proposals in the text raise two questions .
Firstly , the report appears to neglect the boundaries of the legislator 's action .
Europe 's legal arsenal is currently one of the world 's most lavish in terms of women 's rights and gender equality .
Therefore , it is up to the elected representatives and the citizens to ensure respect for the rights of women in the European Union .
In consequence , the usefulness of an umpteenth declaration of intent is somewhat limited .
Secondly , the report contains one proposal that is , to say the least , curious indeed : suggesting that a quota of women on boards of private companies ought to be established by law points to a serious attack on individual liberties and does women little service .
Treating women in a fashion that is closer to charity than equality tends to exclude them even more from certain sectors of society .
Our fellow citizens now expect us to support them by matching our words with actions .
in writing . - The Lisbon targets set in 2000 will certainly not be achieved by 2010 as originally intended .
The current gender structures and attitudes play an important role in this failure .
Europe is not adequately using the potential of the half of its population .
Women do not have equal opportunities for achievement in the high-value-added industry .
Moreover , women are not adequately represented in social dialogue .
Neither employers ' organisations nor the trade unions and the public sector have enough women in high-level positions .
It is remarkable and alarming that the future of work and the future of society are decided by the half of the population which does not take equal responsibility for raising the children and maintaining the household .
Increasingly , antisocial measures such as increasing unreported overtime and uncompensated flexibility of workers are used to increase productivity .
The price we pay for this illusory increase is too high .
The Member States should significantly increase the emphasis on gender equality in social dialogue .
Simultaneously , many Member States should strengthen the role which social dialogue has in setting the policy .
Women have the highest potential to accelerate the development of our high-tech industry .
Europe must use it .
Second Internet Governance Forum , held in Rio de Janeiro from 12 to 15 November 2007 ( debate )
The next item is the statement by the Commission on the results of the Internet Governance Forum held in Rio de Janeiro last November .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the idea of an Internet Governance Forum ( IGF ) was born at the World Summit on the Information Society in Tunis in November 2005 and defined as a non-binding forum for multi-stakeholder policy discussion .
The Commission supports the Forum in this form .
Two meetings have been held so far : in 2006 in Athens and 2007 in Rio .
The Commission welcomes the forum in each form .
The Commission also welcomes the participation of Parliament at the forum and is grateful for the excellent cooperation on both meetings .
As in the previous year , the meeting in Rio provided an excellent framework for enriching exchanges which allowed the gathering of a range of views on the relevant issues .
Therefore , the Commission sees value in upholding the main characteristics of the forum , notably the participation of the various stakeholders and its non-binding nature .
I would like also to thank you very much for giving me the opportunity to say something more concrete on the IGF ( we have adopted this abbreviation ) which took place in November in Rio de Janeiro .


Firstly I would like to thank very much Ms Trautmann , Mr Harbour , Mr Badia i Cutchet and Mr Hökmark , who represented Parliament at this meeting , for their active participation and for the continuation of their excellent cooperation .
This allowed us - this year again - together to highlight a number of European priorities such as freedom of speech , bridging the digital divide , security and child protection on-line .
It is important for Europe to bring such issues to the forefront of the international agenda on a constant basis .
The Commission supports the IGF .
This concept , elaborated during the World Summit on the Information Society , is still very valuable , and all the issues which have been mentioned are very much in favour of what we are trying to step up as actions in this particular field .
In fact , on a broad range of internet-relevant subjects , the number of participants - around 3 100 - clearly demonstrates that there is indeed interest in having such a place for discussions .
The fact that there is no negotiated text as an outcome of the Forum should be seen as a strength rather than as a weakness of the process .
The Forum allows for open exchange , without the pressure of defending a particular outcome in a binding document .
This can serve as a basis for improving understanding of each other 's concerns and can pave the way for finding common solutions .
Dynamic coalitions stemming from the Forum are , in fact , one example that the IGF can work as a platform where people who share common interests can further cooperate .
Thus , the Rio Internet Governance Forum meeting again provided an excellent framework for enriching exchanges , which allowed a range of views on relevant issues to be gathered .
I would also like to thank once again Members and hope we will continue our excellent cooperation , because this is one of the most promising areas for our future work .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , it is important to underline the rapid change that use of the internet and ICT has brought about , not only for individual societies , but also for the world .
In all sectors of societies , the impact of the internet has changed patterns and opportunities .
This is important in order to keep a perspective for the future , because the strength of the internet has been its independent nature , its opportunities and its ability to adapt to different opportunities and demands in societies , based on a number of different actors and operators .
It is important because , when we look to the future , we must ensure that it can be used in order to bridge rifts between countries and people , and help to fight poverty and support development - it is of crucial importance for the Millennium Goals , for example .
The emergence of new technology should also be used to ensure that it is easier for more people to use the internet , in more societies .
We in the European Union have three important things to focus on .
First of all , we should ensure we are committed to , and support , the IGF process and its independent and non-binding character .
That is of deep importance , because it is a good process which is much more dynamic when it is independent and non-binding .
Secondly , we should contribute to the preparations for the next IGF in New Delhi , and ensure that we hold discussions with parliamentarians and civil society in order to underline its independence , but also the opportunities .
Thirdly , we should ensure that the internet is guaranteed freedom and freedom of expression .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Second Internet Governance Forum was held in Rio from 12 to 15 November last year , and was attended by 2 100 people from all five continents representing interested Internet parties from all public and private sectors .
The forum provides a favourable context in which to seek solutions to future ICT problems .
Through a common culture and a partnership format , it provides the decisions to be taken at future world summits on the information society , in addition to those to be taken by our own states .
It also provides the opportunity to hold an open reflection on the complex nature of the Internet and make timely provision for its technical , ethical and legal limitations , since there are major concerns in addition to the issues close to EU hearts : reducing the digital divide , freedom of expression on the web , cultural diversity and child protection .
I could also RFID , radio frequency identification , in short , the formation of an Internet of things , the risks of network overload by 2010-2012 , digitalisation , particularly of cultural goods , the consequences arising in terms of the protection of intellectual property and , above all , improvement of access to ICT for less developed countries .
Europe is certainly up to speed in terms of the legislative process .
This is encouraging for us as Europeans , but we must not slacken off .
Many of these legal or regulatory issues are likewise improved with the review of the Telecom Package .
In this respect , I would call for a new phase of targeted political and future-oriented work , notably through the creation of a European IGF involving the national parliaments and local authorities : a European forum implemented by 2009 and perhaps a world forum in Europe thanks to Lithuania 's application for 2010 .
As delegation head , I wish to thank all Members , colleagues and officials for their work and their availability .
The resolution we will be voting on constitutes a roadmap .
I am pleased it enjoys the support of all of the groups in Parliament .
More parliamentary committees are welcome to lend their weight to this course of action , and I would like to thank the Commission and ask its Members to lend their support to Mrs Reding .
Finally , I would like to ask the Council to include in its agenda relations with India and preparations for the New Delhi forum , and I would urge all Member States to participate in enhanced cooperation .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , among other items , the public service value of the internet was discussed in Rio de Janeiro on 13 November 2007 .
Nowadays , the most limited asset of European citizens is time , and it is vital for the governments of the Member States to introduce public services on the internet .
My home country , Estonia , has done much in this field : e-voting , e-tax declarations , e-government and e-registry office are only a few examples of successful ' e ' -projects that could be implemented across Europe .
I know that it is much easier to reform a small country , where approximately 66 % of the inhabitants use the internet .
However , moving public services to the internet is worth the effort .
One of the prerequisites for the functioning of democracy is participation .
' E ' -solutions provide the possibility of participation with minimal effort : there are no queues or officials exercising the right of discretion .
The internet gives citizens more independence and ensures impartial administration of their affairs .
However , it is essential to start such education from an early stage in schools .
On the other hand , computer literacy has succeeded where Esperanto failed - it has become the most universal language - and efforts should be made not only to bridge the digital gap at regional and global levels , but bearing in mind the different age groups and social strata .
Last but not least , the European Parliament often seems to occupy itself with producing immense volumes of paper .
Why not upgrade our tools of democracy and implement paperless administration ?
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , the Internet is rather like a knife .
A knife may be used to slice our daily bread but it may also be used to kill .
It is hard to imagine the contemporary world without the Internet , and our working lives without the Internet , but the Internet is also abused , for example by paedophiles .
The European Union therefore acted wisely in setting child protection on the Internet as a priority for the last Internet Governance Forum held in Brazil two months ago .
We should strive to combine openness and maximum access to the Internet with safety not only for children but anyone else who might be as risk as a result of Internet abuse .
It is significant that the next Internet Governance Forum will be held in Delhi , the capital of India .
India is a country that has become a leader in information science , despite being relatively poor . It services global enterprises thus enabling hundreds of thousands of people to improve their standard of living .
Two proposals appear worthy of support : the first is for an Internet Governance Forum to be organised in two years ' time in one of the new Member States , Poland for example , or perhaps Lithuania ; the second is to consider creating an Internet Governance Forum of our own , I mean our own European forum , not a world forum .
The European Parliament has a vital role to play in this regard .
Clearly , Internet access in the Member States of the Union varies considerably .
In my country , Poland , it is not very extensive , largely for financial reasons .
The European Union should act to ensure that access is comparable , especially in rural areas .
Madam President , I would like to join with Ms Trautmann - and I think I am speaking for all my other colleagues as well - in expressing my gratitude to the Parliament Presidency for having enabled us to go as an official delegation .
This was a fact well noted by the many participants . We were the most active of all the political delegations there , and there were more European parliamentarians than any others .
However , we are now seeing signs that other parliaments are looking at the Internet Governance Forum and realising they need to engage with it , because it addresses crucial public policy matters on which they need to be involved .
The speeches given by my colleagues have covered a number of the issues .
I would just like to make some broad observations about how I see the process evolving , particularly because I am the only Member of this Parliament to have attended both the world summits on the information society , and have also been through the process from the very beginning .
There is a feeling that the forum in Rio is now starting to come up with much more practical ideas , and people are beginning to realise the value of exchanging information and best practice from around the globe .
That is based on an understanding that it is not actually going to be formal , international , legal structures that are going to deliver many of the benefits we are looking for .
In fact , we are going to have to deal with many of these matters through intergovernmental cooperation , and in many cases through cooperation between voluntary or non-governmental organisations .
In the case , for example , of child protection , which the previous speaker referred to , the most successful initiatives have been those carried out by voluntary-based organisations - such as , in my country - the Internet Watch Foundation .
It was very important to actually talk to people about such organisations .
I will close by giving you a clear example , at a broader level , of the value of such interchanges .
I participated in a workshop on consumer protection data breach notification , which is about to be discussed in Parliament as part of European legislation .
I have a whole dossier on what has been done in other counties , and would say to the Commission that their proposal is currently extremely weak and would benefit greatly from its looking at that information .
This is the sort of practical benefit we can derive from such forums , and I am sure we in this Parliament will be able to contribute to the development of the agenda for the next forum , to make it even more effective .
( ES ) Madam President , I feel that the Commissioner and all of us who have spoken today agree on the importance and the social and political impact of these forums , which are being attended in increasing numbers .
For this reason I feel we must congratulate ourselves on the commitment we are making in Europe .
I also feel , however , that we ought to avail ourselves of the political opportunity at this time , as Mrs Trautmann said , to reflect on the new Telecommunications Package , and in that sense I think that both the Commission and Parliament must make every effort not just to offer the people of Europe access to the best digital services , but also to spearhead the extension of the information society as a social commodity to countries that are in need of European cooperation and leadership .
In this sense , I feel that what has been said here is extremely important : we must work on common problems such as sensitivity , freedom of expression on the Internet and protection , priority issues in my view .
At the present time I think it is vital - and I will end here , Madam President - that we make global issues compatible with local issues . I believe that this is a priority , and so the posture set out in the resolution we will be adopting today is relevant : I trust it will be sufficient incentive for the Commission to continue to include these priorities in its political agenda .
( NL ) Madam President , I was not in Rio , but I was at the first conference in Athens , and there I saw the importance of the formula of the forum .
In this forum stakeholders can explore together the limits that are very important and that will probably be applied in global relations later and also translated into EU regulations .
There are some quite difficult issues behind this dialogue .
I am thinking of the domain names , the icon and the American influence on this .
The idea behind it is that we feel that it is extremely important that the world wide web should continue to have a genuinely global , unambiguous approach .
That is why it is important to see that signals from this debate reappear again in the new approach to the icon and that the ideas of partners are taken on board .
Madam President , I would like to throw some light on one particular aspect today .
I very much support a European forum , a European interpretation of the forum for internet governance for the future , ideally before the 2009 elections .
What we have to do is to make sure that we also bring our national parliaments on board in the debates .
From the initiatives in some countries , such as the United Kingdom , you can see that these are live issues ; given their importance for the future , for employment and welfare , as well as for freedom of information and participation , it is essential that we bring the national parliaments on board with other stakeholders in a European approach .
I am appealing to the Commission : I read in the files that it does not have enough instruments or funds to support one thing and another , to choose a different line of approach .
There is plenty of money .
Look in i2010 , look in the programmes for research , etc .
I would really like to a very generous position to be adopted in order to establish the European view of these problems even more clearly before the 2009 elections .
( SK ) Thank you , Madam Chairman , for giving me the opportunity to contribute to this interesting debate .
I strongly support the idea to establish forums on Internet governance with the participation of Members of the European Parliament .
The Internet is today an unavoidable component of the life of European citizens regardless of their age .
However , in disadvantaged regions it is almost impossible to get a fast Internet connection .
With envy I often watch advertisements in our Slovak public and private media for Internet with four times the speed and its advantages .
Where I live we do not have this advantage and our real options are limited only to local sources with insufficient speed .
Commissioner Kuneva , what can the Commission do to make sure that the disadvantaged regions and the people who live there will not be forgotten , to make sure that these people have an equal opportunity to participate in the digital world ?
Madam President , I just wanted to say one thing .
I would like to thank Ms Trautmann , who led the delegation to Rio and did it in a very good way .
I did not mention that in my first intervention , but I think it is important to state .
We all found her to be a very good leader .
I would just like that to be noted .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , let me start with the next steps , which are more concrete .
Following the Rio meeting , consultations will be held in Geneva next month to collect views on the outcome of Rio and the preparation for the next meeting in New Delhi .
The Commission participates in the advisory group which assists the UN Secretary-General in the preparation of the IGF .
As has been our practice since the World Summit on the Information Society , we will of course inform Members of the outcome of this meeting .
I would now like to answer some of the specific questions raised by MEPs , starting with Ms Trautmann .
We welcome the fact that Ms Trautmann addressed , in her speech at the opening session , the issue of the ' Internet of Things ' and the possibility of bringing this up at the IGF next year .
With regard to the second part of Ms Trautmann 's speech , regional IGFs have emerged in a number of places , and this appears to be a useful way to focus on questions of internet governance that are of particular importance for a specific region .
The Commission strongly supports this idea .
Moving on to Mr Savi , we could not agree more with his statement , and this is why the Commission is committed to the development of the e-application with the broad programmes and legislation .
To Mr Czarnecki , the Commission is committed to all the initiatives on child protection .
We promoted the item on the IGF agenda and we are about to propose a renewed programme on child protection on the internet .
To conclude the debate , I have received one motion for a resolution , signed by six political groups , pursuant to Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.40 a.m. and resumed at 12 noon . )

Calendar of part-sessions : see Minutes
1 . (
2 . (
- After the vote on Amendment 62 :
( DE ) Mr President , now that Parliament in its infinite wisdom has adopted compromise Amendment 62 , Amendment 61 as proposed by the ALDE Group is now superfluous and is therefore withdrawn .
3 . (
- Before the vote on Amendment 3 :

rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , I just wanted to ask Mr Tannock if the addition he is proposing is in fact an addition , or whether his aim is to remove the section on violence and ill-treatment in police custody and penitentiary institutions .
If his amendment is to be an addition , I can of course support it .
If , however , he wishes part of the existing text to be deleted , I can only recommend that we vote against it .
( FR ) It is an addition .
Thank you .
- Before the vote on Amendment 7 :

rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , in paragraph 32 we repeat the two conditions , i.e. territorial integrity and self-determination , even though they are already mentioned in paragraph 30 .
However , the author of the amendment has added ' self-determination of the people who live there ' .
I strongly recommend that we delete the words ' of the people who live there ' because that would exclude the refugees and persons displaced in their own country .
Therefore , if the author of the amendment agrees to delete those few words , I will be able to support the amendment ; otherwise , I recommend that we reject it .
Mr President , I have agreed to that change to the oral amendment .
( Parliament agreed to accept the oral amendment )
- Before the vote on Amendment 8 / rev :
Mr President , as we agreed at the beginning of the session , it will be an addition now .
In the actual text it says to replace the words ' in the Baku-Tbilisi-Erzurum gas pipeline ' with the words ' in the trans-Caspian energy corridor projects ' .
But by negotiation at the beginning of the voting session , I have already agreed this should be an addition rather than a replacement , so can we include the words ' in the trans-Caspian energy corridor projects ' .
( Parliament agreed to accept the oral amendment )
4 . (
5 .
Kenya ( vote )
- Before the vote :
Mr President , since we formulated this resolution , some important changes have taken place in Kenya .
Yesterday , the newly-elected Parliament - and according to all observers the elections to the Parliament were pretty honest - elected a new speaker .
The speaker is from the opposition .
We view that as an encouraging sign , and I would therefore like to propose an oral amendment , in the form of a new paragraph reading as follows : ' Welcomes the fact that the newly-elected Parliament showed its independence by the election of Mr Kenneth Marende as its speaker , and underlines the decisive role to be played by that Parliament in restoring civil liberties in Kenya ' .
( Parliament agreed to accept the oral amendment )
6 . (
- Before the vote on Amendment 39 :
rapporteur . - ( PT ) Mr President , this oral amendment is supported by female Members from five political groups and also by one male Member .
It aims to amend the first part as follows : ' Stresses the need to retrain those women who have had to stop their career , to enhance their employability ' and then continues ' calls on the Member States to increase life-long learning possibilities ' .
This is the amendment that we are tabling .
( Parliament agreed to accept the oral amendment )
7 .
Second Internet Governance Forum , held in Rio de Janeiro from 12 to 15 November 2007 ( vote )
Voting time
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( For the outcome and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
Calendar of part-sessions : see Minutes
Explanations of vote
I would like to make the following proposal for the voting : we shall begin with the explanations of vote and then suspend the sitting at 1 p.m ..
Any explanations of vote not dealt with can then be presented this afternoon at the end of the debate and after all the votes have been taken .
( Loud applause )
( Parliament approved the proposal )
Explanations of vote
Mr President , I have to say that on this particular measure , I voted against .
While Mr Cashman is a very charming gentleman , I must say that whenever I see anything with his name on it , I do look on it with some degree of scepticism .
The issue here is that we have a European Fundamental Rights Agency as if there were no such protection for human rights in the Member States .
I question whether there is any need for this institution at European level .
Is it not just a case of extending bureaucracy and creating new quangos , as we call them in Britain ?
This is a burden on the taxpayer which , in the view of many others , will not actually contribute to human rights .
Furthermore , in the absence of the constitution which we were promised , which you are now proposing to drive through without a referendum , there is no basis for it .
Mr President , I voted against this report because the United Kingdom already respects human rights .
It is a signatory to many international agreements ; it does not need to be told how to behave by an EU that has overridden the results of the French and the Dutch referendums , which were perfectly constitutional .
They rejected the Constitution .
It has been replaced by an equivalent Treaty that has now been approved even before it has been seen in full by those who signed it .
The EU clearly has no respect for democratic rights and cannot therefore be considered a safe or reliable custodian of human rights .
Mr President , thank you for this opportunity to explain my vote .
This is the first time I have done such a thing .
I voted against this proposal because , whilst the committee in question may be called the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , it does not offer liberties to civilians , it does not offer justice , and it interferes in home affairs .
We in Britain were promised a referendum .
We are not going to get one .
What is the European Union going to do about that ?
Mr President , thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to explain my vote on this important issue .
You may not be aware of this , but I represent the constituency of London , the greatest city in the world , capital of the greatest country in the world .
What one needs to understand is that London is actually a pretty diverse city .
Let me explain : we already have 300 languages and 14 religions and , on the whole , we get along very well .
So , the EU could actually learn a lot from London and how it has ensured human rights and that people 's dignity is respected .
We do not need those issues to be resolved at EU level .
What could London , the most diverse city in Europe - and perhaps even in the world - learn from this institution ?
What could it learn about human rights ?
What could it learn about fundamental rights ?
Absolutely nothing !
Let me add the following . The forthcoming ratification of the European Constitution , despite its rejection in two referendums , is undemocratic , cowardly ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , on what legal basis are we constructing this agency ?
The Fundamental Rights Agency would have been given authority by the European Constitution .
It would be given authority by the Lisbon Treaty .
But the only legal base it has at the moment is a flimsy cat 's cradle of communiqués , of press releases , of resolutions in Council .
The European Union does not have a problem with the systematic violation of human rights .
It does have a problem with the systematic violation of democratic rights .
The problem we have is that a human rights charter written down on paper is meaningless unless there are also mechanisms to hold leaders to account .
If you look at the constitutions of the former East Germany and of the Soviet Union , they were full of these wonderful promises of liberty .
But , as the peoples of those unhappy countries found , it meant nothing without democracy .
That is why , if you want to impose this human rights charter , you should consult the people first in a referendum .
Pactio Olisipio censenda est !
Mr President , I too voted against this ludicrous proposal of an agency in respect of human rights in the EU .
We in the United Kingdom , like many other countries , are long-term signatories of the European Convention on Human Rights .
Such rights as require external supervision are found there , and any court which is required is found in this city under that aegis , not under any aegis required by the EU .
So this is totally unnecessary , an utter waste of public money .
Its primary intent is to provide another layer of apparatus of statehood to the EU so that it can parade itself as some sort of a superstate within a Europe that gives rights to its citizens , rights they already have .
If it wants to give rights , then let it recognise the fundamental right to vote on matters such as this : to say ' yes ' or ' no ' to a constitution .
( SK ) Mr Chairman , since criminal activity is increasing continuously and the threat of terrorism is growing , Europol needs to become more flexible .
The three Protocols from 2000 to 2003 that amend and supplement the Europol Convention have still not taken effect .
Surely an organisation that is promoting law cannot be effective if changes to its basic legislative instrument come into force only several years after a decision has been made to accept them .
The proposal for a Council decision deals with this situation , which is why I voted for it .
One important change in relation to the present situation is the plan to finance Europol from the Community budget and give the staff the status of EU official .
This will increase the European Parliament 's involvement in the management of Europol and simplify budget and personnel management .
In addition , the European Parliament 's position will be strengthened as democratic control of Europol improves .
Moreover , the Community 's financial expenditure will be comparable to the current expenditure of the Member States .
( CS ) Mr Chairman , please allow me to explain why I did not take part in the vote on this report .
Firstly , I think that Europol is functioning well on the basis of bilateral agreements and bilateral cooperation .
Secondly , the Czech Republic has , together with other countries , joined the Schengen area .
It is necessary first and foremost to get accustomed to this cooperation , analyse it and subsequently improve it .
In addition , any further integration aimed at transforming Europol into a European police force will require ratification of the Lisbon Treaty .
Only then we can talk about possible changes to Europol 's legal basis .

Mr President , I was interested to note that you cut off the microphone of my colleague , Mr Kamall , on the instant of 60 seconds , whereas you are much more generous when people are saying things you find more palatable .
One of the errors we make in the European Union is to confuse ' cooperation ' with ' supranationalism ' .
I am all in favour of police cooperation - any sensible person would be in this day and age .
However , I am absolutely opposed to the creation of supranational authorities - such as EUROPOL is intended to be - which , as one of my colleagues said of the Fundamental Rights Agency , is one of the attributes of statehood that the European Union is claiming .
The trouble is that these organisations lack democratic legitimacy , and that is very dangerous .
Both EUROPOL and the European Union will lack democratic legitimacy until you put the Lisbon Treaty to a referendum .
Mr President , I could not disagree more with this report .
I voted against .
Cooperation between police forces , yes ; forced cooperation and obligation , no ; especially when this police force will have within its ranks armed police that can be sent anywhere in the European Union .
We do not have armed police as a rule in the United Kingdom .
We will not suffer armed police coming in at the behest of EUROPOL .
We do not believe in it .
We run our country in a different way !
I am particularly disappointed to see that Amendments 56 and 57 were voted down , because , if passed , they would have removed immunity from that police force .
In the United Kingdom , we are used to a police force which , if it causes damage to property or violates the individual or arrests without good reason , can be charged with offences afterwards .
But then , I would not be surprised , because , after all , you are prepared to ram through a constitution without asking anybody either .
Mr President , for the second time I rise to declare my vote opposing this motion .
In Britain , there is a simple philosophy : no man is above the law ; not even the Queen , the monarch of England , is above the law .
It will take due process .
We have in this legislation created a situation where there are people outside the law , incapable of being pursued legitimately .
I have said in this House before : if the European Union is the answer , it must have been a bloody stupid question , and never was this so true as now .
I give you Kennedy 's comments : ' Those who make peaceful protest impossible , make violent protest inevitable ' .
Mr President , it is vital to cooperate across transnational boundaries on international crime , terrorism , drugs and so on .
EUROPOL is doing that job right now with other police forces .
However , creating a European police office which increases central powers will not solve the problems that have arisen in local communities around Britain .
My country , my party , has voted against this resolution today as loyal Conservatives .
My party has also requested that we have a referendum on the EU Constitutional Treaty .
I have no place other than this House to protest at what Mr Brown is doing in reneging on a pledge he gave to hold such a referendum .
I would therefore ask that we request Mr Brown to give the British people that referendum .
Mr President , I understand that this proposal for a Council decision , as outlined in the report , provides for the conversion of EUROPOL into an EU agency .
We must recognise that this will have two consequences .
First of all , funding will have to be provided from the Community budget , and EUROPOL staff will acquire the status of Community officials .
The report also contains provisions for coordination , which we all welcome , and organisation and implementation of investigations and operational activities carried out in conjunction with the Member States ' relevant authorities or by joint investigation teams .
The Conservatives favour open cooperation between police forces across the EU and beyond in the fight against crime .
But we really do not accept that the EU has any role in centralising such cooperation .
Thus , EUROPOL is an agency which is not necessary since other organisations already exist to fulfil this function at a global level .
It is for this reason that I would like to add that the coming ratification of the European Constitution , despite its rejection in two referendums , is undemocratic , cowardly and illegitimate .
Mr President , I am glad to have this opportunity to make an explanation of vote .
I put in for speaking time in the debate on this issue , but one of the consequences of my party 's unhappy mésalliance with the European People 's Party is that British Conservatives are systematically denied speaking time in important debates .
What I wanted to say was that this report is based on a conceptual misunderstanding .
People say that , because we have cross-border crimes , and because crime is international , we need cross-border policing .
We already have it .
The police forces of the nation states have for decades been collaborating to great effect .
We have Interpol , we have the Hague Convention , we have extradition treaties , we recognise the time spent in another country 's prison as constituting part of a sentence , and so on .
The difference is that these things are based on democratic decisions between independent states , whereas what is being proposed with EUROPOL is the federalisation of what ought to be a sensitive national issue - namely the policing of criminal law .
If we want to do that , we should first ask people in a referendum , which is why we need a referendum on the Lisbon Treaty .
Mr President , some of the reasons propagated for this proposal on EUROPOL are quite bogus .
It is suggested that we need to change the legal base ; that we need to provide it with EU funding ; that we need those it employs to be EU officials ; that we need to expand its remit ; and that we need an agency so that we can fight organised crime and terrorism .
What utter nonsense !
We have been fighting organised crime and terrorism quite effectively , through proper long-standing cooperation between police forces .
This is all about creating another aspect of the apparatus of EU statehood , so that it has an effective EU police force .
That is what those officials will be , meddling in the internal affairs of Member States and - as has been pointed out - with immunity for their actions , beyond the reach even of judicial review in nation states .
It is a preposterous proposal and utterly unnecessary .
Mr President , regarding the Polfer report , the Conservatives did vote with the rapporteur on the issue of the South Caucasus .
But it is again rather curious , is it not , that , while we are so anxious to protect the democratic freedoms and the rights of the people of the South Caucasus , and to ensure that they have a legitimacy and that they can express their self-determination , when it comes to the serious issue of the Constitutional Treaty of the European Union , Mr Brown of the Labour Party , who promised to give us a referendum , has now reneged on a referendum .
My party , the Conservative Party , is incensed that a promise has been reneged on and that is why I am standing here asking the Labour Government to give us a referendum on this important constitutional issue , just as we are concerned about what is happening in the South Caucasus .
Mr President , I understand that this report welcomes the inclusion of Armenia , Azerbaijan and Georgia into the European neighbourhood policy and the endorsement of bilateral European Neighbourhood Policy action plans .
I also understand that the rapporteur calls on the EU to develop a regional policy for the South Caucasus to be implemented jointly with the countries of the region .
Of course , one of the watchwords that will appear in many of these reports is the word ' democracy ' .
I represent London - you may not be aware of this .
I represent London , the greatest city in the world , capital of the greatest country in the world , and we happen to have a very diverse community in London , including many people from Armenia , Azerbaijan and Georgia .
One of the things that they welcome about living in London is democracy and the right to have their say on vital issues .
They ask me all the time , ' Why is it that you are preaching to us about democracy , yet you deny that very right to your citizens in Britain when it comes to a referendum on the Constitution ? ' .
So the Constitution , despite its rejection in two referendums , is undemocratic , cowardly and illegitimate .
Mr President , may I thank you for the patience and good humour you are exhibiting in this session .
May I also , as yesterday , extend my thanks to the services and the interpreters for humouring us .
The big issue in the South Caucasus region at the moment is the dispute over election results .
The West more or less connived at the Saddam-like election victory of the current Georgian Government the first time around with its vote of well over 90 % , and now , when it claims re-election , we are arguing about whether that vote was free and fair .
What kind of example do we in the European Union hold up to these struggling democracies when we show such contempt for our own democratic process here in the European Union ?
It seems periodically necessary to remind this House that 55 % of French voters and 62 % of Dutch voters voted ' no ' to the European Constitution , and yet we have the document coming back - this time without any referendums - as the Lisbon Treaty .
I say it again : it is necessary to give the people a referendum on the Lisbon Treaty .
Pactio Olisipio censenda est !
Mr Hannan , my good humour is matched only by yours .
I always wonder how you manage to fit in a reference to a referendum .
You succeed in doing so every time , no matter what topic we are discussing .
Mr President , I voted in favour of this measure not because it was my considered wish to do so , but because , as a loyal Conservative , I was following the whip .
Left to myself I would probably have abstained or perhaps voted against .
I have to say that issues concerning the Black Sea are not the top priority for my electors in the East Midlands of the United Kingdom , and I suspect not the second or third priority either .
Therefore , you could in a sense say that this was not a matter of the very greatest importance .
However , I do not believe that the European Union should have a common foreign and security policy .
I believe that nation states should have their own foreign policies , and am perfectly happy for them to work together in cooperation when that is in their interests - be this with states in the European Union or with states outside it .
In any case , the common foreign and security policy can have no democratic legitimacy if there is to be no referendum on the Lisbon Treaty .
Mr President , without doubt this new policy is aimed at facilitating , amongst other things , the supply of oil and gas through that region to Western Europe .
That would be Russian gas and Russian oil , and you are now allowing yourselves to be possibly taken hostage .
We all know that Russia cut off the supply of gas to Ukraine two Christmases ago ; once they get an even bigger share of Western Europe gas supplies , perhaps they might do it to all of us at some time .
At least here in France they have got the right idea , generating at least 70 % of their electricity by nuclear power , and it is about time the EU formulated a policy to promote that right across the Union .
But instead , of course , you go dabbling in the south Caucasus , around the Black Sea , with regimes that are not terribly stable ; with regimes that may not want us there .
But of course , you would rather do that than promote a referendum on the new constitution amongst your own people .
Mr President , I am pleased to say that I am still here , even if you and others may not share my pleasure at being here .
I would like to thank you all for your patience .
I understand that this own-initiative report actually welcomes the Commission 's communication ' Black Sea Synergy - a New Regional Cooperation Initiative ' , which aims to enhance cooperation with and within the Black Sea region by supplementing existing bilateral policies with a new regional approach .
It considers that , in order to adopt such an approach , the communication has to be followed by further consistent steps on the part of the EU to encourage a genuine regional dimension tailored to this era .
What region are we talking about ?
Let me just clarify - the Black Sea region comprises the EU Member States Bulgaria , Greece and Romania , as well as Turkey and ENP partners Armenia , Azerbaijan , Georgia , the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine , as well as the Russian Federation .
The great philosopher Brook Benton - followed and copied by the great philosopher Randy Crawford - once said , ' It 's a rainy night in Georgia ' .
Indeed , when the people of Europe are denied their vote and the people of Britain are denied their vote in a referendum on the Constitution , it is a rainy night in the EU for democracy .
Mr President , I appreciate your courtesy .
I am glad to be able to speak on this report because it seems to me that the European Union , in its treatment of Turkey , is making a generational , a possibly epical mistake .
It now seems very clear that we are never going to admit Turkey to full membership .
It is clear from the majorities in this House ; it is clear from the promises of referendums in Austria and France , where there are majorities of 70 % and 80 % respectively against membership .
Had we said initially to Ankara that this was the case and we were going to work out some kind of alternative , we might have been able to go ahead in amity and partnership .
Instead we are stringing the Turks along , imposing tens of thousands of pages of the acquis communautaire on them , making them grovel about Armenia , about Cyprus , about the treatment of their minorities and then , possibly 10 or even 15 years from now , after all of this , we will flick two fingers at them .
In so doing , we risk creating the very thing we purport to fear : an Islamist state .
Turkey is more of a democracy than the European Union .
It changed its government peaceably .
I wish we would have the courage to consult our own people .
Pactio Olisipio censenda est !
( SK ) The Black Sea region , an area of production and transit , has a strategic significance for the diversification and security of energy supplies to the European Union .
I am convinced that regional cooperation should , in addition to Turkey and Russia , include the EU Member States as equal partners too .
That is why I have voted in favour of the report .
I am concerned about the continuing conflicts in this region , which are a threat to the stability and development of the area .
I would therefore call on the European Union to play a more active role in the efforts to resolve the conflicts in this strategic area , in particular to get involved in the peace operations and to cooperate more closely with the Russian and Ukrainian Governments .
There are obvious problems as regards the uneven development of the private sector in many countries around the Black Sea .
It is necessary to improve the investment environment in the region , for local and international companies , through measures to improve the fight against corruption and fraud and promote market economy reforms .
In accordance with the decision of this House , the explanations of vote will continue after this afternoon 's votes .
Explanations of vote
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to express my full support for this report , the fruit of a lengthy and excellent job by our colleague Michael Cashman .
The European Monitoring Centre for Racism and Xenophobia was transformed into an Agency tasked with safeguarding and promoting human rights , the Agency being officially established on 1 March 2007 .
Ever since then , we must acknowledge , it has been wholly non-operational owing to the lack of a director and a multiannual framework .
In response to this sluggishness and bureaucratic inefficiency , the rapporteur proposes amending the multiannual framework in a minimum number of areas .
He urges the Commission and Council to speed up the process of selecting candidates for the post of director so as to facilitate a rapid agreement among the EU institutions , thereby reactivating this vital tool to safeguard citizens ' human rights .
I would call upon my fellow Members to support this report , since it represents an initial step towards making the Agency operational .
Support for EU human rights policies and their development cannot and must not be subject to considerations and delays of a political and economic nature .
in writing . - ( PT ) I obviously supported the creation in February 2007 of the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights as I believe that this Agency could significantly help to increase the coherence and cohesion of EU policy on fundamental rights .
The Agency was officially established on 1 March 2007 but is still waiting for the basic elements so that it can become fully operational , in other words the appointment of its director and the approval of a multiannual framework .
This initiative aims to adopt this multiannual framework , which must guide the Agency 's work over the next five years by defining the thematic areas in which it must act .
I therefore welcome the enormous effort made by the rapporteur , Mr Cashman , to facilitate the negotiations , and I hope , like him , that this encourages the Commission and the Council to conclude both the discussions on this multiannual framework and the process of selecting candidates for the position of director as soon as possible .
The people of Europe will not understand the reason for further delays preventing this Agency for Fundamental Rights from becoming fully operational .
in writing . - ( PL ) I am opposed to the creation of a European Fundamental Rights Agency , and therefore I did not support the Multi-Annual Framework for 2007-2012 .
I believe that the proposed creation of this agency and its functions are not only a waste of money but also a dangerous political initiative , whose long-term effects will be damaging to the Member States of the Union , The basic tasks assigned to this agency amount to a clear intrusion into the sovereignty of Member States .
The agency 's existence cannot be justified . There are already institutions charged with safeguarding democracy and protecting human rights in every European country .
In my view , this agency 's activities will inevitably extend beyond the thematic areas for which it was established .
For example , in the course of today 's vote on Amendment 6 to the recitals , the question of defining a human being and establishing the point at which it acquires human rights arose .
I consider this type of action to be an outrageous attempt to covertly impose dangerous ideological notions in the framework of the European Union .
in writing . - I support this report , despite my opposition and disappointment that the former European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia , set up following the recommendations of the Council of Ministers ' Consultative Committee on Racism and Xenophobia , where I represented the European Parliament , has now been dissolved into a wider European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights .
The Monitoring Centre in Vienna did extremely valuable work on promoting best practice in combating racism , xenophobia and anti-Semitism and preventing their rise , as well as reporting on the current state of play across the Union and in applicant countries .
The danger is that this will be lost , or at least diluted , in this new Agency .
I will watch developments with care .
in writing . - ( FR ) The PPE-DE Group 's French delegation welcomes the adoption of the Cashman report on the adoption of a Multiannual Framework for the EU Agency for Fundamental Rights for 2007-2012 .
Among other points , the text defines the precise thematic areas of the Agency 's activity to enable it to fulfil its mission and objectives successfully .
The majority of the French delegation , following the group line , rejected the amendments by the Liberals aimed at extending its missions to homophobia and homophobic violence , and to racism against the Roma .
They did so not in order to express their opposition to this legitimate and justifiable goal , but because these missions are already covered by the proposal for a decision , which includes in the Agency 's thematic areas the issues of racism , xenophobia and related intolerance , in addition to discrimination based on gender , racial or ethnic origin , religion or belief , disability , age or sexual orientation or against persons belonging to minorities .
We welcome the adoption of this report , which will allow the Agency to become fully operational , thus enabling it to accomplish its task and safeguard the rights of EU citizens .
in writing . - ( FR ) The PPE-DE Group 's French delegation welcomes the adoption of the Cashman report on the adoption of a Multiannual Framework for the EU Agency for Fundamental Rights for 2007-2012 .
Among other points , the text defines the precise thematic areas of the Agency 's activity to enable it to fulfil its mission and objectives successfully .
The French delegation , following the group line , rejected the amendments by the Liberals aimed at extending its missions to homophobia and homophobic violence , and to racism against the Roma .
It did so not in order to express their opposition to this legitimate and justifiable goal , but because these missions are already covered by the proposal for a decision , which includes in the Agency 's thematic areas the issues of racism , xenophobia and related intolerance , in addition to discrimination based on gender , racial or ethnic origin , religion or belief , disability , age or sexual orientation or against persons belonging to minorities .
We welcome the adoption of this report , which will allow the Agency to become fully operational , thus enabling it to accomplish its task and safeguard the rights of EU citizens .
in writing . - ( PT ) Leaving aside the aspects criticised , which we have already had the opportunity to highlight , once the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights becomes operational in due course , its actual purpose will be clarified .
In the debate on the definition of the objectives and priorities for its Multiannual Framework for 2007-2012 , its thematic areas were clearly restricted to the following was clear : racism , xenophobia and related intolerance ; discrimination based on sex , racial or ethnic origin , religion or belief , disability or sexual orientation or of persons belonging to minorities ; compensation of victims , prevention of crime and related aspects relevant to the security of citizens ; protection of children , including the rights of the child ; immigration and integration of migrants ; asylum ; visa and border control ; participation in the Union 's democratic functioning ; human rights issues relating to the information society ; and access to efficient and independent justice .
The European Parliament has added extreme poverty and social exclusion .
However , social rights , including the rights of workers , have not been regarded as a priority , even at a time when fundamental social rights are being called into question by the policies promoted by the EU .
in writing . - ( FR ) Like the French delegation in the PPE-DE Group , I welcome the adoption of the Cashman report on the adoption of a Multiannual Framework for the EU Agency for Fundamental Rights for 2007-2012 .
Among other points , the text defines the precise thematic areas of the Agency 's activity to enable it to fulfil its mission and objectives successfully .
Like the French delegation and the PPE-DE Group , I rejected the amendments by the Liberals aimed at extending its missions to homophobia and homophobic violence , and to racism against the Roma .
In fact , these missions are already covered by the proposal for a decision , which includes in the Agency 's thematic areas the issues of racism , xenophobia and related intolerance , in addition to discrimination based on gender , racial or ethnic origin , religion or belief , disability , age or sexual orientation or against persons belonging to minorities .
I welcome the adoption of this report , which will allow the Agency to become fully operational , thus enabling it to accomplish its task and safeguard the rights of EU citizens .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the amended proposal because it contains improvements in data protection .
However , I do not agree with the increasing move of justice and home affairs issues from the Member States to the EU .
For this reason , I voted against the legislative resolution .
in writing . - ( FR ) I strongly support the report by our excellent colleague Mr Díaz de Mera .
The transformation of Europol into a Community agency is a request I have always supported .
It means in fact that from now on Europol will be financed by the Community budget , and that the status of Community official will apply to Europol personnel .
In both cases , the powers of our Parliament have been considerably enhanced .
Moreover , the Council decision substantially broadens Europol 's scope and capacity for action , which I also support .
In short , making Europol more operational and subjecting it to genuine democratic control is a decision I support unreservedly .
in writing . - The Council 's wangling has been entirely successfully : transforming the European Police Office , Europol , from its status as an intergovernmental agency financed by the budgets of the Member States into a European Union agency financed by the EU budget , and applying the status of Community official , all on the grounds of technical , not political , requirements .
Since Europol 's missions have in fact been extended significantly to encompass areas other than organised crime , the Council feels that the new objectives will be better dealt with at EU level than at Member State level .
Thus , in the name of the extremely questionable principle of subsidiarity , the Europeanist logic of systematic elimination of competences of the Member State and deepening of the supranational model is applied .
This is exactly the philosophy and the approach of the reforms in the Lisbon Treaty , which European and national leaders as a body wish to impose on the peoples and nations against their will .
Europe is no longer listening to its peoples .
Worse still , it is disregarding them and lying to them .
Now that 26 European countries have already announced they will not ratify this Treaty by referendum , let us hope that the nations and peoples of Europe will be saved by a rejection of this ridiculous text by the Irish , the only people who are allowed to decide for themselves .
in writing . - ( PL ) The Member States of the European Union created Europol as an institutional response through which to combat organised crime .
We are today debating broadening Europol 's competences and streamlining its operations , 12 years after it was established .
The rapporteur has made an accurate assessment of Europol 's current legal and factual situation .
He rightly criticises the overly complicated and lengthy procedure envisaged to change Europol 's status and include it in the Union 's organisational structure .
The corrective measures proposed in the report are also worthy of consideration and support .
Earlier attempts to change Europol 's competences show how difficult it is for countries to reach agreement when they are bound by the principle of unanimity .
I therefore believe that only when the Treaty of Lisbon is ratified and comes into force in all 27 Member States will we be able to introduce procedural changes and improve this situation , as the Treaty will also reform the decision-making process within the EU .
In addition , bestowing the status of an EU agency on Europol , with all the consequences that involves , including financial , will enable the European Union as a whole to combat organised crime more effectively .
in writing . - ( PT ) As neither the Treaty proposal nor this proposal to adopt by qualified majority decisions on regulations relating to the structure , operations , field of action and tasks of Europol have been ratified , the EU institutions are already tiring of trying to convert the European Police Office into a European agency .
In addition to our fundamental criticism of this process , we are concerned that we are facing :
the possibility that ' special categories of data concerning racial or ethnic origin , political opinions , religious or philosophical beliefs , party or trade union membership , sexual orientation or health ' will not be excluded from processing ;
the failure to adopt safeguards for the protection of personal data processed in the field of police and judicial cooperation at EU level and in relations with third countries , particularly with the US ( e.g. air passenger data ) ;
the failure to guarantee access by an individual to his data or even to be aware that his personal data is being processed by Europol ;
the failure to clarify the control by national parliaments .
This would be a flagrant breach of citizens ' rights , freedoms and guarantees .
in writing . - ( ES ) I voted for the text agreed by consensus with the contributions of the groups .
It is an issue that affects essential cooperation against crime .
I must point out , however , as did my colleagues Mr Fava and Mr Moreno , that the lofty goals of the resolution are at odds with the recalcitrant attitude of the rapporteur , Mr Díaz de Mera , who was Director-General of the Spanish Police on 11 March 2004 and who refused to cooperate with the court that presided over the trial on Europe 's largest ever terrorist bombing .
Moreover , the rapporteur is one of the major propagators or collaborators of the disgraceful theory that it was not Islamist cells , but ETA terrorists , that were responsible for this massacre .
Mr Díaz de Mera and others who described themselves as ' peones negros ' ( black pawns ) attempted to mislead international public opinion and , even though their standpoint was in the end not treated as a crime ( it was subjected only to a sanction and serious admonishment from the Court ) , this Parliament should be acquainted with all the facts .
Their personal attacks reveal their lack of arguments .
Finally , I wish to express my regret that Mr Díaz de Mera did not even have the dignity of his colleague Jaime Mayor , who at least removed his name from the terrorism text .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to vote in favour of the Díaz de Mera García Consuegra report on the establishment of the European Police Office ( Europol ) .
Changing circumstances within the European Union , new forms of criminal activity and new terrorist threats mean that the existing body is in need of reorganisation .
I nevertheless feel that certain points should be clarified .
The transformation of Europol into an EU agency must not place an additional financial burden on Member States ; above all , it must not consume any of the already insufficient state resources earmarked for national police forces .
On the contrary , the investigative authorities and those responsible for law and order must be better looked after and reinforced .
Indeed , Europol 's activities must consist of supporting and coordinating the fundamental , irreplaceable work of the various Member States ' police forces .
I am therefore pleased that the proposal contains provisions for the coordination , organisation and conduct of investigations and operational activities in conjunction with the Member States ' competent authorities or by joint investigative teams .
in writing . - ( PT ) This own-initiative report reveals the true ambitions of the ' European Neighbourhood Policy ' , specifically for the South Caucasus .
These are to set out the geostrategic agenda in its political , economic and military aspects , in other words the EU 's plan for intervention in this neuralgic area , with increased pressure being put on China and Russia .
This will result in more interference in , and manipulation of , the conflicts arising from the dismantling of the USSR , with the aim of ensuring that the EU 's major powers and financial / economic groups gain control over this region , with the inter-capitalist rivalries also being clearly evident .
You only have to look at the ' recommendations ' , such as the incentive to conclude free trade agreements and the pursuit of further liberalisation or the clear appeal for interference through ' support ' for the action of ' civil society ' , ensuring that ' the [ Community ! ] funds are distributed ... without ... state interference ' .
The approach to the energy issue is particularly significant as it highlights the importance of energy brokers who can bypass Russia and the control over energy infrastructures and sources .
Finally , we note the incoherence between ' its unconditional support for the territorial integrity and inviolability of the internationally recognised borders of Georgia ' and the appeal to the principles of the United Nations Charter , when this is not being done for Serbia .
in writing . - ( PT ) This is another own-initiative report which assumes the same logic as the report on the Southern Caucasus and the ' European Neighbourhood Policy ' : in other words , interference and pressure to guarantee access to ( and control over ) markets ( particularly energy markets ) and further liberalisation .
The report argues for the promotion of ' market economy reforms ' , encouraging ' harmonisation and further liberalisation measures ' and supporting ' the creation of a free trade area in accordance with WTO principles ' .
This is a process in which the EU allegedly has ' a leading role to play ' in ' encouraging the region to take the necessary steps ' .
At the same time the report ' stresses the crucial importance of establishing and developing good neighbourly relations among the countries of the Black Sea region and with their neighbours , based on mutual respect , territorial integrity , non-interference in each others ' internal affairs and the prohibition of the use of force or threats to use force , as fundamental principles for fostering regional cooperation ' and yet it argues for the promotion of ' European values ' , ' irrespective of the degree of willingness shown by partner governments ' .
This is a clear contradiction / incoherence between what is recommended ( for others ) and what is done .
The EU is demanding that others respect what it itself does not respect .
What cynicism .
in writing . - ( DE ) Until a short while ago Kenya was a holiday paradise for many people .
Visitors were well shielded from the massive corruption and terrible poverty in which a large majority of the population have to live .
Since the events of late December and the fraudulent presidential elections , Kenya and its political problems have suddenly been on everyone 's lips .
While the parliamentary elections were generally regarded as successful by the official observers , doubts were raised as to the accuracy of the results of the presidential election .
In tabling today 's motion for a resolution on Kenya , we are once again condemning the widespread irregularities and the conduct of the incumbent President Kibaki , who in rejecting the offer made by President John Kufuor to help resolve the crisis has seriously undermined the mediation efforts .
We call on Kenya 's political leaders to do everything in their power to prevent further violence in the country and to ensure respect for human rights .
During the debate on this subject we again discussed and examined the question of the effectiveness of direct budgetary aid .
This topic , like that of Kenya , is one that will continue to occupy us in the months ahead .
in writing . - ( PT ) This explanation of vote is intended to point out that , by recognising the mediation efforts begun by neighbouring countries , by the Southern African Development Community and by the African Union , we believe that the Kenyan people will be able to find and define their own path .
It is up to the Kenyan people themselves to find the solutions to overcome the current situation in their country .
As a result , we regard as negative any attempt by the EU to interfere , as indicated and proposed in the resolution , particularly bearing in mind the objectives proclaimed by the EU in its ' Strategy for Africa ' and the framework of inter-imperialist cooperation / rivalry concerning this continent that is also clearly evident and that is so deeply felt in this region .
Finally , I must highlight the omission from the resolution of a reference to the severe and deteriorating socio-economic situation in this country - which is at the root of the expression of popular discontent manifested in the elections - and the deep responsibility for this situation of the neo-liberal policies promoted , in particular , by the international financial institutions , major capitalist powers and their transnational companies .
in writing . - ( CS ) I fully support our resolution on the situation in Kenya , which is based on an up-to-date investigation by the EU observer mission in Kenya at the start of the year .
We must ensure that the authorities in Kenya investigate , without delay , the circumstances surrounding the elections and prevent further violence .
We must insist on the return of live broadcasting and on the adherence to basic human rights and the rights laid down by the African Charter .
However , this resolution detract from the responsibility of the European Commission to resolve the issue of the transfer of € 400 million to the Congolese Government .
I think that we shall be returning to this issue soon .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of paragraph 20 of the report on the role of women in industry because it is essential that the Commission carries out a study into the negative consequences of long working hours on private , family and social life , such as children spending a lot of time alone , left to their own devices , which often leads to failure at school and crime .
The Member States must improve monitoring of undertakings that force their employees to remain at work beyond the statutory working hours and they must impose harsh penalties on these undertakings .
in writing . - ( PT ) The European Parliament today adopted my report on the role of women in industry .
This is very positive , although I do regret certain minor amendments .
However , the report recognises the important role of women in industry and it calls on the Commission and Member States to take the necessary measures , including effective monitoring , to combat stereotyping and discrimination , particularly wage discrimination .
This situation is even more serious when you consider that women 's wages are around 30 % lower than men 's wages in industry , whereas the average for other sectors is 15 % , despite the Equal Pay Directive having been around for more than 30 years .
It stresses the importance of collective bargaining in the fight to abolish discrimination against women , in particular with regard to access to employment , wages , working conditions , careers and professional training .
It stresses the importance of Community programmes that encourage the creation of trademarks , the protection of products ' designation of origin and the external promotion of Community products from industrial sectors where women predominate .
Finally , it is very important to ensure recognition of the right of female and male workers to take part in restructuring processes affecting industrial undertakings , by guaranteeing their structures , in particular the European Works Councils , full access to information and the possibility of decisive intervention , including the right of veto .
in writing . - ( SV ) This report deals with a number of aspects which , in themselves , are important but in respect of which the Member States retain the power to act and the responsibility to develop and improve their legislation .
The gender ratio on company boards , the development of equality plans in large companies and the proportion of female members of company boards are not questions which are best and most effectively regulated at EU level .
We have thus voted against the report in question .
in writing . - ( PL ) Clearly , European industry is undergoing far-reaching change .
It is therefore hard not to recognise its strategic importance for the development of all Member States of the European Union and their citizens , regardless of gender .
The role of women employed in European industry and the opportunities available to them depend not only on a country 's level of economic development , but also on traditions regarding acceptance of equal opportunities and respect for human rights regulations .
There is large-scale participation of women in industry and they make a substantial contribution in almost all sectors . Nonetheless , one has to agree with the rapporteur that the role of women in industries involving cutting-edge technologies , such as the aeronautical industry or the chemical industry , is very inadequate .
It is entirely appropriate , therefore , that the report highlights this aspect and focuses quite rightly on gender issues .
The report also emphasises that women 's involvement in industry cannot be limited to work in sectors that do not require qualifications , where women are the first to suffer when restructuring takes place .
The rapporteur calls for support , especially for SMEs , to enable the relatively high level of female employment to be retained , particularly in the case of women who find themselves in an unfortunate professional situation .
This suggestion is worthy of support , as is the entire report , if only for this reason .
in writing . - I support paragraph 33 because such proactive measures need to be taken - at least on an interim basis to ensure participation of women in the decision-making process at all levels .
In addition to this I strongly support paragraph 20 as there is a real need for a full investigation into the impact that long working hours have on health , both physical and mental , as well as on family life .
If we are to promote a work life balance and family friendly policies then we need such a study .
in writing - ( PL ) Human rights are the foundation of democracy .
These rights include the very important principle of equality between women and men , allowing of course for the circumstances arising out of the biological differences between them .
One aspect of this issue concerns the employment and role of women in industry .
It is simply impossible to apply an arithmetical division into equal halves .
Above all , what we are concerned with is equality of opportunity , which is conditional on access to education and professional training in technical and economic subjects .
Another very important issue is providing assistance to mothers bringing up children and ensuring they are not discriminated against in the workplace .
It is essential to introduce flexible provisions regarding pensions for women bringing up children . The period of so-called parental leave must be credited in full and added to the period considered as time in employment under pension rules .
In many of our countries women are still being paid significantly less than men for work of equal quality and quantity .
There can be no justification for creating obstacles impeding women from undertaking managerial and supervisory roles on company boards of directors or boards of trustees .
Action is needed to do away with stereotypes in this regard .
The report tabled represents a step in that direction , which is why I voted in favour of it .
in writing . - ( FR ) In many recitals and paragraphs of this extremely long resolution , we are stating the obvious .
We are calling for measures that were , fortunately , taken some time ago .
It is true that certain directives on equal treatment and opportunities between women and men have been poorly applied , but if discrimination still remains in the areas covered by this set of measures , who is at fault ?
All these directives contain appeal mechanisms .
Women who have experienced discrimination need only go to court , where they will win their case , as demonstrated in many cases in my country , thankfully .
Unfortunately , this report contains a number of incongruous claims that bear no relation to the role of women in industry .
Asking for a 40 % quota of female representation on company boards is interference contrary to the principle of subsidiarity in issues reserved for Member States .
It is not for us to call for the ' monitoring ' of company delocalisation .
It is utopian to demand ' more choice in the workplace ' .
If my company is based in the city of Luxembourg and has no other branches , I cannot put in a request to work in Schifflange where I live .
I voted for this report in accordance with these observations .
in writing . - ( CS ) I agree with many of the ideas in the report on women in industry .
However , I am not happy that specific attention was not given to the regional unemployment among women who lost their jobs in European textile factories at the time when this was happening .
I also think that no amount of quotas for the employment of women will solve the situation .
My second comment concerns the balanced division of time between work and family .
This affects women as well as men .
I do not think that the solution lies in resolutions .
It lies in the implementation of the European concept of flexicurity .
Holland is one example where an excellent legislative framework has been developed for part-time work .
The result has been reduced unemployment , as well as giving men and women more time for family life .
An effective use of shorter working hours also shows that it does not have to lead to a reduction in income .
in writing . - ( SV ) As a liberal and a member of the Liberal Party of Sweden , Folkpartiet , I always find reports from Parliament on equality somewhat tricky .
The Swedish Liberal Party has over the years taken the view that the best way to proceed in these matters is on a voluntary basis but we also realise that this is not always enough .
Sweden 's positive engagement in this field has made us known as one of the world 's most equal countries .
So do we not want to disseminate our successes across the EU ?
Of course we do !
The question is merely by what methods .
In the report in question I felt obliged to vote against a number of paragraphs whose spirit I support but whose scope and approach seem dubious .
I think that both equality plans and measurable targets may be important tools for enterprises .
On the other hand , I do not believe it is something that the EU should concern itself with as a primary issue .
The same applies to the establishment of an EU-sponsored ' methodology for analysing exactly what jobs entail ' that will ' guarantee ' equal pay .
The Global Adjustment Fund , about which I had severe misgivings from the beginning , also should not take special account of gender - that would be to perpetrate a double injustice .
One cannot expect every report to be written as though one had drafted it oneself , but there is much to find fault with here .
Yet the subject is so important that , in the end , I voted in favour of it as a whole .
in writing . - ( PL ) I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Figueiredo on the role of women in industry .
I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on a very good and thorough report .
The issue of equal rights for men and women is a very important one and we must continue to give it as much attention as possible , since the European Union is based on the principle of non-discrimination .
We should give priority to tackling all indications of failure to comply with this principle . This is particularly necessary because the nature of industry is changing as we strive to create a knowledge-based society .
The sectors in which women were traditionally employed are linked to the processing industry , whereas the newest sectors of industry are based on the development of the latest technologies , such as information and communication technologies .
We should make every effort to ensure that the principle of equal opportunity is complied with in these new sectors .
in writing . - ( IT ) The resolution on which we are about to vote cannot fail to receive the support and vote of the UEN Group .
We hope that there will soon be better regulation of the Internet aimed at protecting children and taking more effective measures against providers that host child pornography websites .
Immediate action must be taken by all EU Member States to close down illegal sites , by means of better coordination among the police forces responsible .
In addition , we hope that it will be possible to tackle the sensitive issue of information exchanged by terrorist organisations thanks to the Internet , and that this matter might be the subject of future forums .
There can be no freedom without rules and , most importantly , the Internet cannot and must not be an area of freedom for those who commit criminal acts and preach hatred and intolerance .
An emergency must be tackled by means of decisive , urgent measures and not improvised ones .
The fight against terrorism and hatred between peoples must be a rule and a goal of the European Union and all free , democratic countries .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 1.05 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
1 .
Arrest of Chinese dissident Hu Jia ( debate )
- The next item is the debate on five motions for resolutions on the arrest of the Chinese dissident Hu Jia .
author . - ( DE ) Madam President , our Group has nominated Hu Jia and his wife , Zeng Jinyan , for the Sakharov Prize .
Because the couple are under house arrest they used a webcam link to take part in a hearing of the European Parliament on the human rights situation in China .
The renewed arrest of Hu Jia has only served to demonstrate something that he himself warned of .
Does China by its action wish to show its contempt for the opinion of the European Parliament ?
Human rights must be firmly enshrined as an issue that cuts across all the relations that exist between the EU and China .
We too must act in a coherent and consistent way and should not simply sacrifice our values on the altar of good economic relations .
We are therefore calling on the Council and the Commission not just to take up a position for Hu Jia but also to use the next EU-China summit to call for a commitment to human rights .
China has to put a stop to the systematic intimidation of human rights activists .
If China does not change its conduct we will again need to raise the issue of our participation in the Olympic Games .
Moreover , Russia is set to host the next Winter Olympics and that country also has a poor record when it comes to human rights .
( Applause )
Madam President , the problem of human rights in China keeps coming up in these urgent debates , always with good reason .
China 's economic growth and increased international standing have still not resulted in any real difference in the approach to civil liberties , abuse of power by the authorities , room for opposition and independence of the judiciary .
Harsh penalties are still being imposed , including frequent use of the death penalty .
China is not the only country that sentences people to death and executes them , but it is the champion in this .
The only progress that we have seen is that more care is now taken to be certain of the perpetrator 's guilt before the death penalty is carried out , so fewer people are being put to death who later turn out to be innocent .
Meanwhile , the international focus on the three great dramas in China has to a large extent disappeared .
The bloodbath in Tiananmen Square in 1989 , the persecution of the supporters of the Falun Gong movement and the changing of the composition of the populations of Tibet and East Turkestan are being given less and less attention .
All the attention is now going to economic growth , export opportunities to China , opportunities for cheap imports from China , the growing role of China in Africa and the coming Olympic Games in China .
Under these circumstances the pressure to improve the human rights situation in China is dwindling .
The Olympic Games have become an argument for pulling down residential areas and driving the residents away .
Chinese ambassadors say that their national honour is violated when this is criticised from abroad .
The coming Olympic Games could have been an occasion for improvement .
As things look at the moment , they will be good for tourism and good for the completion of major public works , but not good for improving human rights .
In the Netherlands , meanwhile , a debate has started about the possibility of boycotting these Olympic Games .
A resolution about a single arrested human rights activist , Hu Jia , is necessary but it is not enough .
The most important factor in the relations between Europe and China should not be economic self-interest but our concern about human rights in China .

author . - ( PL ) I agree with Mr Meyer who said just now that we should boycott the Olympic Games because of the persecution to which the Chinese people are subject in China .
Indeed , it is not only the Chinese who are constantly being persecuted in that country . The persecution of the Tibetan people and other national minorities has often been raised in this House .
We are today referring to the illegal detention and persecution of an activist in the cause of freedom , a person who is fighting for freedom in China , namely the politician Hu Jia . His wife and family have shared his fate .
Ladies and gentlemen , I can remember when the Olympic Games hosted by the Soviet Union were boycotted several decades ago . That action contributed to the fall of the Communist regime .
We cannot now allow ourselves to be dazzled by China 's economic success .
Congratulations are due to China on the latter , but we must not turn a blind eye to the persecution of so many people and the violation of their fundamental rights . As I mentioned earlier , it is not only the Chinese who are affected , but also other residents of what is known as China .
After all , Tibet , whose cause has repeatedly been raised in this House , is not China . I appeal for a boycott of the Olympic Games .
author . - ( DE ) Madam President , seven months before the start of the Olympic Games , China is demonstrating how little account it takes of human rights .
The hope that the IOC decision would help improve things in the Middle Kingdom has been an illusion .
In October and November 2007 the State Security Services abducted and maltreated the attorneys Gao Zhisheng and Li Heping .
At the end of December they imprisoned the human rights activist and cyber dissident Hu Jia on the charge that he had used the Internet to incite subversion of State power .
On 10 October Hu Jia took part in a press conference on human rights , which was held at the European Parliament in Brussels .
He was linked to us live from China by telephone .
We must thank him for this courageous act .
Last year he and his wife Zeng Jinyan were nominated by the European Parliament for the Sakharov Prize .
In his Internet blog he reports on political prisoners and on the victims of land confiscations for the forthcoming Olympics .
In a letter he thanked Chancellor Angela Merkel for having received the Dalai Lama .
This clearly was too much for official China .
In an open letter some 57 Chinese intellectuals called for the release of Hu Jia .
Our President , Hans-Gert Pöttering , endorsed this .
It is a slap in the face when human rights activists are arrested , especially because of their contact with the European Parliament .
We have to use all diplomatic means at our disposal to ensure that he is released from prison immediately .
China is promising the world the best Olympic Games ever seen .
The price for this should not be censorship or contempt for the rule of law .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , back in 2001 when it was decided that Beijing would host the Olympic Games , many of us believed that despite the controversy surrounding it , this decision would help to bring about political change in Communist China . We felt that the host country would be moved to put an end to widespread violations of human rights and increase the scope of fundamental freedoms on its territory .
I agree with Mr Mann that with 7 months to go before the Games open , all those hopes have proved in vain .
The opposite is actually the case : the rule of terror in China has intensified .
Human rights defenders like Hu Jia and his wife are imprisoned and held illegally without trial in unknown locations , harassed , terrorised and denied the right of defence .
The Chinese authorities are sending out a different signal to the world , indicating that there is no democracy or openness in their country .
At the same time , the Chinese Olympic Committee has determined that the Games ' main slogan will be ' One world , one dream ' . They maintain that this dream consists of a common aspiration to flourish and live in peace .
One is left wondering what kind of peace the Chinese have in mind and whether they really understand what the Olympic Games are all about .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , the Chinese activist Mr Hu Jia was arrested two days after Christmas during the afternoon at his home .
It is very sad news , particularly because China , a great country , a great global player in the contemporary world , is the organiser of the Olympic Games this year .
The European Parliament and all the European Union must stress that China must challenge six issues relating to human rights : China 's failure to fully implement new regulations allowing greater press freedom ; China 's superficial commitments to upholding the rule of law ; limited Chinese support for international efforts to promote civilian protection in Darfur , Sudan ; limited Chinese support for international efforts to promote human rights in Burma ; the absence of transparency in Chinese aid to abusive governments ; and , in particular , the release from prison of all political prisoners in China .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , Hu Jia and Zeng Jinyan have come to symbolise for us the fight for freedom of expression and human rights in China .
Both husband and wife have been nominated by this House for the Sakharov Prize in recognition of their activities , whilst they are repressed in their own country because of those same activities .
Hu Jia was arrested on 2 January .
In the 1980s , during the period of martial law in Poland , transparency served to protect against the most drastic forms of repression .
The press and radio stations on the other side of the Iron Curtain named those imprisoned , which allowed us to hope we would be safe .
I myself experienced what it meant to be helped in this way by people abroad who were not indifferent to our plight .
That is why it is now so very important for me to ensure that our voice , the voice of the European Parliament , the voice of hundreds of Members from different European countries should be heard in China . The Chinese authorities must hear our appeal and stop repressing Hu Jia and the many other victims of persecution .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , the Olympic Games ought to be perceived by both the Chinese authorities and the rest of the world as a chance for China to change its international image , which has been particularly affected by continuous breaches of human rights , affecting very different groups , for very different reasons .
The arrest of Hu Jia , and many others , show that China is not taking up this opportunity as it should .
It also serves once again as a reminder to those who saw China as a country that was prepared and sufficiently open-minded to organise an international event supposedly focusing on solidarity such as the Olympic Games .
China still has time to change that image , but to do this it must take issues such as freedom of expression and freedom of association more seriously , and put an end to its obsession with arresting , punishing and convicting Chinese men and women accused of an offence as difficult to justify as incitement to subvert state power .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , every Olympics draws our attention to the preservation of human dignity as stated in the Olympic Charter .
The 2008 Beijing Olympics will specifically draw our attention to that preservation - or otherwise - in China .
Hopefully , this will bring pressure on the Chinese Government to rethink actions like the arrest of Hu Jia .
It is an opportunity for the country to improve its poor record in this area .
Instead , the Chinese Government seems determined to sweep human rights abuses under the rug , by arresting activists and protestors .
Of concern is the purchase of Western high-tech security equipment by the Chinese authorities , obviously intended to step up security during the games .
My concern is twofold .
I fear that such security equipment will be used against the Chinese people this summer , and that it will remain in misuse after the summer .
We must either use the Olympics to promote human rights in China , or boycott them , and one thing we cannot do is have a big celebration of China if human rights continue to be so flagrantly disregarded .
( BG ) Colleagues , during the 20th century millions of people all over the world fell victims to communism .
Regrettably , this extremely pernicious , misanthropic and mostly anti-Christian ideology continues to take its victims to this day and to have its representatives . Even here in this Chamber .
I will give you an example to illustrate and make things somewhat clearer .
Currently Hu Jia is under house arrest in China because there are a sufficient number of people there who believe that he is a proponent of their ideas .
This is what makes his dangerous for the Chinese regime .
Here , at the European Parliament , thank God , there is a sufficient number of Members elected by millions of citizens to represent their views , yet the powers that be in this European Union , which many compare to a ' pyramid ' , have their own priorities and a referendum on the Lisbon Treaty is not among those priorities .
This makes us , those Members , just as dangerous as Hu Jia is for the Chinese regime .
We are not placed under house arrest but Mr. Pöttering , if he is honest and open enough , would admit that he might go that far .
However , I assure him that an honourable representation of our voters counts more than that prospect . Thank you .
Madam President , the case of Mr Hu Jia and his wife , unfortunately , is not an isolated one .
In order to have the privilege to host this year 's Olympic Games in Beijing , the Chinese Government undertook additional commitments to meet internationally recognised human rights standards .
Contrary to these expectations , Beijing sees the Olympic Games as a justification for increasing repression against human rights activists .
So , by systematically violating its own commitments , the Chinese Government has demonstrated that it does not intend to respect the core values of the Olympic tradition .
In fact , it is about to lose its credibility .
Therefore , the democratic states cannot limit their reaction to mere complaints .
If the Chinese authorities do not make credible changes to the situation , then the democratic participants in the Games risk their own credibility with regard to the values they advocate .
( PL ) Madam President , in 2001 the Vice-President of the Beijing Organising Committee for the Games of the XXIX Olympiad , Liu Jingmin , stated that awarding the Olympic Games to Beijing would help to promote the development of human rights .
In recent months , however , the Chinese authorities have been allowing themselves to violate freedom of expression more frequently than usual . They have also repressed journalists and activists .
The arrest of Hu Jia , a leading human rights activist who was nominated for the Sakharov Prize in 2007 sent shock waves through society .
Hu Jia was arrested on the pretext that he had been inciting others to overthrow the national government . He is still being denied the right to a lawyer and to medical care .
China must be forced to comply with international standards in human rights and to respect those rights . It must also put an end to exploitation of the Games as an excuse for the illegal detention of journalists and dissidents .
We should remind the Chinese authorities of the idea inspiring the Olympic movement , namely linking sport with a vision of a peaceful society and the preservation of human dignity .
At the same time we should call for the immediate release of Hu Jia and of all the other activists detained without trial , so that they can return to their families and access essential medical care .
( PL ) Madam President , I simply wished to establish whether the ' catch-the-eye ' strategy also works here .
If so , I wished to state briefly that when in China one cannot detect any obvious signs of how the control system operates , but it does . The citizens feel strongly bound up in the oppressive regime imposed by the system .
We believe we are called to make the rest of the world aware of the situation , as other Members have already stated .
That is the only weapon at our disposal .
We can respect the economic development achieved in China , but hardly anywhere else in the world have people become so permeated by fear and self-censorship .
I am therefore full of admiration for those courageous individuals in China who are brave enough to risk their careers , their freedom and their very lives to draw attention to the situation . It is our moral duty to stand shoulder to shoulder with them .
There is no other solution , no other way forward .
( PL ) Madam President , further to the comments of my fellow Member from Poland , I should like to pose the following question to Commissioner Kuneva , taking advantage of her presence in the House .
Against the background of the last few years , can we really say that genuine respect for human rights is on the increase in the People 's Republic of China ?
Have the Games due to take place this July in Beijing really meant that Chinese dissidents can now feel more secure , and that relations with Taiwan are on a more civilised footing ?
Has free access to the Internet increased over the last two or three years ?
I would be grateful for the Commissioner 's reply .
After all , the Bible tells us : ' Ask and ye shall receive ' .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , only a month ago my colleague , Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner , expressed in this Chamber the Commission 's deep concern at the continuous and systematic repression of human rights ' defenders in China .
The Commission was , therefore , all the more concerned to learn about Mr Hu Jia 's arbitrary detention and recalls that he has been subjected to repeated acts of harassment in the past due to human rights activities .
We also express our concern for Mr Hu Jia 's health .
He suffers from hepatitis B and must take daily medication .
It is not clear whether daily access to the medical treatment he needs is guaranteed and whether he can count on doctors ' assistance during his detention in the Beijing Municipal Detention Centre in Dougezhuang .
In the Commission 's view , the detention of Mr Hu Jia places an obligation on the EU to act in a firm manner because of the clear inference that he was arrested as a consequence of speaking freely and honestly about the repression of human rights defenders via a telephone link to a meeting of the European Parliament 's Subcommittee on Human Rights in November 2007 .
As such , it has echoes of the case of Cao Dong , a Falun Gong petitioner , who was arrested and is still in prison after meeting the Vice-President of the European Parliament in Beijing in May 2006 .
The detention of Mr Hu Jia also calls for a reaction from the EU as an international actor for the protection of human rights defenders .
Yesterday the EU troika carried out a firm démarche to the Chinese authorities asking for his immediate release .
We sincerely hope that the Chinese authorities will understand that the issue of human rights defenders has an important impact on China 's standing with the European public and will act accordingly .
I would like to reassure this Chamber that the EU will monitor very closely the evolution of Mr Hu Jia 's case .
The Commission would like to use this opportunity to urge again the Chinese Government to permit expressions of all forms of opinion .
This is an important factor in how the international public views China , especially this year , when the eyes of the world will be on China in the build-up to the Olympic Games .
We are convinced that a far more stable society can be achieved by allowing freedom of expression .
Let me close by saying that the Commission will intensify its efforts to seek an improvement of the overall human rights situation in China .
In this respect , we will continue to play an instrumental role within the troika in preparing the EU-China human rights dialogue and seminar so that discussions continue to become more target-focussed .
Despite the slow progress in the human rights situation in China , we firmly believe that the EU-China human rights dialogue remains one of the most effective ways of engaging China in frank and detailed discussions with a view to achieving human rights reforms on the ground .
- The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debate .
2 .
Situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo and rape as a war crime ( debate )
- The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on the situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo and rape as a war crime .
author . - ( ES ) Madam President , sexual violence and rape in particular as a weapon of war is not , regrettably , a new issue .
It is no minor issue that Articles 7 and 8 of the 1998 Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court provide that rape , sexual slavery , enforced prostitution , forced pregnancy , enforced sterilisation or any other form of sexual violence are to be treated as crimes against humanity and war crimes , and will equal , in terms of treatment and persecution , torture or serious war crimes , whether or not they are committed during an armed conflict .
The war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo shows to what extent this issue merits much more attention than has been paid to date .
There have been tens of thousands of reports of rape or sexual assault annually in the region .
Many of these incidents , moreover , take place at camps for displaced persons or refugees , and are frequently perpetrated by government troops , rebel groups or other forces .
I thus consider it extremely important that this Parliament not only condemn these practices , but that it urge the authorities in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to put an immediate stop to these practices , investigate , bring them to trial and secure convictions , and guarantee protection for the victims , witnesses and family members .
We must also remind our own institutions that United Nations Security Council Resolution 1325 emphasises the responsibility of Member States to put an end to impunity , and pursue those responsible for crimes against humanity and war crimes , including crimes relating to sexual violence or other kinds of specific violence against women .
Madam President , European states brought tribes together in colonies in Africa that did not have good relations with each other , and divided other tribes by drawing boundaries right through the middle of their lands .
The Democratic Republic of Congo , an enormous territory with a multitude of racial groups , was not given the opportunity to grow into independence by gradually building up self-rule during the Belgian colonisation before 1960 .
There was no preparation for decolonisation : it suddenly became inevitable after England and France had granted independence to their smaller neighbouring colonies at the end of the 1950s , partly as a consequence of the wars of liberation in Morocco , Tunisia , Algeria and Kenya .
Since then the Congo has been a permanent war zone .
The early years were dominated by the conflict between Kasavubu from the west , Lumumba from the north-east and Tshombe in the south-east .
They each represented different ideologies and interests but , more importantly , they were popular with limited sections of the Congolese population .
The harsh military dictatorship of the profiteer Mobutu kept the country united for years in apparent peace , but the differences were never bridged .
The most recent elections also failed to produce unity or good cooperation .
The country remains a conflict zone with flexible borders , where , just as in the 1960s , it is about the demarcation of ethnic territories and control of mining areas .
Foreign companies have benefited from this .
The conflict now seems to be about which group among this multitude of tribal groups will dominate the others .
As things are now , the future of the Congo seems to be without prospects .
The atrocities to which the resolution refers , including the general lawlessness and frequent rape of women are all connected with this chaos .
The 2006 law against sexual violence will not solve that problem , as long as the conflict continues and there are so many people without a permanent place to live .
The resolution rightly makes reference to the role of government representatives , peace forces , aid organisations ; their people should do everything they can to prevent such atrocities without becoming drawn into them themselves .
Recognition of rape , forced pregnancy , sexual exploitation and other forms of sexual violence as war crimes by the European Union and the United Nations is a prerequisite , but removing the breeding ground for this violence will have to happen on the ground .
author . - ( PL ) Madam President , I was in the Democratic Republic of Congo only three weeks ago , so my knowledge of the situation has not been gained exclusively from documents although the latter are very important .
This truly is an unfortunate country , which has experienced frequent name changes .
It used to be called Congo , then it became Zaire and now it is known as the Democratic Republic of Congo . It has experienced mass movements of its population far more frequently than name changes , however .
The documents before us state that last year alone 400 000 of its inhabitants were forced to leave their homes . The total number of people forced to do in recent years is four times greater , amounting to 1.5 million .
I should also refer to the use of rape as a weapon used deliberately for political purposes both by the partisans on the rebel side and by the police and the army on the government side .
This is something unprecedented and the African Union is totally powerless to deal with it .
Madam President , it is my strong impression that the words ' Democratic Republic ' that form part of the official name of Congo ring rather hollow nowadays , because it is precisely in that country that one the worst humanitarian crises of recent years is unfolding before our very eyes .
Over 650 000 people are constantly moving around the country . In just one province , Kivu , 80 % of families have been displaced during the last five years , about 1 000 women a month are the victims of rape , and tens of thousands of children have become soldiers .
In the Democratic Republic of Congo the passage of the armies is accompanied by all possible kinds of crime against the civilian population , such as rape , murder and pillage .
Sexual violence is used to terrorise and punish the inhabitants of the Democratic Republic of Congo who supported the wrong side in the conflict .
It is so widespread that , according to Médecins sans Frontières , 75 % of all rapes in the world take place in the east of the Democratic Republic of Congo .
Rape is accompanied by barbaric torture such as beating with clubs and mutilation with knives .
Many young women have been forced into sexual slavery .
We should recall that the largest UN peacekeeping force in the world , consisting of over 17 000 soldiers , is currently deployed in the Democratic Republic of Congo .
What is the main method of preventing sexual violence ?
It is slogans on walls stating that rape is inhuman .
The most alarming fact is that the UN soldiers themselves have become involved in this scandal .
On more than one occasion , UN investigators have discovered that UN soldiers themselves have forced Congolese girls into prostitution .
It has proved simply impossible to punish the soldiers concerned , however , because their unit leaders did all they could to impede the prosecution .
The soldiers have perpetrated violence instead of protecting against it on more than one occasion , and these occasions are becoming more numerous .
This can only be defined as a scandal .
I would like to appeal to the international community to support immediate determined action aimed at identifying and punishing those responsible for crimes of a sexual nature .
I should also like to emphasise that the countries sending military units into the field under the auspices of the UN are responsible for carrying out a proper investigation of any allegations of criminal behaviour by personnel involved in peacekeeping missions .
I realise that the European Union 's options regarding the resolution of conflicts of this type are limited .
Nonetheless , I call for funds to be made available for the organisation of a peace conference in Kivu .
European Union aid should also be channelled towards the provision of medical , legal and social assistance to all victims of sexual crimes .
I trust the European Union and the UN will formally recognise that all types of crime of a sexual nature are crimes against humanity .
author . - ( ES ) Madam President , the description of sexual violence in Kivu , Congo , produces an unavoidable feeling of revulsion .
Our fellow Members have described what is going on there , and I do not intend to repeat it .
We must not merely agree to condemn it , since this could make us a voice crying in the wilderness : we have to do something to stop it , and what we can do is put pressure on the Congolese Government , because it is not just the rebels , but also its armed forces , who are carrying out these kinds of atrocities , aimed at humiliating women and undermining the moral foundations of the society in which they live .
We must make the United Nations and the European Union declare sexual violence a crime against humanity .
We must ask the Commission to allocate development assistance funds to the Congo , fundamentally and as a priority as assistance for the victims : legal assistance , social assistance and medical assistance .
We must make United Nations personnel on the ground consider defence of the victims and the search for those responsible priority tasks , and to do so we must extend the mandate of the United Nations Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to constitute a more direct link to the prevention of such occurrences .
Finally , we must call on those attending the Kivu Conference to produce a set of specific results demanding justice and acceptance of responsibility , because if , after all that has happened , rapists finally enjoy impunity wearing the uniforms of the official army of the Republic of the Congo , the victims will be humiliated twice - first during the rape itself , and again when they see it was carried out with impunity .
That is what we can and must do .
I trust the Commission will take due note of this , and rechannel development assistance funds for the Congo , as I have requested , to assist victims and prevent the continuation of this savage butchery of the dignity of women .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , the text of the resolution before us contains alarming data .
We should keep in mind , however , that behind these statistics lie the tragedies of individual women .
I would like to tell the House the story of Lumo .
She was the victim of a mass rape in 1994 .
The attack was so brutal that this young woman sustained permanent internal injures .
After years of treatment and four operations she has still not regained her health and will probably never fully recover .
She has been rejected by her fiancé , by most of her family and by society .
Her mother and the African charitable organisation HEAL Africa have been her only support .
HEAL Africa runs a hospital in Goma , which is the rape capital of the Democratic Republic of Congo .
The hospital specialises in treating the victims of brutal cases of sexual violence .
The surgeons have been very successful , and so-called mothers provide psychological support for the victims .
The House should commend these people on their work , but commendation alone is not enough .
We need to consider how we can provide them with practical assistance .
We owe it to Lumo and to the thousands of her Congolese sisters to help .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , with today 's motion on the situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo and on rape and violation as a war crime , we are calling on the European Union and United Nations formally to recognise rape , forced impregnation , sexual slavery and other forms of sexual violence as a crime against humanity and as a form of torture .
We are also calling for pressure to be put on the Congolese Government to bring an end to the situation in which these crimes are being committed with impunity .
These measures are needed to improve the appalling situation in which hundreds of thousands of women find themselves .
The violence being suffered by women in the Democratic Republic of Congo is unimaginable .
In the province of Kivu more than one third of all women have been subjected to rape , and many have been violated repeatedly over long periods .
This has been going on for many years .
Most of the perpetrators are soldiers from both sides , members of the Congolese security forces and the police .
The UN special rapporteur on violence against women submitted her report last September .
The atrocities being committed by armed troops are of unimaginable brutality and are designed to ensure the complete physical and psychological destruction of women .
The trauma of rape is aggravated by the fact that many of the victims then suffer social discrimination and ostracism by their families and communities .
This is one of the reasons why only a fraction of the rapes actually committed are being reported .
Echoing what my colleague Mr Fontelles has just said , we therefore want to see the UN mandate extended to include the protection of civilians against sexual violence .
Reports of sexual misconduct by members of the UN peacekeeping mission must be looked into in greater depth and those responsible must be brought before a court .
The Goma Conference on peace , security and development opened a few days ago .
We urgently call on all the participants to tackle the problem of sexual violence against women and girls , to undertake to bring those responsible before a court and to end the current situation in which these acts can be committed with impunity .
on behalf of the UEN group . - ( PL ) Madam President , we are today discussing rape as a war crime in the Democratic Republic of Congo .
It is ironic that this country should be named the Democratic Republic of Congo . Nowadays it seems that the more democracy is referred to in names and in speeches , the less human rights are enjoyed by ordinary people .
I shall say once again that the only way to rein in African warlords who have been elevated to presidential office is on the one hand through economic sanctions , and on the other through armed intervention .
Until the European Union creates a police force that would not , of course , intervene in every civil war but could at least supervise the camps , the so-called refugee camps where the very worst crimes are being committed in the Democratic Republic of Congo , all we will be able to do is continue debating the matter . People will continue to suffer and die whilst we debate endlessly .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , the appalling mass rapes taking place in the Congo are being systematically organised and this means they are also being used as a military strategy , and that is not just war but sexual terror against women .
The brutal rapes are now being used by each of the warring factions in eastern Congo , whether they are local tribal militia or national army soldiers , as a symbol or power and as a means of intimidation .
It is precisely the weakest in society , namely women , children and even babies , who are being barbarously abused , deliberately injured , mutilated , infected with HIV and other infectious diseases and even killed .
We know , and have heard , that the level of brutality exceeds the powers of human imagination and we now urgently need to see rape being condemned at long last as a crime against humanity , as a war crime and as a form of torture .
Moreover , when the rape victims return traumatised and alone to their villages after painful operations - with many of the women losing all their genital organs - they find little or no shelter there .
I can therefore only support the remarks made by Mr Borrell and Mrs Scheele : we must also use European money to set up women 's dormitories that can serve as a kind of refuge for those returning from their stay in hospital , and where they can then try to build a new life .
Indeed , in addition to the physical violence endured , the psychological violence that the victims have suffered is terrible beyond measure .
We know that most of these attacks have been carried out by rebels , but almost one fifth of the recorded incidents can be attributed to government troops and police , and it is indeed shameful that not a single culprit has yet been arrested or even charged .
The time for empty talk is therefore past .
We need political action from the UN and the European Union , for if we ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , when I took the floor recently in a debate on sexual slavery in Japan during the Second World War , I also expressed my opposition to the brutal violence against women currently being perpetrated in the Democratic Republic of Congo .
According to Médecins sans Frontières , 75 % of all rapes committed in the world take place in the Democratic Republic of Congo . This is all the more alarming because the violence is accompanied by particular cruelty .
Even three-year-old girls are affected .
Armed groups use rape as a tactical method to break down resistance and punish ethnic groups . This is true not only of armed rebels but also of the Congolese army .
Along with food shortages and disease , sexual violence and aggression on an unprecedented scale have contributed to turning that area into a hell on earth .
We should remember that the inter-tribal rivalry stems from colonial times , when one tribe was favoured over the other .
( PL ) Madam President , the Democratic Republic of Congo is the largest country in Africa .
It is rich in natural resources , such as water , tropical forests and agricultural land , but civilisation has long been in a state of collapse there .
Over four million people have lost their lives in the Democratic Republic of Congo as a result of two civil wars , tribal conflicts , and the activities of armed groups and partisans .
To compound the tragic situation of the people , there have also been mass deportations of citizens from their previous areas of residence , corrupt and inefficient governments , the AIDS epidemic and most recently the onslaught of the Ebola virus .
How can these people be helped ?
In addition to humanitarian aid and technical support , it is essential to deal with the leaders and organisers responsible for these horrific acts .
They have been , and remain , unpunished and should now be excluded from Congolese society .
Criminals responsible for genocide should be pursued by international special forces , so they can be tried before a court of law .

( PL ) Madam President , I do not wish to repeat what has already been said so I will simply state that as far as we are concerned there can be no question that aid must be provided . Hopefully the aid will be as substantial and widespread as possible .
I would also like to say that when I was in the Democratic Republic of Congo during the elections , I was shocked to discover that boys as young as 13 and sometimes even younger are taught two things : how to fight and how to rape girls even younger than themselves .
Such is the image of the so-called soldiers of the group supporting the opposition presidential candidate , Mr Bemba .
That is no exception , however .
The situation is similar in all factions .
I therefore support Mr Borrell 's statement that the funds and resources we have available should be directed to re-educating these young people , amongst other purposes . If these youngsters become set in their present ways , the only future they can look forward to is a life in gangs , committing rape and murder .
Something has to be done with them .
It seems we are being challenged to find a way to help these people change their attitude to life and to the opposite sex .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the Commission remains extremely worried about the deteriorating human rights situation - especially about the widespread sexual violence - in the eastern Democratic Republic of Congo , and strongly condemns all acts of violence against women .
In the prevailing climate of violence and insecurity all the armed groups present in the eastern Democratic Republic of Congo , including elements of the national armed forces , are to some extent involved in the dramatic rise of these types of acts .
In this context , it is important to promote the fight against impunity , but also to address the root causes of the problem .
It ought to be noted that sexual violence in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of Congo is embedded within the context of persistent conflict and violence in the region .
Peace is needed for sustained security and stability , the two key elements linked to the prevalence of sexual violence in the Democratic Republic of Congo .
This is why the Commission , together with the EU Member States , has been continuously promoting a political solution for the crisis in the eastern Democratic Republic of Congo .
The ongoing conference on peace , security and development in the Kivus , coupled with the recent agreement reached between the Democratic Republic of Congo and Rwanda in Nairobi in November 2007 , could indeed represent a significant step forward in the process , while acknowledging that there are still many challenges ahead before a sustainable peace in the Kivus can be reached .
However , these efforts are not enough and have to be complemented with active support to strengthen the capacity of the state in providing protection to its people .
In this regard , the Commission works together with the Member States in strengthening the rule of law and the fight against impunity by supporting the security sector reform comprising the army , the police and the justice sector .
I would like to reflect on some of the questions from Members and try to answer them .
The Commission addresses , in particular , the problem of sexual violence and criminality through a multi-donor justice and rehabilitation project in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of Congo , focusing inter alia on building the capacity of judicial actors and reinforcing the provision of legal assistance to the victims of sexual violence .
In addition , the Commission provides significant humanitarian assistance - roughly EUR 40 million per year - to the Democratic Republic of Congo , especially to Uturi and the Kivus .
Our humanitarian and health programmes take into consideration the gender violence they mentioned , both from a creative and awareness-raising perspective .
- The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debate .
3 .
Egypt ( debate )
- The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on Egypt .
author . - ( ES ) Madam President , I wish to begin by saying that this Parliament would be making a most serious mistake if it succumbed to pressure from those who prefer us not to discuss issues that could cause discomfort in certain countries , particularly when they denounce breaches of human rights .
We have privileged relations with certain countries , such as those covered by the European Neighbourhood Policy , with whom we must have a particularly clear dialogue and remind them that business cannot and must not ever be disassociated from respect for human rights , either here or there .
The situation in Egypt merited some reflection , and the relations between Egypt and the European Union also obliged such reflection .
Thus it is more than legitimate to denounce , as we are doing in this resolution , the persecution of a number of non-governmental organisations , particularly human rights organisations , that is currently taking place in Egypt , and to lend support to the campaign for freedom of association led by a number of social movements in the country .
author . - ( PT ) Madam President , I too must point out that there are of course no borders or sacred places where human rights are not a fundamental concern .
However , we must take into account the fact that we had the opportunity to observe the willingness of Egypt 's Foreign Minister who came on purpose to the European Parliament , to the Committee on Foreign Affairs , and who was ready to answer all the questions on human rights ' infringements that were put to him .
I was there and I put these questions to him and obtained some answers from the Minister .
In addition to certain negative factors , this motion for a resolution also highlights certain positive factors that I feel are important to stress , such as the undertaking to lift the state of emergency this year , in fact within the next few months , and the cooperation in the fight to end the arms smuggling in Gaza .
However , in my opinion , the fundamental point is that we should take advantage of the willingness of the Egyptian authorities and encourage them to rectify certain serious infringements .
I must highlight in this respect the continued imprisonment of the former candidate for the Presidency of the Republic of Egypt .
I would repeat the call for this situation to be brought to an end as this would be coherent with the basic principles of a country that defends human rights , as Egypt has repeatedly advocated and to which it is committed .
Madam President , Egypt has no tradition of democracy .
The young military men Nasser and Naguib , who overthrew the poorly performing regime of King Farouk over 50 years ago , brought hope for change and progress .
Nasser gave his people pride and inspiration for the future ; he was to put an end to their status as a backward and humiliated country .
His successor , Sadat , gave them hope of permanent peace with their neighbour Israel , after a series of terrible wars .
The current president , Mr Mubarak , does not offer any hope at all .
He has become the symbol of the stagnation .
His only service has been to organise stability with a hard hand , so that he can be seen in the outside world as an ally against terrorism and Islamic fundamentalism .
However , he has no progress and no democratisation to offer .
Oppositions are permitted selectively , but they do not have the normal latitude that is customary in a parliamentary democracy .
Consequently , he is cultivating a breeding ground for internal conflict from both fundamentalists and democrats .
Intolerance of religious minorities , including the large Coptic Christian minority who have been present in Egypt for centuries , is also on the increase .
Long-term stability cannot be built on these foundations , where problems are not solved but covered up with violence .
There is every reason for this critical resolution therefore .
Sabotage of non-governmental organisations , intimidation of opponents , discrimination against minorities , arrests and torture and all the other failings on record lead us to fear the worst for what will follow the Mubarak regime .
Egypt seems in many respects to have stepped back into the backwardness of the reign of King Farouk , 60 years ago .
European relations with Egypt ought to contribute to bringing this situation to an end as far as possible .
author . - ( PL ) Madam President , the progressive deterioration of the situation regarding respect for human rights in Egypt is causing increasing concern .
Changes to the constitution have facilitated violations of human rights .
On the pretext of the need to provide protection against terrorist attacks and in connection with the alleged problem involving the smuggling of weapons into the Gaza Strip , additional powers have been vested in the Secret Service .
It is now easier for the latter to evade responsibility for the use of torture . Repression on the grounds of religious belief , arrests and prolonged detention without proper trial are being resorted to ever more frequently .
Organisations like Amnesty International , which monitor respect for human rights , have drawn attention to the international community 's indifference towards the situation .
I call on the European Commission to consider effective methods of bringing pressure to bear on the Egyptian authorities in order to halt this process .
author . - ( CS ) Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Egypt is without doubt the most notable of the Arab countries .
It is the cradle of ancient civilisation and it is the most important Arab state .
Nobody in the European Union or in this Parliament doubts that Egypt is not only a key partner of the European Union , but also a dynamic partner , prepared and strong .
These are the reasons why we consider a dialogue with this country very important and significant .
New negotiations are starting next week on an action plan between the European Union and the Arab Republic of Egypt .
It is good that our Parliament is unanimously and clearly expressing its support of these negotiations and that it is thus a player in international politics .
We are stating clearly that a country that allows severe interference in the independence of an old democratic institution , i.e. the courts , that permits torture in prison and the killing of immigrants , that violates freedom of speech , blocks the Internet and sends members of parliament , such as the nephew of President Sadat , to a court martial , cannot be a partner of the European Union .
Egypt is a key ally in the fight against terrorism , and it must remain a key ally notably in our struggle against the causes of terrorism and Islamic radicalisation .
For that very reason , Egypt cannot act the way it did when it prohibited the registration of non-governmental organisations , it must not destroy freedom of speech and it must in particular defend the long-standing rule of law that has always existed in Egypt .
We believe that Egypt can succeed in doing this and we believe , in particular , that our resolution will help the European Commission to establish a high-quality action plan with Egypt .
Thank you for your support .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , I am one of the few people here in this Chamber who was present when President Sadat gave his famous speech in the European Parliament .
This speech could be taken as a policy document for the Year of Intercultural Dialogue that has just begun .
It was one of the greatest speeches ever made here in this House .
Down through the years President Mubarak too has been an important and reliable partner for the European Union , and this is of course in spite of the many failings and mistakes that we have seen in Egypt .
I therefore simply cannot understand the speech that the President of the Egyptian Parliament made in reaction to this motion .
We are simply saying in a reasonable and restrained way that we consider Egypt to be one of the most important partners in the Mediterranean area , but we are criticising by way of a number of specif