Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session suspended on Thursday 26 April 2007 .
Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes

( DE ) Mr President , it was actually planned that today 's sitting should include a debate on the roaming report , since this House , in the trilogue on 2 May , presented the Council with a package of compromises , and I might add that it did so with the agreement of all groups here and of all the countries represented in the trilogue .
It is unfortunate that the Council has not , to date , indicated its agreement to it , and it is for that reason that we are unable to have the debate today or to vote on the report tomorrow .
A Uachtaráin , ba mhaith liom comhghairdeas a dhéanamh le Rialtas na hÉireann , le Rialtas na Breataine , agus leis an Rialtas nua i mBéal Feirste .
Mr President , yesterday saw the installation of a new government and the re-establishment of the devolved assembly in Northern Ireland , representing what would have previously been called the extreme opinion of unionism and the extreme opinion of nationalism , brought together to form a new government for Northern Ireland .
As we have heard from the Nobel laureates , this is a great opportunity for us not only to congratulate those people who have been involved and to encourage them in finding a new way forward in solving conflict and resolving the difficulties that occur between different communities , but also to congratulate the European Union for its ongoing commitment and help to the people of Northern Ireland over the last 20 years .
The reasons such greatness took place yesterday was that the people there were standing on the shoulders of giants - not just the shoulders of John Hume and Lord Trimble , who are here today , but also the shoulders of Jacques Delors , who first came up with the plan and the idea of a peace programme for Northern Ireland , and of Helmut Kohl and others .
We should reflect on this today in making sure that we continue our commitment .
As chairman of the UEN Group and a representative of a government party , I extend my thanks to all my colleagues here and to all my colleagues from Ireland who worked together towards this common cause and common goal .
We should also reflect on and remember the loss of life , the harm , the impairment and injury to so many , but , rather than allow those losses to continue to fester and to poison our dialogue , let us understand : that was one of one time , this is of another .
Our task and our role now is to ensure that our grandchildren have better prospects for the future in Northern Ireland .
Let us also remember the words of the old poet who said : ' Even though my bones may break and even though my body may bleed , within my heart still beats the hope of mankind to find and fulfil all its needs ' .
( Applause )
Thank you for that statement , Mr Crowley .
I would like to inform you that I have sent a letter to the First Minister and Deputy First Minister to congratulate them .
We look forward to a good future for Northern Ireland , Ireland , Great Britain and the European Union .
Membership of the temporary committee on climate change ( deadline for tabling amendments ) : see Minutes
Agenda
With the agreement of all the groups , a corrigendum to the order of business adopted for today and tomorrow at the sitting on Monday 23 April has been circulated , and I have received a number of motions for its amendment , which are as follows .
Wednesday :
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats has moved that the report by Mr Brok on the 2005 annual report on the Common Foreign and Security Policy be deferred to the May part-session in Strasbourg .
Our colleague , Mr Brok , has undergone an operation .
He thought that he would be here this week , but that will not be the case .
Nevertheless , I can assure you that he is in good health - as we know , he takes care of his health - and he will be with us for the part-session in Strasbourg .
That is why I ask you , ladies and gentlemen , to postpone the debate on this report .
( Parliament adopted the motion . )
The Socialist Group in the European Parliament has moved that the report by Mrs Lulling on the approximation of the rates of excise duty on alcohol and alcoholic beverages be deferred to the May part-session in Strasbourg .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , first of all , let me , on behalf of our group , wish Mr Brok all the best and a good recovery .
Moving on to the Lulling report , I spoke with Mrs Lulling today .
There are a number of problems - let me be frank about it , particularly in Bulgaria - in connection with the changes that the Lulling report would bring in its wake , and , since we would like to have more talks with Mrs Lulling and also with representatives of the other groups on whether we might not find some consensus on this thorny issue , we move that the debate be deferred to the next part-session in Strasbourg .
This is not a matter of party politics , as all political groupings in Bulgaria are affected by this .
We would be ill-advised to send out a negative signal now if there is a chance of us after all finding a solution through consensus one or two weeks down the line .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , there is no objective reason why we should not debate my report today in order to put it to the vote tomorrow .
This report was adopted within the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs after several months of discussion , since the Commission proposal was referred to us on 28 September 2006 , as is written down .
We debated the proposal at least five times within the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
Everyone was able to voice his or her opinion .
The amendments were tabled within the timescales set .
They have been translated .
Things being what they are , I obviously understand why the Socialist Group in the European Parliament is proposing this postponement : the Socialists are in favour of increasing the minimum rates of excise duty , while in Bulgaria , they are against doing so .
The Socialists are therefore afraid of adopting a position before the European elections .
That is why this request for postponement is a blatant lie : in reality , it is based on a political , not objective , reason .
I therefore call on my fellow Members to vote against .
( SV ) Mr President , we should not show the contempt for democracy entailed in postponing the debate on this report until after the Bulgarian election .
It is a hugely important democratic principle that the people , in this case the Bulgarians , should have as much information as possible when they go to the polls .
The whole purpose of the proposed postponement is the opposite of that , namely that we should debate this issue only after the Bulgarians have voted .
I am resolutely opposed to this move , and all good democrats should oppose it for the same reason .
( Parliament adopted the motion . )
( The agenda was thus determined . )
Declaration of financial interests : see Minutes
Written statements ( tabling ) : see Minutes
Written statements ( Rule 116 ) : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's positions and resolutions : see Minutes
Strengthening European legislation in the field of information and consultation of workers ( tabling of motions for a resolution ) : see Minutes
Statement by the President ( Estonia )
I have been asked to make a brief statement on Estonia , and have been informed that the Group chairmen wish to do likewise once I have finished .
That does indeed seem to be so .
The Schuman Declaration of 9 May 1950 gave Europe the foundation on which it would be possible to build partnership in peace and freedom between nations that had formerly been at enmity with one another and , when our continent , formerly divided , had grown together , the European Union became the guarantor of peace , freedom and prosperity throughout Europe .

We take pride in being able , today , to celebrate Schuman Day together with 27 Member States of the European Union , but 9 May is , for other reasons , a controversial date , as we have seen most recently in the dispute concerning the Soviet soldiers ' memorial in Tallinn , the capital of Estonia , and it is for that reason that we call to mind our resolution of 12 May 2005 , in which this House remarked upon the fact that there were some nations for whom the end of the Second World War meant the dawn of another tyranny , that of the Soviet Union .
We remind ourselves that controversies on matters of history must never be an occasion for violence , and we firmly condemn affray and looting .
The current President of the Republic of Estonia , Toomas Hendrik Ilves , who was formerly a Member of this House , said the right thing in response to the events outside the Estonian embassy in Moscow , and this was what he had to say about them : ' In Europe , it is not customary to demand the resignation of the democratically elected government of a neighbouring country ; in Europe , it is unthinkable that the Convention of Vienna on the protection of diplomatic missions be disregarded ' .
We call to mind our resolution of 8 June 2005 on the protection of minorities and against discrimination against them , in which we declared , inter alia , that national minorities enrich Europe .
The European Union is founded upon values , the protection of which is our common task .
Putting a Member State of the European Union under pressure constitutes a challenge to all of us , and Estonia can count on our solidarity .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , I wish to thank you for your support and solidarity .
I should also like to express my gratitude to all colleagues for their extraordinary demonstration of support and solidarity with Estonia , because what is happening between an EU Member State , Estonia , and the Russian Federation is not a bilateral case but a case for the EU as a whole - it is a test case of whether the EU is a real political Union rooted in solidarity and unity .
Today , the clarity , timing and unity of the EU reaction are being tested .
What we expect is a strong EU commitment to unconditional solidarity .
First of all , we need to be free of wishful thinking .
The way the Russian Federation is treating an EU Member State is clearly not an aberration .
President Putin presented a programme of a new , much more assertive Russian foreign policy in his Munich speech .
This approach could be termed neo-imperialist or revanchist .
The aim is to regain , at least partially , its past influence over its former Baltic colonies , and then over the former Warsaw Pact part of Europe , relying on the current energy boom that has boosted Russian influence , as well as misusing parts of the Russian population living outside Russia .
I would like to make it very clear that President Putin calls these Russians his compatriots .
I would like to dispute that strongly .
Russians living in Estonia are my compatriots , and I am proud of them because 99 % of them remained loyal not to President Putin but to the Estonian state .
( Applause )
Therefore , the question is not only about solidarity ; the key word is the ' sovereignty ' of the new Member States of the European family .
We can succeed in achieving it only when we speak with one voice and demonstrate unity in action .
When a Member State that decides to be clearer about its own past , and does so in an open and dignified way , suddenly becomes an object of concentrated pressure from its huge neighbour ; when its embassy in Moscow is practically held hostage for a whole week ; when riots to destabilise law and order are organised with clear inspiration and assistance from a foreign state ; when there are calls by Russian officials for a democratically elected government to step down ; when an economic blockade is being implemented ; when websites of the Estonian state institutions are still being blocked by massive cyber attacks - an innovative form of propaganda war ; then one has to be really worried about the sovereignty of the state in question .
In conclusion , there is still another form of sovereignty we must defend : our right to decide on and assess our past .
You quoted the resolution of the European Parliament two years ago concerning the many European countries that fell victim to the renewed tyranny inflicted by Stalin 's Soviet Union .
There is still a dividing line in Europe , between all the western democracies , which have never recognised the illegal annexation and occupation of the Baltic States to the Soviet Union in 1940 as a result of the Hitler-Stalin pact , and the Russian Federation , which still denies this pact and also tries to deny the right of its former victims to assess their past .
Therefore , we need your solidarity , and I am very thankful to all of you for demonstrating it .
( Applause )
Thank you very much , Mr Kelam .
As a citizen and an honourable personality from Estonia , I gave you twice as much speaking time as you had been allocated , but this should not be an example for others .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I hope I am honourable , even though I am not from Estonia .
I asked the leader of our Estonian delegation , Mr Tarand , to speak .
Since he will be speaking later on , he asked me to make it clear that the Socialist Group in the European Parliament as a whole is giving its full backing to Estonia , to our Members from Estonia and to the people of Estonia , and that we reject all outside intervention and every intervention on the part of Russia .
We affirm not only the principle that embassies and diplomatic premises should be treated with respect , but also that the sovereignty of a country and its people should be respected .
If I may add a personal remark , I was born a few months after the end of the war in what was then the Soviet-occupied zone in Eastern Austria .
I remember my parents , relatives and friends relating how they were glad that Russian soldiers had come to free us from the Nazi regime , and also know from personal experience that these same people feared the possibility of the Soviet troops staying on as occupiers .
It was our good fortune in Austria - a good fortune bestowed on us by history - that our country was liberated .
Many others , such as the people only 20 kilometres to the east of my home , experienced occupation rather than liberation .
That is why we believe that Russia should at last come to acknowledge that , while many Russian soldiers came as liberators , they did bring with them a regime under which the same liberators remained as an occupying power and that many peoples - not only in the Soviet Union but also in many neighbouring countries - suffered oppression .
If this were to come to be accepted , it would make dialogue so much easier .
I hope that all citizens on either side of the former border with the Eastern bloc accept that this dual truth was once the case .
Our group was very sad to lose Mr Ilves as a member , but we are , today , very glad that such a level-headed man as he is President of Estonia . Here are two short quotations from him .
He drew attention to the website of a young Russian woman , who had written on it , ' We are Russians , but our homeland is Estonia ' , to which he added , ' Thank you , Maria ' .
The last sentence in his speech , which really is most remarkable , goes like this :
' It is customary in Europe that differences that occur now and then between states are solved by diplomats and politicians , not on the streets or by computer attacks .
Those are the ways of other countries , or , I would add , other times , somewhere else , not in Europe . '
( DE ) What we in Europe need is dialogue and conversation rather than attacks on embassies or demonstrations in front of them , because it is this dialogue itself that is of the essence of Europe .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( ET ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me first of all to reply , in the hope that , since I am speaking on behalf of my group , I shall not be given significantly less time than the previous speaker .
Today we are discussing relations between Estonia and Russia and , in talking about these , we must definitely discuss the events that took place at the end of April in Estonia .
Nor can we ignore the cause of these events - the Bronze Soldier .
This statue was erected by the Soviet authorities in honour of the liberators of Tallinn .
The liberation of Tallinn actually consisted of the bombing of Tallinn on 9 March 1944 , when 40 % of Tallinn 's residential areas was destroyed and hundreds of people died .
This was referred to as liberation , but Estonians were deported to Siberia , with one wave of deportations following another and no family left untouched by the repression .
My father was deported to Siberia in 1941 and only returned home 21 years later .
After Stalin 's death my great-grandmother , who had also been deported to Siberia , set out alone and on foot for her home country of Estonia .
When my family came home from work one day , they found her sitting on the steps of our house , but unfortunately my great-grandmother was already dead .
I can still remember that time .
As a monument erected to a liberator , the Bronze Soldier was a symbol of very painful experiences for many Estonians .
Nevertheless , it stood in the central square of our capital city for another 15 years , that is to say for the 15 years after Estonia regained its independence .
What was it that happened on 26 April ?
What happened that night ?
The monument crisis actually began about a year ago , when a gathering of extremists waving Soviet flags transformed this monument from one that honoured the dead into a symbol of the victory of the Soviet occupation , and as such it became a continual source of tension .
Up to that time , veterans had gathered there every year , and despite the fact that alcohol was sometimes consumed on the grave and that those present even at times danced on the grave , the police never intervened .
On the night of 26 April , however , riots broke out in the downtown area , and these later spread to some border cities where , however , they were less severe .
The rioters destroyed everything that stood in their path including cars and bus pavilions , but mainly windows .
Bands of youths broke into shops and stole everything .
Off-licences , in particular , were targeted , but also some other shops . For example , Armani and Hugo Boss shops , as well as jewellery stores , were looted .
Since we live in a media age , all of this was recorded and also broadcast live on television .
Today there is a great deal of video material documenting the events .
The police only intervened when the gangs of youths became too aggressive .
Truncheons and water cannons were used ; firearms were not .
That night , the Bronze Soldier was transported from Tõnismäe to the military graveyard , where it was yesterday made accessible to the public again .
After that , the attacks from Russia began - the propaganda offensives mentioned by the previous speakers , culminating in the Russian Duma 's demand for a change of government in Estonia .
I will stop now .
Please accept my apologies , Mr President .
( The speech was interrupted )
Finally , I would like to thank all who have supported , and who continue to support , Estonia .
This is a great honour for us and a great help to us .
Thank you , Mr President , and please accept my apologies .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Mr President , I would like to join my colleagues in firstly giving our solidarity and support to the Estonian Government and to the Estonian people , and secondly , in denouncing the bully-boy tactics of the Russian Government in its attempt to create uncertainty and instability , not only within Estonia but in all the Baltic States .
In many ways what we are witnessing is a new form of totalitarianism or authoritarianism by the use of mobs in Moscow to attack an Embassy , by the use the power or strength of energy to try and make people kneel before the influence of the Russian Government , and , most importantly of all , by a continuing desire to keep imposing symbols of domination and of subjugation in areas that have gained their independence from totalitarian regimes .
Our task and role today is to listen to our Estonian colleagues and to hear their cries and their pleas for assistance and solidarity .
Most importantly of all , however , because we value Russia as a partner for future developments , we should call on Russia to take the proper steps to ensure that the rights of all European Union Member States are respected equally - whether large or small , whether a neighbouring country or not , whether a former dominion or not .
Finally , our most ardent call should go out to the citizens of Estonia , to show them that now that they are part of the European Union , they will not be abandoned as they were abandoned previously .


on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have had this sort of argument about European history many times before ; the last time we did so , it was in a debate on what to make of the Sudeten problem in the Czech Republic , when we said - and I repeat - that what was needed was a European interpretation of the war and that the national interpretations of it had to be put to one side .
In this instance , the European interpretation is a simple matter ; it is that the Red Army played its part in freeing Europe from National Socialist Fascism .
That is what it did , and this playing of its part demanded great sacrifices .
Let us leave to one side the argument about what responsibility Stalin bore for Hitler 's rise to power , for that is another debate .
After that , though , the Red Army became an army of occupation , an army that made freedom impossible .
That , too , is part of European history .
Removing hideous bronze statues , far from presenting a problem for the cultural landscape of a city , tends to help make the place more beautiful , but , in this debate , we have to make it abundantly clear - and I hope that we will hear this said in the debate on Russia - that the fact of the matter is that what the Russian leadership - Putin - is trying to do here , with all its and his might , is to foment division .
We must all affirm our solidarity with the governments of Latvia and Estonia .
At the same time , though , whatever our solidarity , we have to acknowledge that the Baltic states do have a problem with the rights of the Russian minority .
What history teaches us all is that social conflict arises when a minority - and that is what 30 % of the population amounts to - wants to belong but feels deprived of their rights .

I know that all majorities always deny that : the Turks have always told us that there is no Kurdish problem in Turkey , yet a Kurdish problem is just what there is in Turkey , and there is a problem with the Russian minority and their rights .
This is not to say that the Russian minority is good , but that , as a minority , they have to have rights , and that it is difficult to build consensus in society if those rights are not recognised .

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is quite true that 62 years ago today , the representatives of Nazi Germany signed the instrument of unconditional surrender , thus bringing to an end one of the darkest chapters in European history .

The peoples of what was then the Soviet Union played a decisive part in bringing this victory about , and they also had to pay an enormous price ; all these things we ought to properly appreciate and , of course , reflect upon them , and it is for that reason that I thoroughly endorse what has been said about the events in Tallinn by the head of the Simon Wiesenthal Centre in Jerusalem , in these words , which I found very moving :
' Whilst the Centre unequivocally condemns crimes committed against Estonians of all faiths and nationalities under Soviet rule , it must never be forgotten that it was the Red Army which effectively stopped the mass murder conducted by the Nazis and their local collaborators on Estonian soil until the final day of its occupation by Nazi Germany .
Thus the removal of the monument from the centre of Tallinn by the government reflects a regrettable lack of sensitivity to the depth of Nazi criminality and is an insult to its victims . '
( DE ) My group finds it extremely regrettable that disagreements in Tallinn on matters of domestic and foreign policy should have reached this crisis point , and we urge all the parties involved to exercise moderation and enter into dialogue .
That a peaceful demonstration in the Estonian capital should degenerate into a riot and that the police should act in such a way that one person is killed and many others injured is very disturbing , and that it should happen at all testifies to the lack of dialogue between the Estonian majority and the Russian minority .
What I want to highlight , then , is that we in this House also share in responsibility for this , for having expressed too little opposition to the discrimination against the Russian minority in the Baltic states .
The disproportionate responses from Russia are no less disturbing .
My group strongly endorses the demand made of Russia that it discharge its international obligations in accordance with the relevant conventions and protect not only the premises but also the staff of the Estonian embassy and allow unhindered access to it .
We also call on the German Presidency of the Council to help de-escalate the situation and bring Estonia and Russia together in dialogue .
With the EU / Russia summit in the offing , this is a time for building bridges rather than barriers .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , the first and most important thing to state is that Estonia is an independent nation , not a Russian satellite state .
This means that we cannot begin to talk in muted tones about the need to understand Russia and its history . Rather , we must understand that Russia is mounting a blockade against Estonia and demanding that another country 's government resign etc .
Emphatically , these are not matters for which we should be showing understanding .
The Russian Government , the Russian-speaking minority in Estonia and everyone else do , of course , have the right to criticise activities such as the removal of a bronze statue .
However , Estonia is not a Russian satellite state within Russia 's sphere of interest , but a free and independent nation .
The instances offered by Mr Cohn-Bendit when he begins to talk in this House about quite different issues , notably the situation of the minority populations in the three Baltic republics , are unhelpful .
Obviously , that is another , albeit worthwhile , discussion .
What , however , we are talking about now is Russia 's being entitled - or , rather , not being entitled at all - to do what it has in fact done .
The fact - in itself extraordinary - of the Red Army 's having defeated Hitler is irrelevant .
That victory is something that we can celebrate .
Subsequently , the Red Army settled down to the long-term bullying of Estonia .
In 1939 , Finland lay north of the Gulf of Finland and Estonia south of it .
The two countries had approximately the same standard of living and were in many respects quite similar .
When the Russian occupation came to an end , Finland was one of the world 's richest and most successful countries , while Estonia - which is now very successfully working its way up - was in the doldrums .
These costs must not be forgotten .
We are not now required to understand Russia .
What we have to remember now is that it is the independent nation of Estonia that we are talking about , not a Russian satellite state .
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , history has yet to be written with the sole aim of getting close to the truth .
Until now , it has been written in an ideological way .
Consequently , it constantly omits this essential fact , namely that the wicked alliance between Molotov and Ribbentrop , between Stalin and Hitler , that is , between communism and national socialism , resulted in the violent invasion of Estonia , where the presence of the Red Army took the form of arrests , deportations , arbitrary executions and decades of denial of all civil rights .
Today , everyone is in favour of the Baltic countries having their freedom , but when , in October 1987 , in the French parliament , Mr Le Pen and the members of the group that he was chairing wanted to exclude the Baltic countries - the annexation of which we felt was illegal because it was achieved by violent means - from the scope of the treaties concluded with Russia , all the other political parties were against .
In reality , ladies and gentlemen , the Estonians and the Russians were victims of communism .
Admittedly , given the enormous sacrifices subsequently made by the Russian army , the humiliation felt by the Russian minority and , above all , by the former soldiers , is understandable .
The great French poet , Baudelaire , once said : the dead , the poor dead , have great sorrows .
Let us leave Estonia free to find its own methods of being able to honour those whose sacrifice ultimately has no other legitimate meaning than that of having defended their respective nations - the independence , sovereignty and identity of each of those nations .
The debate is closed .
EU strategy for reform in the Arab world ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Rocard on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs on EU strategy for reform in the Arab world .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , I should like to commend the willpower of the Minister and of the Commissioner : I know what it is like to attend debates without being able to leave the room , and I hope they will not be too bored .
I come now , with this debate , to a topic that is rather a new one for us .
The title of the report is not appropriate .
It is not so much about the European Union 's relationship with reforms in the Arab world as about a relational process of the European Union with the Arab world for the purpose of facilitating reforms .
For the sake of speed , I shall set out my comments as a number of points .
The first point , as you all know , is that all is not well in the various Arab states .
We all receive vast amounts of information and hear complaints about failure to observe human rights , about often dictatorial governments , about huge , scandalous financial inequalities in the various countries and about the lack of economic take-off , even in places where there is oil .
There is indeed a malaise in the Arab world .
A Lebanese Arabic writer even spoke about an Arab malaise .
Behind this malaise , there is a long history of humiliation : colonialism , independence , lack of control of resources , of oil in particular , intellectual decline and , as a result , a corresponding rise in religious fundamentalism .
My second point is that it is in this context that belonging to the Arab world is perceived in most of these countries as an awareness of identity , a search for collective empowerment .
That developed in the second half of the 20th century and particularly towards the end .
Now , it is the League of Arab States which , internationally , is taking a stand on behalf of the different States and is being respected .
It is the League 's resolutions that have brought about some progress in what is called the Middle East peace process , which is still not a peace process but from which it is hoped some results will emerge through the Arab League Summit .
There is also , thanks to the media , something of a growth in Arab public opinion that is much more homogeneous than the diplomatic positions of the various States .
It is also at the pan-Arab level that many intellectuals , especially Egyptians , but also Lebanese , even Algerians , pitch their message , rather than within their national context .
Finally , it has to be said that the Arab League has never had to deal with religious problems .
They are referred to the Organisation of the Islamic Conference , which is a different world .
Arab identity is a secular concept , which can make our relationship easier .
My third point is : how do we , the European Union , deal with this Arab identity ?
By ignoring it .
We have a strong , dense relationship with Iraq , and talk about it a great deal .
We deal with the Israel-Palestine conflict , making very little reference to the preceding one .
We speak about Algeria .
We have strong bilateral relationships with Algeria , Morocco , Tunisia and Egypt , too .
In short , we have relationships with all these countries that are of the public , state , bilateral kind , but we ignore the fact of their Arab identity .
The question that this own-initiative report puts to the Commission and to the Council is this : is there not good reason to move away from that and to do a bit more , in the light of the observations I was making in my second point ?
There is now an intellectual life , a political life and a diplomatic life in the Arab world at the level of its community .
Is it not in the European Union 's interest to establish relations at this level also ?
The numerous standstills that we find in the Arab world , which are of course economic , financial , political , institutional and religious , are also to a large extent intellectual and cultural .
It is through intellectual and cultural relations that other relations will develop , and the purpose of this report is to suggest that we take note of that .
Firstly by recognising that Arab identity is compatible with democracy and with modernity , even if the facts do not demonstrate it .
There is , intellectually and politically , and in the speeches of the League , a real possibility .
It is , moreover , the Arab League which , by slightly forcing the hand of many of its Member States , has produced an Arab Charter on Human Rights .
We all know that it is not a great advance , that it is well behind our own European Convention on Human Rights and the Universal Declaration on Human Rights .
Nonetheless , it is real progress compared with the situation we had a short time ago .
And then , in the face of the great contemporary problem of the fight against terrorism , I think that we all wish to reach a relationship of complicity and alliance with the Arab nations against extremists and killers , rather than to condemn them all and to make this fight impossible .
It is in this context that the report suggests that we , the European Union , should strengthen our relations with everything that has a collective character in this matter : of course , the League of Arab States , but also , why not , the Gulf Cooperation Council and even the Arab Maghreb Union , if it were to be revived .
Through these bodies , it is possible to develop a network of cultural and intellectual relations and to organise discussion seminars , which will bolster our support for the reforms .
This report , Mr President , is somewhat subtle .
We are extending the hand of friendship to countries about which there is seemingly much to criticise .
Our amendments debate will be between the extremism of the condemnations and the moderation of the hand of friendship which , while indeed recognising that there are strong criticisms to be made , would prefer to keep quiet about them as long as this hand of friendship can contribute to a process of reform that we all need .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , Mr Rocard , ladies and gentlemen , the present debate on the position of the Arab world in international politics is timely .
As we see it , one of the issues here is how to further improve cooperation between the West and the Arab states , so that both sides can benefit from it .
I should like to extend the warmest of thanks to Mr Rocard , with whose report the European Parliament , too , underlines the importance of EU-Arab cooperation .
Greater dynamism has been apparent in the Arab League 's regional involvement for some years now - the Beirut Peace Initiative of March 2002 being just one example .
Recent weeks , in particular , have seen a massive interest on the part of the Arab world in reaching out beyond the borders of the region for closer coordination and cooperation - including on its own initiative .
On the one hand , this development strikes me as resulting from a return , to a certain extent , by the Arab world to the Arab League as an instrument of cooperation that has been neglected over time .
On the other hand , I see it as representing a response to the quest on the part of non-Arab states and organisations for a reliable regional partner in an unstable region .
The ongoing involvement of the Arab League in Lebanon , which started immediately after last summer 's war , is very important ; and so we encourage the Arab League to continue its present endeavours .
Nevertheless , I believe that the clearest illustration of the new quality of international involvement by the Arab League , under the powerful leadership of Saudi Arabia , was the confirmation of the Arab Peace Initiative at the Riyadh Summit in late March .
This Initiative shows the prospects of a return to normal for relations between Israel and the Arab States .
The continued debate within the Arab League substantiates the view that the Arab world has the will to make genuine progress .
The EU , too , has increased its involvement in the Middle East in recent years and months ; the Quartet remaining its key actor .
Recently , both sides - the Arab world and Europe - have stepped up discussions on their ideas for intensifying political cooperation .
In this regard , I should just like to mention the meeting of the EU Troika with an Arab League delegation in Sharm el-Sheikh , and also to point out that Frank-Walter Steinmeier , in his capacity as President of the EU General Affairs and External Relations Council , has invited a ministerial delegation of the Arab League to a meeting with all the EU Ministers for Foreign Affairs in Brussels on 14 May .
This alone does not reduce the internal political , social and cultural challenges facing the Arab world , of course ; but I should like to emphasise clearly that Europe offers Arab countries and societies cooperation in all fields .
It is my hope that this cooperation can contribute to greater understanding and tolerance between Europe and the Arab world .
These two values : understanding and tolerance - characteristics that the Council President Angela Merkel described as constituting Europe 's soul in Strasbourg at the start of the German Presidency - are the vital ingredients for successful dialogue .
For this reason , I welcome Mr Rocard 's inclusion of cultural aspects , too , in his report .
These play a major role in determining the EU 's scope for supporting reform processes in the Arab world .
Ignorance , stereotypes and hostility on both sides hinder a productive partnership with prospects .
Dialogue and understanding of the culture of its relevant opposite number are a precondition for the EU 's taking the right approach to promoting reform processes .
Last year , in the context of the ' caricature conflict ' , there was much talk of the need for more ' dialogue between cultures ' .
We must use this term with caution , however , as the idea of a dialogue between cultures could accidentally promote cultural relativism .
The idea that standards and values are in principle attributable to an individual 's culture runs counter to our understanding of universal human rights .
I fully agree with the report in this respect , emphasising as it does the importance of intercultural dialogue whilst coming out clearly in favour of the universality of human rights .
We must avoid falling into the ' culturism trap ' in all respects , not only with regard to human rights .
Human beings have diverse identities .
We are not only Muslim or Christian or atheist , but also member of a profession , student , father , member of an association and much more .
The problem with Islamic fundamentalism , as with any other kind of fundamentalism , is that one element of personal identity - the religious - is placed above all others , and the complexity of the world is ultimately reduced to the idea of an opposition between ' Islam ' and ' the West ' .
Our policies must avoid everything that promotes this reduction .
We must emphasise what unites us rather than what divides us .
We must select joint EU-Arab forums , particularly the Anna Lindh Foundation , for our discussions and projects .
Political Islamism is an expression of the modernisation crisis of Arab societies , as Mr Rocard 's report also points out .
Tackling this is primarily a task for Arab societies themselves .
There , too , there are secular and liberal forces .
What is often missing , however , is dialogue within these societies on the issue of how the relationship between state , religion and society should be shaped in political terms .
Dialogue within society will make clear that the religious neutrality of the state and the enforcement of human rights are not a reform agenda being forced on the Arab world by ' the West ' , but rather are in the interests of Arab societies themselves .
We can support this process of dialogue within society by providing forums for dialogue .
This is an important task , for example , of the various political foundations found in countries such as Germany .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission welcomes the report by the honourable Member Mr Rocard , which basically discusses what relevance developments in the Arab world have to us and what we can do to exert our influence over these developments .
At a time when we are rediscovering our common cultural and historic heritage , the European Parliament 's willingness to resume a key role in the promotion of closer relations with our Arab neighbours is important .
The European Parliament resolution on reforms in the Arab world underlines very clearly that we peoples and countries surrounding the Mediterranean are dependent on each other .
We are mutually dependent in political terms as partners endeavouring to pacify the Middle East and working to promote pluralism and democracy ; dependent in cultural terms with regard to the promotion of the urgently needed in-depth dialogue between cultures and religions ; dependent in environmental terms because , with a shared Mediterranean coast over 46 000 kilometres long , problems such as climate change , marine pollution and the challenges of improving the environment are the same for all ; dependent in terms of energy policy because of the supplies of oil and natural gas originating from or channelled via the Mediterranean area ; and dependent particularly in demographic terms , as dialogue with North African countries is needed on the solution to issues surrounding both legal and illegal migration .
As a response to our dependence on each other , we launched the Barcelona process together , which is now complemented by the European Neighbourhood Policy .
In addition , the Cooperation Agreement with the Gulf Cooperation Council , the agreement with Yemen and the Cotonou Agreement with sub-Saharan Arab states have further developed relations .
Progress has been made recently thanks to the Barcelona process and to the neighbourhood policy .
To give two examples , association agreements have been concluded with nearly every country in the region and Neighbourhood Action Plans launched .
A Euro-Mediterranean Free Trade Area is gradually taking shape , which is intended to function as an interface between an increasingly globalised world and the open , integrated regionalism practised by Europe .
The year 2007 could certainly signalise our relations with a region undergoing radical change ; a region with great expectations of a far-reaching partnership with the EU .
Our work with our partners is based on the conviction that changes only last if they come from within a society , and the gradual introduction of political and economic reforms within the framework of neighbourhood policy smoothes the way for a further rapprochement between Europe and Mediterranean countries .
At the heart of our relations with our Arab partners is our desire to promote security , growth and stability in the region .
In addition , we firmly believe that these relations have a far broader purpose , namely the joint creation of an area of cooperation and stability , and the advocacy of our common objectives and values .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the relations between Europe and the Arab world are the key to building peace in the Mediterranean area and in the Middle East .
We must all become involved in the dialogue between cultures and religions over the next few years , in the firm belief that friendly relations are based on sincerity , loyalty and an attempt to understand others , without , however , renouncing one 's own identity .
In confirming the crucial importance of providing the European Union with a strategy for reform in the Arab world , the Rocard report defines some inalienable principles that will have to characterise future relations .
The European Parliament 's task will be to encourage any decisions that will enhance democracy , respect for human rights and the role of women , the creation of a free trade area , freedom of information , financial aid and respect for religious freedom .
The Rocard report - and I can announce that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats will vote for it - defines a fundamental principle , which is that of reciprocity : just as everyone in Europe has the right to practise his or her religion , people should have the same right in every Arab country .
On this aspect the Rocard report calls precisely on Arabs living in the European Union to give their accounts .
On this , as on other issues , however , we are still a long way from achieving the objectives that the European Union has set itself .
By upholding these principles and helping the Arab countries in their reforms , yet respecting their autonomy , we will help to prevent fundamentalism from gathering further support .
The threat of fanaticism does not concern , in fact , only Europe , but the entire Arab world .
Terrorism is the child of fundamentalism , which is why it is vital for Europe and the Arab States to work together to beat this scourge of the 20th century .
Recent attacks demonstrate that al-Qa 'ida 's priority right now is to strike out at the moderate Arab States , which are trying to establish a dialogue and are facilitating the reforms .
Europe cannot remain silent ; it cannot stand by .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , my colleague and friend Mr Rocard will forgive me if I start by addressing a very important topic , one on which Mrs De Keyser has been working very intensively in recent months and years : that of the Palestinian territories .
I do not believe that we can make progress without a change in EU policy on the Palestinian issue or with regard to many of Mr Rocard 's justified demands .
Today , my group decided unanimously to call on the Commission and the Council to make fundamental changes to their policy on the Palestinian territories .
EU policy - championed by the Council and the Commission - is untenable , cynical and unacceptable to the Arab population .
Some governments may consider it acceptable , but the population of the Arab countries cannot approve of our current policy towards the Palestinian Government .
We called for free elections ; and free , fair elections took place - to which Mrs De Keyser is the chief witness - but then we said we could not accept the result .
This is most undemocratic .
We then said that the Palestinians should at least form a unity government ; and a unity government has been formed .
We also told them to make a clear commitment to the peace process and the 1967 borders .
The present Palestinian Government has declared its commitment to those borders .
Israel has not , but we do not seem to consider this a problem .
Many of our officials still refuse to receive the Palestinian Foreign Minister , for example , as the Council President did recently .
It is unacceptable for the Council President , Angela Merkel , to say that she will receive the Israeli Foreign Minister but that it is beneath her to welcome the Palestinian Foreign Minister , who has nothing to do with Hamas .
Therefore , in view of the specific situation in the Palestinian territories , we demand a drastic change in the position of the Council and the Commission .
Perhaps individual members of the Council and the Commission disagree with it , but as institutions their policy is wrong and cynical .
Do the ladies and gentlemen know the situation in the Palestinian territories ?
Do they know that our policy is resulting in the territories descending into chaos , that Mafia groups are taking power there ?
Do they know that a continuation of this policy is the best way of contributing to Israel 's insecurity ?
We must arrive at a different position , therefore - particularly in connection with this report , but also in connection with Israel 's security , which is closely linked to the security of the Arab countries and of Europe . We should do so by attempting genuine cooperation with the Palestinian Government - a government chosen by the elections demanded by us - if that government is at least as prepared as Israel to support the peace process .
I wanted to say this at the start of the debate on what is a very good report , but risks being unrealisable unless we change our policy on the Palestinian territories and towards the Palestinian Government .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to congratulate Mr Rocard , whose report , as he himself has said , is intended to offer support for the purposes of opening a dialogue and a debate .
However , I believe that , in making such a statement , we must first make it clear - since this is something that concerns us and our policies within the European Union - that this is a dialogue and a debate that we intend to open not with the States , but with the people , with individuals .
This is all the more true when we talk about a primarily cultural - and therefore also political and institutional - effort , since in this case the talks must take place first with individuals , rather than with the Arab League or with individual States , not least because I believe that two of the major problems in the Arab world - nationalism and fundamentalism - now concern our European cities , too , which , from a demographic point of view , are also increasingly becoming cities of the Arab world .
That is why these problems must be addressed by our European Union itself .
This state of affairs also affects our institutional systems and the way in which religion is perceived within the European Union .
There is no doubt that Islamic fundamentalism exists .
We have taken the liberty , in this regard , of tabling two amendments on the issue of non-discrimination based on sexual orientation and of the clear distinction between political authorities and religious authorities .
I do not believe that this is provocation .
I only have time to point out , for example , that , when , together with other fellow Members , we went to Jerusalem for Gay Pride , we observed that , during the sometimes violent demonstrations aimed at preventing the demonstration from taking place , Orthodox Jewish fundamentalists , Islamic fundamentalists and Catholic fundamentalists were united .
This is therefore an issue that concerns us , too , and that is the meaning behind the amendments , which I hope will be adopted .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the good intentions expressed in this report pave the way for what I fear may be some wrong moves .
For example , the concessions and , indeed , the looking ahead to the prospect of pan-Arabism , may lead to what the previous speaker rightly pointed out as a danger : Arab nationalism .
I , for my part , would not look on it so approvingly and so calmly .
I am not thrilled with the fact that , behind this offer of dialogue , we can glimpse the plans of what an influential Arab intellectual fearfully described as the ' Eurabia project ' , an expression that was later adopted very effectively by the Italian writer , Oriana Fallaci .
Above all , however , what concerns me in the report is the way in which the doubts about the Arab Charter on Human Rights are expressed , where it is stated that some of the provisions contained in the Charter are worded in such as way as to allow different interpretations to be made .
Yet , there is little to interpret differently in the text !
The Islamic Charter on human rights is very clear : it states that human rights for Muslims are subject to the Sharia .
This is stated in the preamble and in all of the subsequent articles , and stated extremely clearly .
For the Arab States that have signed this Charter - the 1948 Charter on Human Rights , to which we are referring - it is valid only insofar as it conforms to the dictates of Allah .
Instead , unlike what is stated in the report , it needs to be made clear not only to the people but also to the Arab regimes with which we are holding talks - even though it is not clear how enthusiastic they are about tackling and supporting the Barcelona process , which is spoken about in very optimistic terms , given that they then do not take part in the meetings - that religious precepts are one thing , that laws are another thing and that the principle of freedom of conscience is another thing still .
The Charter on Human Rights is based , in fact , on the philosophical principle of the separation of laws from spiritual and religious precepts .
This is a concept that must be reaffirmed very clearly , otherwise Europe will continue to pretend that it cannot see very serious dangers , including , for example , the television programmes broadcast by Hamas , in which Mickey Mouse teaches Arab children about the fight against terrorism , the fight against Israel and the sacrifice made by suicide bombers .
That is what the peoples of the Arab world see .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I , too , must beg forgiveness of Mr Rocard by focusing on one issue - Palestine .
I also believe that , until the EU changes its current position and recognises the National Unity Government in Palestine , we are precisely undermining the opportunities for good relations with the Arab world , we are exacerbating poverty and suffering in the Occupied Territories , we are in danger of destroying the Palestinian Authority itself and we are certainly already destroying the hopes of the Palestinian people .
We are also being entirely inconsistent and hypocritical , because the Palestinians I have met have rightly challenged me : Does the EU not say that democracy is better than violence ?
Well , yes , we do .
Did the EU election observers not pronounce the Palestinian elections free and fair ?
Well , yes , they did .
In spite of that , when asked to do so , did the legitimately elected Hamas Government not transform itself into a genuine government of national unity ?
Yes , it did .
Has that government not agreed to the three demands of the quartet to renounce violence , to respect previous agreements and to recognise the State of Israel ?
Yes , it has .
They ask me and I , in turn , ask the Council here tonight , what else is the EU waiting for ?
I have just come back from a parliamentary delegation visit to Palestine where we met Prime Minister Haniyeh and many of his ministers , and the message from all of them was the same : they have met the demands of the Quartet , they accept a two-state solution based on the 1967 borders and they are ready and eager for peace negotiations .
They cannot understand why the EU does not respond and why we insist , for example , on channelling aid via the Temporary International Mechanism , which , while it helps some of the poorest , is unable to prevent the growing humanitarian and political crisis : it undermines the apparatus and the authority of the Palestinian State and , crucially , it strips the EU of the leverage we could - and should - have with the Israeli authorities to pressure them into releasing the Palestinian tax revenues which they are still illegally withholding .
We met Mustafa Barghouti , the Minister of Information , and he left us in doubt when he said , ' If the EU wants the Palestinian Authority to collapse , then it should say so ' .
Let us be very clear : that is where our policies are leading .
I am sure that neither we nor the Council wants the Palestinian Authority to collapse , and so I ask the Council once again : what else is it waiting for ?

Mr President , if I were a Palestinian citizen looking enthusiastically towards the European Union to get me out of the impasse I was in , I would agree with Mr Swoboda and with Mrs Caroline Lucas and I would be very concerned about certain aspects of the Rocard report .
The first problem with the report is that it upgrades the strategy of the European Council and the European Commission in the Middle East , which calls on all of us to only talk to half the members of the government of Palestine and ignore the fact that this government is the product of democratic elections , that it is a government of national unity and is supported by 96 % of the Palestinian people .
We have all seen the outcome of this catastrophic policy .
There is a legitimate government on Palestinian soil which the European Council and the European Commission has quarantined , thereby destroying every opportunity which this government is giving us to engage in legitimate talks .
If the Union misses this crucial crossroads , the road forward will be very difficult .
In another paragraph , the report notes that any deepening of Euro-Arab relations depends on the energy and talent which Europe brings to bear in reconciling its historic duties and responsibilities towards the State of Israel and the Jewish people ; but where are its historic duties and responsibilities towards the Palestinians going ?
We have to stop burying our heads in the sand .
There is a legal , elected government on Palestinian soil which we must not isolate and with which the European Union must engage immediately in direct dialogue .
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , the Rocard report contains many positive points .
In these times of political correctness , to talk about an Arab evil openly , for example , shows a certain degree of courage .
The report is right to single out a number of painful areas .
There is a need for more democracy , more free market economy , respect for human rights , and equal treatment for women , while non-Muslims must be able to practise their religion freely .
The concept of reciprocity is very much applicable here , and it is useful to make a special mention of this in the report .
The European Union can , and indeed must , play a part in promoting these principles within the Arab world .
Whether this will bear fruit is a different matter , but we should at least try .
The report stipulates - and I quote - that the westernisation of the Arab societies is not the only way of bringing about the necessary reforms .
I can go along with that , but I should like to stress that the Arabisation or Islamisation of Europe should not be an option either .
One consequence of the riots resulting from the Danish cartoons is that we have had to conclude that a number of essential freedoms , such as the right to the free expression of opinion , have also come under pressure in Europe .
The European Union 's reaction to this was rather - not to say very - feeble .
I should therefore like to say in all tranquillity and serenity that our freedoms and the right to remain ourselves in Europe and in all European Member States should remain intact .
( ES ) Mr President , it is not an easy task to produce a report on reforms in the Arab world , since that covers a fairly heterogeneous group of countries .
There is , however , agreement on the need for reforms in the Arab countries , a notion that is taken up in the very title of the report .
The Arab leaders also acknowledged this at the Tunis Summit in 2004 .
Furthermore , the recent Riyadh Summit insisted on modernisation too , though I notice that its text places less emphasis on the idea of reforms .
The Arab countries are facing a series of challenges which they need to tackle by means of substantial improvements in the political , economic and social fields .
That means reforms leading to democratisation and greater respect for human rights , which are not the exclusive property of the West , but are universal .
In many cases , democratisation will involve the challenge of incorporating moderate Islamic options into political life , options that are opposed to the use of violence .
Economic and social reforms are also needed .
From an economic point of view , there is excessive State presence , scant participation in international trade and little diversification of economies .
Generally speaking , in the majority of these countries there is a low level of economic development and low rates of growth , which are incapable of generating employment for a rapidly growing population .
High unemployment and lack of prospects cause social discontent , which feeds radical political forces .
The stability and prosperity of the Arab countries is very important for the European Union .
We need to have good relations with them that benefit us mutually ; we must consider the importance of their oil and gas to the European Union , which imports much of its energy resources from outside .
Furthermore , several Member States have Arab countries as neighbours , and many Arab citizens live in our cities .
In addition , over recent years , an extremely serious Jihadist threat has emerged , which is attacking our countries and also the Muslim States themselves .
In short , there are many fields in which we must cooperate .
We must also encourage them and help them to implement political , economic and social reforms .
Maintaining the status quo - as the report itself points out - is not a guarantee of stability in the long run , quite the opposite .
( FR ) Mr President , some people have said , on reading this report , that it is strange .
It is strange because it does not mention , or scarcely mentions , regional and international policy in this part of the world , the conflicts ravaging the Middle East , terrorism , radical Islamism or illegal immigration .
Nor does it mention the colonial past of certain great powers or the persistent influence they wish to continue to exert .
What , then , is the point of this well-meaning report , which , by the way , is a real antidote to the cartoons of Mohammed ?
First of all , it is not a well-meaning report , but a bold statement and a tremendous message of confidence in the democratic potential of the Arab world , in the diversity of its non-governmental actors , in the strength of its civil society and in its culture .
Furthermore , it states clearly the role that Europe must play : to support and promote local endogenous democratic processes and to remind them of the importance of human rights , but without ever imposing itself as a hegemonic power .
This message may seem commonplace .
It is , however , vital for a real alliance of civilisations since it finally makes the Arab world a partner in peace , a partner in development and in culture .
Many reports emanating from this European Parliament describe the threats coming to us from the East .
Mr Rocard has chosen to point out the reasons for hope , and I thank him for it .
It is , however , a subject on which Mr Rocard has been incomplete .
The report rightly mentions Europe 's responsibility towards Israel and its security .
We accept this responsibility and we will continue to accept it , but it is inseparable from our responsibility with regard to Palestine , which is today going through an unprecedented crisis .
We shall never be able to sacrifice one to the other .
The Balfour Declaration , in 1917 , already stated that ' the establishment of a home for Jewish people in Palestine would not prejudice the rights of non-Jewish communities in Palestine ' .
Where have we got to a century after this declaration ?
That is why I support and strongly take up the demand not only of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , but also of all those who have spoken this evening and said to us : the sanctions against Palestine must be lifted , we have to negotiate with its national unity government , which accepts the Arab peace initiative , which is also a tremendous guarantee for the security of Israel with regard to the Arab world .
This is a leap forward ; this is a rising hope .
And it is rising for all those who , on both sides of the 1967 frontier , still believe in international justice and want to encourage hope .
Therefore , in the name of these values , in the name of those just men on both sides of the frontier , what are we , in Europe , going to do ?
Wait ?
I say to you , ladies and gentlemen , and I say to the Council and to the Commission : let us wait no longer !
Tomorrow it will be too late , and the crushing responsibility for that will be ours .



( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I will not speak about Palestine because I fully share the opinion of Mr Swoboda , Mr Triantaphyllides , Mrs Lucas and Mrs De Keyser ; I will therefore spare you my comments about Palestine on this occasion .
Instead , I should like to thank Mr Rocard for having drafted a report containing many important elements - ' hope ' , as Mrs De Keyser was saying .
These elements include the statement that many Arab intellectuals have carried out a lucid analysis of the ills of the Arab world .
I believe that what the Rocard report is lacking , however , is a lucid analysis of the ills of European society , with regard not only to the need for reforms in the democratic Arab world but also to our policies .
In the amendments tabled by Mr Rocard himself , there are a few corrections that I fully support , even though I believe that we cannot talk about reforms in the Arab world without taking into consideration the tragedies caused not by European policies but , for example , by the war in Iraq and by the absence of a solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict .
I therefore believe that we must begin also with a criticism of how devastating and obstructive our policies in Iraq have been , for example in terms of hindering a reform process that is crucial not only in the Arab world but also to us , when it comes to changing our policy .
( MT ) Thank you , Mr President .
The subject of reform in the Arab world is an extremely complex one .
One need only read Mr Rockar 's report in order to understand this complexity .
The rapporteur in fact asks whether there is in fact an Arab community as such and points out that there is a reason why we talk of the Arab world but not of the Arab nation or the Arab union .
This clearly means that , before we begin discussing the Arab world and offering solutions , we must understand it better .
That is why it is essential not to be patronising when we talk of reforms in the Arab world and not to dictate solutions as though we were better informed than everyone else .
There is no doubt that reforms are needed so as to enable the Arab countries to benefit more from the process of modernisation and globalisation .
Our task is to offer the experience we have had in our Union and to lend our support in a spirit of partnership between two equal parties .
We must not create a context in which we tell others what to do .
The Barcelona Process was meant to be one of partnership but , as we all know , we ended up in a situation in which the European Union dictated what should happen , and when and how .
We also need to make better use of our interlocutors in the Arab world , such as the Arab League which , despite its own problems , has gained enough credibility to give a voice to the Arab world .
Malta took the initiative of proposing a structured dialogue between the European Union and the Arab League ; a dialogue aimed at tackling the subject of the reforms that must be carried out on both sides of the Mediterranean .
This is a good initiative , and one that has gone down well with the Arab League , and I hope that both the Council of Ministers and the Commissioner can support it .
Thank you .

( CS ) I should like to congratulate Mr Rocard on his outstanding report which , in my view , is much-needed , both for the Arab world and for Europe .
I believe the need for this report can be seen from the way that in recent years , not only in the USA but also in Europe , there has been a certain blinkered tendency to view the Arab and Islamic world simply in terms of the fight against terrorism .
Whilst European-Arab relations must take account of the fight against terrorism , they must also take account of issues such as economic and social development , employment , the proper management of public affairs , the strengthening of civil society , the concept of human rights , and intercultural and inter-faith exchange and dialogue .
European-Arab relations should be based on genuine dialogue on a level playing field without feelings of superiority or inferiority being generated .
Dialogue and partnership with the EU could in my view be targeted more at cooperation with the Arab world as a whole .
In other words , in addition to bilateral relations , we should also focus on specific organisations , some of which have already been mentioned , such as the League of Arab States , the Persian Gulf Cooperation Council and the Arab Maghreb Union .
Lastly , because we are here in the European Parliament , I should also like to emphasise the role played by the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly ( EMPA ) as a democratic body bringing together members of parliament from both sides of the Mediterranean .
The EMPA should in my opinion play a much greater role , including attempting to resolve the Arab-Israel conflict .

( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like first of all to thank Mr Rocard for this report , which conveys much objectivity on the European Union 's exclusively bilateral relations with the Arab world .
It calls , however , in particular for a new dialogue , which must include the problems of development and of good governance .
It is to this subject that I should like to return .
In its development policy , the European Union has broken up the Arab world into two parts : the Mediterranean zone and the Caucasus , called the neighbourhood zone , and the Middle East subject to the development policy .
This artificial distinction does not allow a more balanced comprehensive approach , which would make fundamental reforms possible .
As far as the matter of governance is concerned , Mr Rocard emphasises the partnership approach and the role of civil society .
This is an innovative view that must take into account - and this is why I am speaking of it - the role of the local authorities .
In fact , a very dense network of cooperation from town to town has developed in the Arab world , with the organisation of Arab towns which , moreover , belong to a wider organisation , the world organisation of towns , which includes Palestinian towns and Israeli towns that work together .
There are cooperation projects for peace , for cultural and religious exchanges , for human rights and the fight against all forms of discrimination .
These transnational actions are the expression of a link between Europe and the Arab world on an infra-state scale , that of emerging civil societies .
They also offer a wider framework for analysis than that of the fight against terrorism imposed following 11 September .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate my esteemed colleague , Michel Rocard , on his report .
As it underlines , the only valid response in our desire for reform in the Arab world is one which is inclusive and based on common values - something which is too often lost in talk of the war on terror .
As several Socialist colleagues have said , we need to make real progress in finding a peaceful and long-term solution to the problems of conflict , not least between the Israeli and Palestinian peoples .
But let me highlight the absolute need to limit the impact of any direct or indirect support by the EU or our Member States for authoritarianism in the region .
There needs to be a re-evaluation of the relationship between European security services and their counterparts , making sure that these agencies continue to cooperate in addressing common threats , including terrorism , but that any action is unambiguously consistent with international human rights law , including the provisions on torture .
There need to be tighter controls governing arms or military transfers to the region to ensure these are not used in internal repression or external aggression .
In all of the EU 's external assistance programmes there needs to be further re-evaluation of the provision of assistance to countries in the region in order to promote development and economic justice and to support the reformers themselves in the reform process .


rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr Gloser , Mr Verheugen , in only two minutes , I shall not be able to reply to everybody .
I should like first to stress the importance that has led four of our speakers not to deal with the subject directly but to remind us that , before this topic , the unresolved tragedy of the Israel-Palestine conflict , the non-recognition of the new Palestinian Government and the different obstacles that we put in the way , hinder good relations between Europe and the Arab world .
They are right .
That was not my point . I wish to support this point of view very forcefully .
I have often supported it on other occasions . I would draw your attention to the fact that therein lies the key .

I should also like to commend the great understanding of the report 's approach , which has been as evident in Mr Gloser 's speech as in that of the Commissioner , Mr Verheugen , and I do not think that his successor will say otherwise : there exists a convergence of thinking between a parliamentary approach , which I represent here , and the perception of the Council of Ministers , as well as that of the Commission .
For me , that is absolutely essential .
To our colleagues on the different benches , I shall simply say that the contribution made by Mr Busuttil 's , who supports the idea of partnership , seems important to me .

I would say that Mr Cappato is right to emphasise that we wish , through all these efforts , to engage with civil societies , to engage , ultimately , with individuals , of course , but we cannot engage with individuals alone , we have to do so through institutions , the media , etc . , and that is indeed the approach of this report .
Mr Tajani focused on reciprocity .
I too am concerned about reciprocity .
I should like to point out that the intelligence of our approach will depend on our ability to adjust reciprocity according to the inequalitiy of the levels of economic and cultural development .
The point is to support a process that must bring Arab countries closer to the values of our democracies , without pretending and without accusing them of not sharing these values from the beginning of the process .
That is what brings me , as Mr Cappato well knows , to defer certain amendments , not because I disagree with some of the criticisms , but rather because I disagree that it is opportune to bring them up now , at a time when we are engaging in a process of holding out a hand to help people who are way behind us when it comes to respect for human rights .
A support process does not presuppose that the problem has been resolved in advance .
We will not increase our demands .
I would even be tempted , in this spirit , to encourage voting against an amendment tabled by my own group .
We have discussed it fully .
My group is inflexible on some intangible principles for which I have been fighting for 50 years .
In this matter we must progress more moderately .
I propose that we use subtlety in our diplomatic relations .
In politics , subtlety is rare , but I am suggesting it all the same .
( Laughter )
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should just like to discuss a few points .
What alternative is there but dialogue with our neighbours ?
In recent years , the EU has laid down a wide palette of measures - not unilaterally , but in cooperation with many Arab countries .
The key ones have already been mentioned : the Barcelona process , for example , and also the further development of neighbourhood policy that is currently taking place .
Nevertheless , we note different developments in individual countries .
Who would have thought , for example , that the King of Morocco would have launched a truth commission seeking to reappraise what crimes were committed in the past ?
Of course , this committee of inquiry does not come close to meeting the criteria the EU Member States lay down for such committees .
Who would have thought , also , that certain distant countries would extend the right to vote ?
A great deal has happened , but it is apparent that , on certain points , we could have achieved more .
The people in Arab countries would also have hoped for a greater share in economic development than has been the case .
There is no alternative to dialogue , however .
Mr Rocard spoke of the need for us to develop a strategy : this can only work in cooperation with Arab countries .
It is possible that the strategy towards a certain country will differ from that towards a Gulf State .
It is also important , however , to note that the Arab League has regained strength .
The League often looks to the EU , the association of European states , but it has no such uniting function ; instead its members often have a very national outlook and prefer to regulate their own matters .
Nevertheless , there has now been a realisation that , when it comes to conflict resolution , in particular , an association is better , and accordingly is a better means of asserting a country 's own interests .
I should also like to discuss the various comments that have been made in the debate with regard to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict .
I am of course aware that the unresolved conflict between Israel and the Palestinian territories often interferes with many of the talks , the forums for dialogue .
However , I should also like to say quite deliberately that many problems in Arab countries could also have been solved without a prior resolution of this conflict .
However - including in view of comments by Mr Swoboda and others - we should bear in mind the chronicle of developments in this whole debate .
We have never said that the elections in the Palestinian territories were unfair .
On the contrary , we noted that they were conducted more fairly than those in many other countries .
Another important aspect , however , is that the newly elected government failed to declare its intention to comply with the commitments entered into by the previous government - at least not initially , Mr Swoboda ; only gradually - and now only as a result of the initiative of Saudi Arabia .
Many Arab states have succeeded in forming a national unity government .
I would say quite clearly - because this is occasionally obscured , and so that you do not reproach me at the end of the process - that , at the time of the blockade , the EU provided considerable financial support to the Palestinians : a fact that the Commissioner responsible for external relations , Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , has always made clear .
The sums paid out were often greater than in the period before the ' blockade ' .
We must now concern ourselves , together with the Arab League and , of course , the two actors Israel and Palestine , with making progress in reviving the peace process - an achievement to which the EU and the Quartet contributed - and with meeting the demands we have heard today .
Mr President , I simply wish to thank Parliament and , of course , its rapporteur , Mr Rocard , for the work done on a subject that is important for all of us .
I will give an account to Mr Verheugen , who has presented the Commission 's position , of the quality of the debates in which I have been able to take part in his stead .
I think , in fact , that Parliament prides itself on developing thinking about important issues .
I pay tribute , of course , to the German Presidency and hope that this report will make it possible to work out this peace strategy that we all need so much .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Written statements ( Rule 142 )


in writing . - ( FI ) Mr President , I think that Mr Rocard 's report is fairly commendable : it emphasises the fact that the Union 's role is to encourage and engage with the attempts at reform in the Arab countries .
This role requires active inter-cultural dialogue .
We have to give our attention to what the dialogue should be based on .
The report says ' inter-cultural dialogue can only be revived through the affirmation of a common and universal basis of human values which transcends dogmas and Community allegiances ' .
This should not be understood as a purely secularist basis , which might indeed increase cultural tensions .
A liberalised society exhibits a mix of two ways of thinking : ethical pluralism and cultural relativism , which could be called secularist relativism .
Whereas relativism is based on the assumption that there is no religious truth , the pluralistic approach is just that we can reach consensus on this through reasonable means .
Relativism therefore means that value and belief systems have not been left out of political decisions entirely .
Pluralism , on the other hand , aims for dialogue on values and means that different value and belief systems need to be understood when decisions are being taken , for the simple reason that they are an important part of people 's lives .
It has to be realised that dialogue along these lines makes not just understanding and interaction , but also criticism , possible .
Relativism in fact leads to an increase in tension because it evades the difficult issues and passes over them .
Pluralism can help ease tension as it is fundamentally to do with taking account of human values and their differences .
Religion is not necessarily what causes tension , which is to say a problem .
It can also be part of the solution .
in writing . I will be supporting this report on EU strategy towards the Arab world .
While there is fault on both sides of the Arab-Israeli conflict , I welcome the fact that the EU has a much more balanced position with regard to this conflict than the Bush Administration in the US .
What we can potentially do has been recently demonstrated in the not entirely different context of the Aceh conflict in Indonesia - the world 's fourth largest country and largest Muslim state .
Here EU efforts brokered a peace settlement and a peace process that ended a 30-year-long civil war at the cost of less than a few hours ' spending in Iraq .
This example should serve as a paradigm for the EU 's future actions within our emerging Common Foreign and Security Policy .
One-minute speeches ( Rule 144 )
The next item is one-minute speeches .
Mr President , the mounting crisis in relations between Estonia and Russia affects us all .
What we have is a clear case of undue pressure by a large country against a small one .
This is the kind of behaviour from which the European Union protects small states .
Russia has persistently accused Estonia of nurturing something that it calls ' fascism ' , without producing a shred of evidence .
The campaign brings the very idea of anti-fascism into disrepute , above all because Russia itself is behaving like a fascist state .
The campaign dishonours the memory of those who really did fight fascism and especially those who gave their lives in that struggle , millions of Russians included .
Anti-fascism means democracy and equality of respect for all .
Russia , by contradicting this , is reviving fascism and thereby turning into a threat to Europe as a whole .
Madam President , I would like to raise a serious matter of EU funding being misused , in my view , for the destruction of archaeological heritage in Ireland .
I appeal to Commissioner Dimas to intervene directly with Minister Roche in Ireland to ensure that these subsidies , which are being provided to build the N3 motorway in County Meath , are not facilitating the destruction of a recently discovered Neolithic site - a ' woodhenge ' .
This is an extremely important site , quite close to the historic Tara Hill .
The Director of the National Museum in Ireland has called for a complete archaeological excavation , but , given that Minister Roche has been deaf to all expert advice so far , there is a real risk that this unique Neolithic site will be lost .
In view of the European investment in this motorway project , it is essential that the Commission step in to ensure that a significant part of not only Irish heritage , but by definition also part of European heritage , is properly excavated , and that if necessary the N3 motorway be reconfigured to achieve that objective .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that we are about to witness a dishonourable - I repeat : dishonourable - episode in the European Union , the responsibility for which rests primarily with the Council and with the inertia of the Commission , which are in breach of compulsory mandates that we have given them .
In December 1994 we were defeated by a mere eight votes when the universal moratorium on the death penalty was about to be established .
Since then , for 13 years , the overwhelming majority of the UN has been ready to vote for this great principle of civilisation .
Since then the European Union has prevented them from voting .
Parliament has said during this part-session that the General Affairs and External Relations Council ( GAERC ) that will take place on Monday 14 May is probably preparing , once again , to betray the mandate entrusted to it and to postpone for yet another year this certain victory .
Madam President , I would ask you to urge the President of Parliament to deal promptly with the issue .
( PL ) Madam President , Poland 's fruit growers have suffered yet another setback .
Poor protection of the internal market against excessive imports and dumping has been compounded by frost which has destroyed some 90 % of this year 's harvest .
The losses , estimated at some 1.5 billion EUR , are beyond the means of the Polish Government and insurance companies .
Low returns on fruit farming , particularly soft fruits , and especially since Poland 's accession to the EU , has meant a reluctance to insure harvests , both by insurance companies and by the farmers themselves , who simply cannot afford it .
This situation requires immediate assistance from the European Union , both emergency aid and long-term aid for the coming years .
If not , Poland 's farmers will be condemned to bankruptcy , and the EU to importing its fruit from third countries .
Madam President , the European Commission has wisely dropped plans to enforce complete metrication in the UK .
It realises that nothing would be more likely to ferment rebellion against the European Union amongst the general population than for them to lose the pound , the pint and the mile .
This is a victory for Britain , but it is only a skirmish that has been won .
The European Union has made a tactical withdrawal in order to fight more strategic battles later .
The struggle for British independence is still being waged and the final victory , when Britain leaves the European Union , is still some way off .
The next big confrontation will be over the revised European Constitution .
At this point I would like to add my voice to those calling for a posthumous royal pardon to be granted to the metric martyr , Steve Thoburn , who was convicted in the year 2000 for the heinous criminal offence of selling bananas in pounds and ounces .
( DE ) Madam President , I should like to inform the public and those responsible of an outrageous case of obstructing the work of an independent Member of the European Parliament .
In Austria , the top candidate of the Liberal Forum at the last student elections , Martin Ehrenhauser , received a letter on 20 April 2007 stating : ' We are offering you a job as a contract agent from 15 May 2007 working for the political group of Non-attached Members in the European Parliament . '
Mr Ehrenhauser travelled here .
Suddenly the letter is no longer valid .
The reason : a political instruction from the very top , from the new Secretary General , Harald Rømer .
This is unacceptable .
It was a bolt from the blue and in this case it affects me .
You will be aware that every Member has the right to work with at least one member of parliamentary staff in his group in his mother tongue .
I am the only one who is denied this privilege , because there is a desire to make the work of an unpleasant critic more difficult .
At the same time , it is precisely the large groups here that allocate themselves legions of staff who are loyal to their party .
Altogether Parliament employs thousands of staff .
I call on the Bureau and those responsible to investigate this case .
This kind of thing is detrimental to Parliament and it is also detrimental to our understanding of democracy .
( CS ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in these post-modern times , marriage is becoming less and less popular , especially among young people , yet it remains the foundation of the family .
It is thus in the interest of the Member States and of the EU as a whole to support marriage .
Following our accession to the EU , I frequently hear complaints about the long-term complications people face when they marry citizens of other Member States .
It is hard for EU citizens to understand that there is no agreement between EU Member States on the mutual recognition of official documents .
Men and women wanting to get married have to spend time and effort going around numerous offices to complete bureaucratic formalities in order to make the wedding possible .
For me too as an MEP it is hard to understand why the offices of one Member State refuse to recognise marriage certificates or confirmations of citizenship as stated in normal documents .
Young people find the process of obtaining current documents and having them super-legalised especially arduous .
I am under no illusions about our ability to harmonise codes .
Nevertheless our citizens certainly deserve some simple measures aimed at simplifying those laws .
( LT ) Russia is behaving disgracefully in Estonia and is not even trying to hide its behaviour .
The Russians have commenced an economic blockade against a European Union Member State .
In the past , Russia has behaved more subtly in Latvia or Lithuania , or in other countries , which is perhaps why the European Union has been nonchalant about most of Russia 's actions .
After the events in Estonia I urge you to reconsider the European Union 's relations with Russia .
Strategic partnership should be replaced by principled , honourable and pragmatic cooperation .
In my opinion , it is essential to postpone the 18 May meeting in Samara .
We need to lay out the European Union 's opinion to Russia on what conditions are essential for such meetings to be able to take place again in the future .
Javier Solana must go to Moscow and clearly state the European Union 's position .
Europe has enough arguments .
My fear is that some European Union leaders will want to have yet another photo opportunity with the antidemocratic Putin , rather than defend the European Union 's democratic values .
Madam President , I start by saying to you - and I hope you will convey this to the President - how much I enjoyed the initiative he took in inviting Nobel Prize winners here this afternoon and particularly hearing from distinguished scientists speaking to us in this Chamber .
We have many issues to deal with , colleagues , involving science and technology and we do not have enough dialogue with the science and technology community .
Through this speech tonight , I would like to draw to the attention of all my colleagues the fact that the Parliament 's own Science and Technology Assessment Unit , of which I am privileged to be Vice-President , with my colleague Mr Busquin as President , is holding a major event in the June Strasbourg week , called the STOA Experience .
There will be exhibitions of recent work and many distinguished scientists will meet and talk to Members about the projects we have under way .
I hope many colleagues will take a real opportunity to step up dialogue between ourselves in this Parliament and the leaders in the science and technology community within the European Union .
Thank you for drawing that to our attention , Mr Harbour .
Madam President , I would like to emphasise a point which is not universally known in the European Union .
This is the fact that - with the exception of Denmark - cars are most expensive in my country , the smallest country in the EU .
This is mainly due to the fact that there is an extraordinary tax called registration tax , which is sometimes higher than the value of the car itself .
This means that , in a country where wages are on a par at most with middle-income Europe , the price of vehicles , whether new or second hand , is exorbitant .
This creates undue stress for middle- and lower-income families when it comes to changing their cars .
It also affects the whole idea of world climate change .
Although Malta is small , car owners find it terribly difficult to change their cars to more efficient energy-saving cars and those which produce less exhaust .
Madam President , as an Irish Member I am delighted to have one minute to add my voice to the many voices who celebrate and applaud what happened yesterday in Belfast .
Indeed it is fitting that earlier today we congratulated Betty Williams , Mairead Corrigan , David Trimble and John Hume , all Nobel Prize winners , for their contribution to peace-building and peacemaking in Northern Ireland .
Betty Williams and Mairead Corrigan worked within their communities and that is where real peace building is achieved , between people , between families , between neighbours and between communities .
But we also need political leadership to drive the process forward and today we honoured two of those politicians , David Trimble and John Hume .
There were many other politicians at different levels who took risks for peace and they too deserve our applause .
As we celebrate 50 years of the EU , it is most appropriate to recognise that the EU has also played an important role in the peace process in Northern Ireland , giving us moral and economic support .
For that support I believe I can say on my own behalf and on behalf of Irish people , thank you to the EU for believing in us and supporting us on the road to peace .
. - ( HU ) Over the past six years , factories on Austrian territory have been continuously polluting the waters of the Rába River .
The Rába crosses the Hungarian border already filled with polluted , foamy water .
The Hungarian Minister of Environmental Protection , who stepped down yesterday , gave the Austrian factories until 1 May to stop the pollution , but no progress has so far been made .
On 1 April , together with my colleague I personally delivered to the Austrian authorities the petition of the Hungarian delegation of the People 's Party , calling upon the provincial and federal government to take the necessary steps .
To date we have received no answer to our petition .
The Austro-Hungarian Water Commission , which years ago granted the factories an operating licence , is currently holding its annual meeting .
This commission is made up of delegates by the governments of the two States , and the revocation of water rights licences likewise falls within their competence .
We must do everything possible to stop this harmful , cross-border environmental pollution ; therefore I call upon the Austro-Hungarian Water Commission , and thus indirectly on the governments of the two Member States in question - in which I request the assistance of Parliament - to revoke , effective immediately , the water rights licences of those factories which are polluting the river .
Madam President , as we celebrate 50 years of European values and fundamental principles , democracy in a candidate Member State is struggling to survive .
The elected Government of Turkey is openly threatened by the country 's biggest enemy , its army generals .
The Turkish army , instead of protecting democracy , is set on a course to destroy it .
Irrespective of our personal stance on Turkey 's accession to the EU , it is to our benefit and to the benefit of the Turkish people that Turkey continues its reform process .
It is our duty to support the political powers of Turkey , represented today by Mr Erdogan 's Government , in their fight against the anachronistic armed forces , represented by Chief of Staff General Buyukanit .
I call upon the President of this House to make a statement as soon as possible to express our strong support for the Government of Turkey and our dismay at the interference of the army in the politics of the country .
The European Parliament 's message to the Turkish army generals should be loud and clear : ' Keep to your barracks and stop your war on democracy ' .
( SK ) I have been following the situation concerning political prisoners in Cuba for quite some time .
It was with pleasure that I received the news that several opposition groups had recently come up with a joint declaration in which they committed themselves to a united approach in the struggle for a peaceful transition to democracy on the island .
The signatories of the declaration include such well-known dissidents such as Oswaldo Payá from the Christian Democratic Movement for Liberation , Elizardo Sanchez from the Cuban Human Rights and National Reconciliation Commission , and Martha Beatriz Roque and René Gómez Manzano from the Assembly for the Promotion of Civil Society .
The document was also signed by the members of the organisation set up by the wives of political prisoners , known as the Ladies in White .
A unified peaceful opposition is essential to pursuing the changes that are needed by the people .
One must not overlook the fact that , despite some political and philosophical differences , these groups share the same goals , including respect for human rights , reconciliation , the release of political prisoners , non-violence and cooperation .
( SK ) The purpose of my presentation is to warn European consumers who wear Chinese textile products .
Regrettably , many of those products are coloured using azocolourants that do not meet the standards set in Directive 2002 / 61 / EC on azocolourants .
When people wear such textile products , the azocolourants penetrate the body like silent killers and cause cancer .
Just as recently as May 2006 the laboratories of an authorised entity operating in the town of Svit , Slovakia , tested a sample of 90 textile products for children randomly collected on the Slovak market , most of them imported from China , and found that every fifteenth product was hazardous .
One can reasonably assume that large batches of essentially identical textile goods are to be found on the markets of other EU Member States .
As these are extremely dangerous products , I urge the Commission to take effective measures to shorten as much as possible the time between sample collection and the publishing of an alert in the RAPEX system .
The 3.5 months or more that it now takes is long enough for the hazardous product to be sold out and disappear from the market .
I find these facts disconcerting , and I strongly believe that we must not remain inactive .
( PL ) Madam President , there is a saying that you can tell who your real friends are in a crisis .
At the moment , Poland 's soft fruit farmers are facing such a crisis because of the frosts that have hit Poland in recent weeks .
Soon these farms and their families will sink into poverty .
Poland 's farmers are hoping for some support from the EU , and that someone will reach out with a helping hand .
This is what should in fact happen , as that is what solidarity means , that is what being together and helping one another in difficulty means .
Lech Wałęsa , who is present in this House today , could tell you much more about this .
Help from the European Union will create a good climate and increase our citizens ' regard for the EU .
Here in this House , in the EU institutions , we need to develop instruments at EU level to help those countries , regions and industries that have been afflicted by natural disasters .
That concludes the item .
Nominal quantities for pre-packed products ( debate )
The next item is the recommendation for second reading from the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection on the Council common position for adopting a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down rules on nominal quantities for pre-packed products , repealing Council Directives 75 / 106 / EEC and 80 / 232 / EEC , and amending Council Directive 76 / 211 / EEC ( 13484 / 1 / 2006 - C6-0039 / 2007 - ( Rapporteur : Jacques Toubon ) .

rapporteur . - ( FR ) Madam President , Mr Verheugen , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection recommends that you adopt the Council common position , modified by some amendments : an amendment comprising a safeguard clause at the end of the transitional periods , a provision encouraging the extension of unit pricing , a system for guaranteeing that British bread can continue to be marketed in its current sizes and , finally , a declaration by the Commission that can explain and guarantee exactly the phasing out of stocks of bottles that are off-specification .
However , the heart of this directive is , on the one hand , freedom in sizing and , on the other , mandatory sizes , for five years , for milk , pasta , butter and coffee and , for six years , for white sugar .
That is what is proposed to you .
How have we reached this point ?
At first reading , on the basis of its own study , the European Parliament retained mandatory sizes for a number of products , in permanent derogation in relation to the general liberalisation of sizes that was proposed by the Commission .
The latter , in a position of principle , set out a revised proposal that was totally opposed to Parliament 's text .
It was then that I was able to resume talks with the Commission and the Finnish Presidency of the Council .
The latter succeeded in achieving the adoption of a common position that took up some of the derogations requested by the European Parliament , but only for a limited period , a transitional period .
I proposed accepting the main points of this position , provided that it was accompanied by two additional guarantees .
Firstly , that the Commission can propose continuing to keep certain mandatory sizes for certain mass-marketed products if consumers experienced disruption at the end of the transitional period and , secondly , that the Member States should be encouraged to extend unit pricing to local shops .
That is what the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection decided on on the basis of my proposal and it is also what we agreed with the Council and the Commission at the end of two trialogues held over recent weeks .
Furthermore , ladies and gentlemen , I shall draw three lessons from this legislative procedure .
Firstly , on this occasion , we have , for the first time , carried out an impact assessment .
We commissioned this assessment from an independent body , and it was the first time that Parliament had used this procedure , which has , I believe , a great future .
Secondly , what we are doing means that better lawmaking does not necessarily consist in doing away with all legislation because - and this is the third lesson I have drawn - through this debate , we have strictly taken into account the needs of consumers , and , in particular , the most vulnerable consumers .
That is why , ladies and gentlemen , I propose that our Parliament vote tomorrow for the three amendments that have been adopted by the Commission on Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
Vice-President of the Commission .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like first of all to thank Mr Toubon for his constructive work on this very difficult legislative proposal and agree with everything that he has just said , particularly when it comes to the lessons to be learnt , that is what we can learn from this dossier .
I should like to make one additional point : I hope very much that the Council will see fit to follow Parliament 's example and in future , when it is making amendments to legislative proposals , that it will also carry out an impact assessment .
This would certainly help us greatly in our ongoing work of creating better regulation .
This is actually just one part of a major project being implemented by the Commission and all of the other institutions : better regulation .
We began with the clear political goal of improving and simplifying the European Union 's existing body of legislation .
Mr Toubon is quite right : improving it does not mean abolishing it .
Improving it means making it simpler , more transparent and more manageable .
Obviously , however , the levels of protection that we have in place should remain intact .
In principle , all of the institutions and certainly also consumers and business agree with this .
Despite this agreement of principle , however , there are always specific reservations once a proposal is actually drafted and tabled .
Then it becomes clear that a political compromise is needed and I am pleased that in this case we have produced a good solution together .
What is this really about ?
We are dealing here with regulations from the 70s and 80s .
At that time mandatory sizes were laid down for a large number of prepacked products .
These included such varied goods as toothpaste , detergent , fish fingers , tomato puree , solvents and even dry and wet dog and cat food .
At the time of their adoption around 30 years ' ago , this was the best way of achieving two aims : firstly , to open up the internal market for goods even more , as provided for in the Treaties of Rome , and secondly to ensure the necessary level of consumer protection in the cross-border trade of these goods .
Since then , however , we have significantly developed the internal market and consumer protection within the European Union .
Now it is a question of following suit by simplifying and harmonising the regulations on packaging sizes .
Here , less European regulation means more innovation and greater competitiveness .
I am convinced that this proposal will have a positive impact , in particular for consumers .
Consumers will gain greater freedom of choice .
Furthermore , thanks to the existing directive on unit pricing ( pricing per kilogram or litre ) , they will also continue to be able to compare the prices of different packaging sizes easily in the future .
I am grateful to the rapporteur for his commitment .
I also think that we have agreed on transitional rules .
As Parliament has requested , the Commission will review the situation in a few years ' time .
There is therefore nothing to prevent an agreement at this second reading .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , with slightly more time at my disposal I would like to congratulate you on becoming a Vice-President .
As a valued colleague of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , it is a pleasure to speak with you chairing the sitting here tonight .
I would also like to thank Jacques Toubon , who I think has led an outstanding review of this process , as the Commissioner has indicated .
I also echo what the Commissioner said about the way that we approached this .
I think we were one of the first committees in Parliament to commission an impact assessment on our proposed amendments .
Some of the issues raised by that have now been reflected in the amendments which we shall support tomorrow , particularly concerning what I might call the safeguard clauses that the Commission will be observing in order to closely observe the behaviour of the market .
Overall we are very much in support of your aims , Commissioner , in wanting to push forward to remove unnecessary legislation , much of which dates back 20 or 30 years , as you indicated .
Now that consumers are better informed , we want them to take advantage of that and to have information about pricing .
We want to give manufacturers the flexibility to produce products in different sizes that would suit different family sizes .
I am bound to say that in my own country - and I suspect in others - it is such a surprise for them to find the Commission producing a deregulatory measure .
As you will see from some colourful newspaper stories in my stories in my own country , this directive has been freely misinterpreted as in many cases preventing British consumers from having access to their preferred sizes for products .
I think that you as a Commission need to work on the fact that misrepresentation is so easy , because at the moment this is such an unusual proposal .
In that context I am very grateful to you and to the Council for giving consumers of pre-packed bread in the United Kingdom - that is over 80 % of regular eaters of bread every day - assurances that their traditional sizes of loaf , which they perceived to be under threat from this proposal , are guaranteed and that they will still be able to enjoy and consume every morning with their marmalade toast made in their traditional sizes of pre-packed bread .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the piece of legislation that we are debating today is very important , because the reason why this directive was created in the past was of course to open up the market for goods .
Opening up the market and producing nominal quantities have now been replaced by consumer protection .
How we deal with this proposal is therefore extremely important and that is why the European Parliament has stated clearly that simply doing away with all of the regulations in this sector could lead to difficulties , particularly for people with disabilities , especially the partially sighted .
If we look round large supermarkets , for example , we note that prices are not always displayed as clearly as they might be .
For Parliament , it is of great importance to appeal to the Member States and say that it is not enough to display prices in units of litres or kilograms in the large supermarkets , but that it would also be appropriate to introduce this pricing method in other outlets . They should identify ways of achieving this , as it is particularly important for vulnerable customers .
It was very important for us to make this appeal and it is good that it has been heard .
The second point that is particularly close to our hearts as social democrats has just been mentioned by my fellow Member , Mr Harbour .
It concerns loaves of bread in the United Kingdom .
At no stage have either the Commission , the Council or the European Parliament wanted to call into question these packaging sizes , but the debate in the United Kingdom has taken on a life of its own .
To make this clear to the people of the United Kingdom it was important to include a corresponding recital in this legislation , so that we really could ensure - and British Members , in particular from the Labour Party , have asked me to stress this once more - that bread in the United Kingdom will not be affected in any shape or form , but that it will continue to be able to be sold in the forms that the British public is used to .
A third issue in this context concerned the fact that we wanted to ensure that these nominal quantities would not be abolished automatically after a certain time , but that the European Commission would assess the consequences and the possibilities beforehand and would consider by means of an impact assessment whether this was appropriate , what consequences could arise as a result and how we might respond to any disruption of the market .
The detergent market has provided us with an example of what happens when there are no nominal quantities , and in that case we could consider what action might be taken .


on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , Mr Verheugen , Mr Lütke Daldrup , ladies and gentlemen , I should like first of all to congratulate our rapporteur and also to thank him because Mr Toubon has worked in a spirit of complete cooperation with all his colleagues .
Consequently , we have always been informed of his positions and of the progress of the dossier after every discussion with the Commission and the Presidency of the Council .
Mr Toubon has sought our opinion , providing us in good time with clear , precise notes , which have enabled us to make up our minds with full knowledge of the facts .
At the time of the vote at first reading , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe took a stand against maintaining packaging sizes insofar as these mandatory categories did not exist in the 27 Member States and these obligations could hamper innovation and competition by limiting consumer choice .
The ALDE Group has , however , come round to the Council common position and supports the idea of transitional periods for certain categories of product .
On the other hand , the ALDE Group did not necessarily want a revision clause to be entered into the actual body of the directive , as it felt that the reference to this review clause in a recital sufficed .
Recognising , however , the persuasive powers of the rapporteur , the ALDE Group will support him on this point as , I might add , it will support his amendments as a whole .
Aside from this vote , however , may I express my regret that none of the institutions has taken up the idea of concordance tables , which appeared in Article 8 of the basic proposal .
In accordance with the ' Better lawmaking ' interinstitutional agreement , the Member States are in fact encouraged to establish for themselves and in the Community interest their own concordance tables between the directives and the transitional measures and , above all , to make them public .
This point is particularly important for the ALDE Group , which is very committed to improving information for consumers and , beyond that , which is fighting for better information for European citizens .
( SV ) Madam President , the Swedish Members of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats are opposed to a Packaging Directive .
Ideally , we would want to do away with the whole directive . I have made efforts to rescue Swedish milk packages , reduce bureaucracy and prevent a debate on milk snatching .
The rapporteur , Mr Toubon , has negotiated , and reached a compromise , with Members of the European Parliament and with the Council .
The compromise now looks quite different .
Today 's date is 9 May , a day of peace for Europe .
The motto is jaw not war , and in that spirit I shall try to do my bit .
Negotiations presuppose compromise .
Whoever is able to compromise contributes to the development of Europe .
It is more difficult to say yes in the right place than to say no .
I personally am in favour of Mr Toubon 's compromise , irrespective of whether or not my Swedish fellow Members are .
This is my way of celebrating 9 May , that is to say by showing some additional willingness to compromise on the issue of a Packaging Directive , for it is in that way that modern Europe is being built - stone by stone , compromise by compromise .
I also want to try to help , so I am agreeing to the proposal and would conclude by saying :
( FR ) My respects , Mr Toubon .
In fact , Mrs Cederschiöld , Mr Toubon is behind you on the other side .
In any event , the debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Approval of motor vehicles and their trailers ( debate )
The next item is the recommendation for second reading from the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection on the Council common position for adopting a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a framework for the approval of motor vehicles and their trailers , and of systems , components and separate technical units intended for such vehicles ( Framework Directive ) ( 09911 / 3 / 2006 - C6-0040 / 2007 - ( Rapporteur : Malcolm Harbour ) .
rapporteur . - Madam President , it is a pleasure to be able to present this report on behalf of the committee tonight .
I would like to pay tribute to my colleague , Mr Gargani , who handled the report at first reading - a substantial amount of work was done by Parliament at that stage .
I should also like to thank the Commission and the Council , because we have worked very hard together on an extremely complex and technical proposal .
In total it is a report of almost 400 pages , which must be one of the biggest reports to come before this Parliament .
In particular , Commissioner , I would like to thank your own staff - Mr Schulte-Braucks and Mr Delneufcourt , who I think has been largely responsible for many of those 400 pages .
I think he deserves a special mention this evening .
This is a very important report in terms of completing the internal market for motor vehicles .
The whole basis of technical regulation for motor vehicles was one of the earliest areas of harmonisation within the European single market , but it has taken until now for us to have a fully comprehensive type-approval framework for all categories of motor vehicles , trailers , major component systems and critical components .
Therefore , on Europe Day , I think this is a notable achievement that we have reached at this stage .
This of course means that we will get the benefits of improved environmental and safety standards for vehicles , consistent and independent validation of performance and that true level playing field we often hear businesses talking about .
We have actually achieved that in this case .
In particular , I think the ability of manufacturers of all scales and sizes to be able to get their vehicles approved by a national type-approval authority to a European regulation and to be able to sell those vehicles in every market across the European Union is a major step forward .
At second reading we have an unusually large number of amendments that were tabled and will be voted on tomorrow .
These reflect a lot of further improvement and work on our part .
I would just like to highlight some of those points this evening .
I am particularly grateful to the Council , also , and I am pleased that Mr Deldrup will be speaking as well , which I think is an indication of the importance that the Council attaches to this important file .
First of all , we have had some debate to finalise some of the issues around the type-approval for buses and the timescale for that .
The bus sector is important because this type-approval directive brings into play the bus directive that many of us worked on .
This brings with it notable safety improvements and important issues like disability access to all types of buses .
This will essentially be brought into play as the single homologation approval framework for buses across the European Union .
The second aspect , which was a new element of the directive added between first and second reading , was the provision to apply a new scheme of type approvals for after-market parts , which affected the environmental and safety systems of vehicles .
It is important that we have an approval process for those categories of parts so that we have very full consumer protection in that area .
But equally this brings the whole of the type-approval process into the focus of many small and medium-sized businesses .
Therefore , together with the other institutions , I worked hard to ensure that we had a very effective procedure , first of all for identifying those parts and to ensure that the producers of those parts were involved in that , and to develop the new test standards that would be required for approval .
But of course , having done that , it allows the producers of those parts , and particularly tuning and other companies , to have access to the single market with a single approval .
I think that is a major benefit that they are very pleased to have .
Another aspect that we looked at was the approval procedure for small series vehicles .
Mr Gargani asked for the lower volume vehicle limit to be raised and a compromise has been reached to raise that to a thousand vehicles for simplified type approval , a major benefit for the smaller serious producers .
We also identified that there was an important category of vehicle for disabled users - ' wheelchair accessible vehicles ' - which were series volume vehicles modified to allow access by wheelchair passengers .
With the support of the Commission and the Council , I propose that we should devise a new category for that type of vehicle .
The producers of those vehicles , which are growing in importance , are very pleased to be recognised in that way and are also confident that this will bring into play a new attention to the needs of disabled users , as well as the strength and fittings of wheelchairs and so on .
We will have a vehicle here in Brussels tomorrow to show what we have achieved .
In conclusion , this is a very important step forward for the single market .
It has been my privilege to handle it on behalf of Parliament and I commend it to this House for support tomorrow .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) Madam President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , tomorrow you will be voting on an important new directive on the type approval of cars , lorries , buses and their trailers .
We in the German Presidency are delighted that we have been able to reach a prior agreement with the European Parliament on the remaining outstanding issues .
We should like to thank you , Mr Harbour , and your colleagues very much for the good and constructive cooperation .
This is an important step towards increasing road safety and vehicle safety in the Community and towards making the internal market in motor vehicles a reality .
The new directive extends the European type approval , that has hitherto only been foreseen for passenger cars , to lorries , buses and their trailers .
Manufacturers of these vehicles will therefore also be able to benefit from the advantages of the European type approval in the future .
At the same time , the directive ensures that in the future all new vehicles in the European Union will have to meet the same high safety standards .
The new directive will therefore benefit not only the European automotive industry but also the public throughout the Community .
We are counting on your support in tomorrow 's vote and we will then adopt the directive at one of our forthcoming Council meetings so that it can enter into force as quickly as possible .
Vice-President of the Commission .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to offer particularly warm congratulations to the rapporteur , Mr Harbour , on his report and to thank him for his work , which has yielded a really excellent result .
This proposal for a directive consists of a whole package of measures , which are intended to speed up the process of placing vehicles on the market in the Member States .
This will indeed , as the representative of the German Presidency has just stressed , bring huge advantages for manufacturers , freight forwarders and users .
Making the internal market a reality is indisputably one of the greatest success stories in European politics .
However , when it comes to commercial vehicles , manufacturers have hitherto waited in vain for borders to be fully opened .
Since 1996 , the directive on the type approval of motor vehicles has been the European Community 's most important legal instrument for creating the internal market in the automotive sector .
It was then that all classes of vehicles were given access to the internal market .
The only exceptions were commercial vehicles , that is buses , lorries and their trailers , despite the fact that this is a sector of huge economic importance .
In 2006 alone , two million new vans and more than a quarter of a million new lorries of over 16 tonnes were licensed in the Community .
The vast majority of these vehicles were built in the European Union .
In 2007 these figures will be substantially exceeded , if the data available for the first quarter are anything to go by .
This new framework directive seeks above all to extend the principle of a standard Community-wide type-approval procedure to all vehicles .
In addition , automotive manufacturers will no longer need to build vehicles in line with the regulations in each individual Member State to be permitted to sell them there .
Instead , harmonised technical specifications will apply , bringing economies of scale into play and avoiding out-dated administrative procedures .
Haulage companies will also benefit from this and , in the end , consumers .
A further essential point in this directive is that new vehicles will have to comply with a whole series of directives on technical harmonisation in the field of vehicle safety .
Precisely at a time when commercial vehicles do not enjoy a good reputation amongst the public , this will make a decisive contribution to improving road safety across the European Union .
Obviously , small and medium-sized enterprises have not been forgotten .
They too will have easier access to the internal market .
Manufacturers of special purpose vehicles or small series vehicles and body-builders , who usually work on behalf of haulage companies , will benefit from simplified procedures , which will not involve too much red tape .
I fully agree with Mr Harbour 's point about those companies that modify vehicles to meet the needs of disabled users .
It was very important to find a way to resolve this problem together .
I am delighted that the recommendations made by the CARS 21 high level group , that was set up on my initiative , have been incorporated unchanged into this proposal for a directive .
CARS 21 has enabled us to define the legislative framework within which we will move when designing future technical regulations .
There is one further important point to be mentioned here : international regulations are becoming increasingly significant , in this case regulations that are currently being drafted by the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe .
An additional factor is that in various respects we are abolishing out-dated Community law and are allowing manufacturers to submit their own test results to obtain a type approval .
On the tension between the Community 's rules on languages and the direct reference to international standards and regulations , I should like to say that the Commission accepts Amendment 25 because it believes that in this particular industrial sector a direct and up-to-date reference to such standards may significantly enhance its competitiveness .
This applies both at global level and within the EU .
The automotive sector is a global business .
It therefore has a greater and more urgent need for international standards than some other sectors .
The Commission supports the amendments to enable an agreement at second reading and is convinced that this proposal constitutes a balanced response to the interests of industry , haulage companies and consumers as well as the needs of the Member States .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , I too should like firstly to thank the rapporteur , Mr Harbour , for his excellent and very professional work on this dossier .
I can fully support the compromise that has been negotiated with the Presidency .
I should therefore like to comment briefly on just one point , which we have already considered in the debate on Euro 5 , and which is particularly important to me , namely access to vehicle repair information for independent garages .
This access to information is of crucial importance for European citizens .
Anyone who is on holiday , travelling in Europe in his car , can break down abroad .
Often , however , the nearest authorised repair garage is hundreds of miles away .
That is why we need to ensure that free , independent garages are also able to repair that motor vehicle .
Furthermore , all drivers in their home countries should also be able to choose the garage where they would like their vehicle to be repaired .
This competition will definitely also benefit consumers .
We will guarantee this with our new rules .
To this end we have included an explicit provision in the new type-approval framework directive stating that vehicle manufacturers have to make all of the necessary information readily available to independent garages to ensure that they are able to repair and maintain a motor vehicle .
This provision is consistent with the wording of the Euro 5 Regulation , which we adopted last year at its first reading .
Our objective is to guarantee access to repair information for independent garages .
This should be ensured for a transitional period by Euro 5 , but should ultimately be provided for in the type-approval framework directive .
Finally , I should like to appeal once more to Commissioner Verheugen to ensure that the political will of Parliament and the Council is respected in the negotiations on technical implementation , because the provisions on access to repair information also have to work in practice .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner Verheugen , I too am delighted that we have reached an agreement between the three European Union institutions at the second reading , so that we can vote tomorrow and then have these provisions implemented very quickly .
For the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , three points were of particular importance .
The first is that we were able to agree in Article 31 to retain a high level of consumer protection in approval procedures for parts or equipment which pose a significant risk to the correct functioning of systems .
Secondly , the text that was adopted in the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection by and large clarifies the technical administrative provisions on type approval and extends them at Community level to all motor vehicles including buses and commercial vehicles .
If we also implement these provisions we will be able to contribute to a significant improvement in road safety .
Thirdly , I should like to highlight in particular the fact that the provisions on adapting vehicles to the specific needs of people with disabilities have - thanks in no small measure to the rapporteur - been improved considerably .
I am thinking here especially of people in wheelchairs .
We have taken a major step forward here and in so doing we are giving the public a positive image of a Europe that puts the concerns of its citizens and the public at the heart of its work .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
EU partnership in the Horn of Africa ( debate )
The next item is the report by Filip Kaczmarek , on behalf of the Committee on Development , on the Horn of Africa : EU Regional political partnership for peace , security and development .
rapporteur . - ( PL ) Madam President , this report on the strategy of the European Union in Africa , and the EU political partnership in the horn of Africa will be the European Parliament 's response to the European Commission 's communiqué of last November .
The purpose of that communiqué was to create a regional political partnership in the Somalian peninsula as the basis for a comprehensive approach to preventing conflict in the region .
It is based on the assumption that without lasting peace there can be no development , and without development there can be no lasting peace .
There were two reasons for selecting this region as a test case for EU regional strategy in Africa .
The first was the strategic importance of the region for the EU , and the second was the great political complexity of the three main conflicts in the region , which are interlinked ; the conflicts in Sudan , Ethiopia , Eritrea and Somalia , where a regional approach is probably the only way of resolving the conflicts .
In other words , nothing can be resolved until everything has been resolved .
The strategy proposed by the Commission is based on a comprehensive approach to preventing conflicts in the horn of Africa aiming to tackle the underlying causes of the instability in the short and medium term both at national and at regional level , and to bring about closer regional cooperation .
You may , however , justifiably wonder whether this is possible in a region where five out of seven states are in conflict with their neighbours , where each conflict spawns another , where one country has been incapable of functioning normally in the last 15 years , and where an extremely high percentage of the population lives in poverty .
Is cooperation through regional partnership the cure to all the ills of such complex and mutually interlinked problems ?
It is my firm belief that it is worth trying , and that despite certain shortcomings in the Commission 's communiqué , some of which were difficult to avoid , and which we address in the report ( an example is greater involvement of MEPs and of the Africans themselves in drawing up the common strategy ) , we should agree on the four main legs of this strategy , which are that sustainable development is impossible without peace and vice-versa , that without the effective participation of African regional institutions there can be no lasting peace , that the regional perspective - that is , regional understanding - is necessary to resolve particular local conflicts , and that regional integration initiatives will be successful if they focus on common challenges rather than on a list of present conflicts .
Regional integration must concentrate on issues such as water resources , desertification , food security , and not simply on ethnic divisions and conflicts .
Furthermore , the European Union has a key role to play by importing its own tried-and-tested model of integration which has effectively brought lasting peace and which , in the context of the present 50th anniversary of the EU , is , in my view , particularly important .
I am clearly aware that both the communiqué of the Commission and the present report of the European Parliament is only the beginning of the process , and that the ultimate aim is to develop a regional strategy for the region .
It should also be borne in mind that specific Member States are conducting their own activities in the horn of Africa , and the report is therefore directed not just at the European Commission , but at Member States as well .
The aim of the report is to flesh out the ideas of the Commission 's communiqué , and I would like to stress particularly that it is important to avoid wishful thinking and cobbling together institutions .
In my opinion , we should rely on existing initiatives and tested ideas .
We need to appoint a special representative of the European Union for the horn of Africa to deal with the major questions that the report raises .
This will help avoid duplication , allow deeper analysis and make it possible to pursue minimum political aims in individual countries .
We must make full use of dialogue based on Article 8 of the Cotonou Memorandum , cooperation between Parliament and the Commission on creating a common strategy with the involvement of Africa , and searching for African solutions and strengthened African organisations .
I would also like to thank all those who contributed to this report : the MEP from the Committee on Development , the secretariat of the Committee on Development , the shadow rapporteur , the German presidency and the experts and non-governmental organisations with which we were in constant dialogue .

Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in his report , Mr Kaczmarek shares for the most part the Commission 's analysis concerning the need for a comprehensive regional approach .
The ideas put forward by Mr Kaczmarek concerning the path to be followed confirms most of the priorities proposed by the Commission , especially with regard to functional cooperation and regional cooperation .
The resolution and prevention of conflicts in the Horn of Africa is not , from our point of view , possible except by means of action at two levels .
The first level concerns the standard way of mediation and diplomatic action .
The current situation in the Horn quite obviously demands far more vigorous and , I might add , far more unanimous , action , from the entire international community .
The second level concerns a structuring action for the prevention of conflicts in the medium term .
The aim is to tackle from the root the problems that affect the countries in the region by addressing common development problems that also have an impact in terms of security and stability .
It is this second way that is proposed in the regional strategy for the Horn of Africa , which the Commission presented in its communication of October 2006 .
I wish to make it clear that the primary aim of the communication is to provide a political framework that recognises the nature of the challenges posed in the region of the Horn and identifies the main routes possible for action by the European Union .
The communication identifies three priorities for intervention .
Firstly , to act on the national problems that have regional ramifications ; secondly , to tackle regional and transversal problems that are sources of conflicts and instability ; and , finally , to foster regional integration .
Precisely as the report emphasises , it is important for there to be genuine ownership , a proper political ownership of this strategy not only on the part of the countries of the Horn , but also at European level .
That is why we appreciate for its true value the involvement of the European Parliament on this issue and the report by Mr Kaczmarek .
Since the Commission communication was presented last October , I have followed with great interest Parliament 's debates on the regional strategy for the Horn and I also personally took part , last February , in the debate within the Committee on Development .
Positive discussions have also taken place at the level of Council working parties since October .
It is , in fact , a progressive process that we want to create , and not to impose .
The important thing is that the process has now been started , with the support of the Heads of State or Government in the region .
The Commission already organised , on 23 April , a conference with the personal representatives of the Heads of State or Government .
This meeting was very positive and promising .
This wide-ranging and intense consultation process enables us to enter confidently and in good order into the realisation phase .
We are therefore on the right track .
The report that you will adopt tomorrow will be a very important support and , of course , a source of inspiration and direction when it comes to conducting the dialogue that will take place over the next few months .
I should like to point out that the regional programming for the 10th European Development Fund for the Horn will naturally be largely determined by the results of this process of identifying priority actions .
I should also like to point out that the strategy for the Horn proposed by the Commission is not intended to supplant the strategies prepared in the context of the 10th European Development Fund .
It is there , in a way , to supplement them .
Likewise , it will not replace the necessary parallel action for resolving crises and conflicts , which must continue at the political and diplomatic level , as I stressed at the beginning of my speech .
I therefore fully subscribe to the report 's recommendations in relation to governance and to the strengthening of the political dialogue .
There are two points in the report that also seem to me very important but that go beyond the regional framework of the Horn and of the proposed strategy : the Joint European Union-Africa strategy and the African peace and security architecture .
I could respond on these two points also , as well as tackle other subjects relating to the Horn of Africa and to the actions that we could take there , but the speaking time prevents me from doing so .
However , I shall perhaps have the opportunity to return to these subjects later , when I respond to your comments .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , thank you very much to Mr Kaczmarek and to the Commissioner for his response to the report .
In the Horn of Africa , one hardly knows where to begin , because what we see is a lethal cocktail of conflict and poverty , where the rule of law barely exists , where there is no concept of democracy and human rights and where five out of seven of the countries of the region are in conflict with their neighbours .
So , as the rapporteur says , there can be no real security and there can be no developments without peace .
The key issues are related to building peace , preventing conflict and resolving conflict .
Those are the central elements in the report .
It is very important to point out that , as the Commissioner is very well aware , in other regions of Africa , for example West Africa - I was recently in Côte d 'Ivoire - and in the Great Lakes area , we are now seeing peace breaking out .
But the Horn of Africa stands out as the one region where we have not been able to grapple with conflict management and prevention .
Certainly , the idea of an envoy and other suggestions are very welcome indeed .
What we see are the worst examples of conflict .
In Darfur , the UN says that some 200 000 people have died and two million have been displaced since that conflict began in 2003 .
The Government of Sudan continues to ignore efforts at mediation , including from the UN Secretary-General .
The border disputes between Eritrea and Ethiopia remain unresolved .
The Government of Ethiopia continues to break international law as far as that is concerned .
The leaders of Eritrea and Ethiopia refuse to give the people the right to choose their own government and to respect elections , as has been the case in Ethiopia .
Now we see intense fighting in Somalia , where about a thousand people have died and where Ethiopian troops have been very active , fighting on behalf of the transitional government in Somalia , but of course - as we all have to acknowledge - with covert assistance from the United States .
The Eritreans , meanwhile , back the Islamist militias .
I have written to the Commissioner on this subject and would still like to ask him why it is that we have offered such support to the transitional government in Somalia and why we are not asking serious questions about the bloody process which we are apparently continuing in many ways to tolerate .
There is a humanitarian catastrophe looming in Somalia and we are still not holding those responsible in the transitional government accountable for their actions .
Why , Commissioner , are we not asking questions ?
Is it political expediency that prevents us from doing that ?
Why is it that the Ethiopians do not leave ?
Why is it that security cannot be established ?
Why is there no genuine power sharing , and is the EU insisting that moderates in the Islamic courts must be involved in any possible solution in Somalia ?
Finally , I have to ask whether the EU is serious about state-building in the Horn of Africa or whether we are actually focusing on other priorities .
May I suggest that the other priorities in the Horn of Africa are the so-called war against terror ?
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( LT ) In its communiqué ' EU strategy for Africa : EU regional policy of partnership for peace , security and development in the Horn of Africa ' , which appeared in 2006 , the Commission shows its inability to find ways to solve the problems in the Horn of Africa when it states that without long-term peace there will be no development , and without development there will be no long-term peace .
This is a vicious circle .
Both factors need to occur at once ; but as we see , in reality , this is not plausible .
In the Horn of Africa , neither the African Strategy nor Articles 8 and 11 of the Kotonu Agreement are working .
Regional instability and military conflicts , in which more than one country is taking part , particularly the savage situation in Darfur , show that a special crisis management model is needed for the Horn of Africa , which would include the elimination of military conflict hotspots and the creation of peaceful economic , social and political life .
The EU provides more than 55 % of the world 's development cooperation humanitarian aid .
With military activities taking place in the Horn of Africa , it is not really possible to assess what humanitarian aid is needed , when it should start and when it should end , and when it will be possible to get on with achieving the true goals of development cooperation policy , namely the implementation of the Millennium Goals and the reduction of poverty in the countries of the Horn of Africa .
I would like to emphasise that the EU must coordinate its support and actions in the Horn of Africa with other countries such as , for example , China , India and the USA , which have economic interests in the countries of the Horn of Africa .
Otherwise , there is little likelihood of any real progress in the creation of peace and security in this region .
These countries , likewise the United Nations and other organisations , together with the EU , must create a special model of crisis management for the Horn of Africa .
( PL ) Madam President , first of all I would like to congratulate Mr Kaczmarek for preparing this report .
It is quite a difficult and important report , about an area where the European Union has not yet promoted itself much .
The area in question is the Somali peninsula , whose countries are in a constant state of conflict , a territory where it is difficult to talk of rule of law , democratic institutions or human rights .
It is one of the least developed regions in the whole world .
The most important thing for the European Union at the present time is to build institutions that would guarantee an end to armed conflict in the peninsula , that would protect a minimum of human rights and would lead to governments based on rule of law .
Madam President , I would like to recall the great political traditions , the great traditions of the model of development that followed World War II , which accompanied the fight against colonialism by the countries of Europe and the United States in the establishment of new states and democracies in areas that had previously been colonised .
Perhaps issues such as nation-building , establishing national institutions and strong governments capable of guaranteeing rule of law are the underlying response that the European Union should be making .
I wholeheartedly agree with Mr Kaczmarek 's proposals such as setting up a special representative of the European Union for the Somali peninsula , and EU assistance to African countries to establish regional institutions of cooperation .
Madam President , honourable Members , my reply will be a relatively brief one , although a whole debate would be needed , of course , to deal with the question .
While I do , of course , endorse the analyses and judgments that I have heard on the subject of the democratic credentials of certain countries in the Horn of Africa , I am a little bit more cautious about the involvement of the Commission and of the European Union .
Today , the Horn of Africa is a region of which it can be said that the Commission is wholly committed to it , and it is without doubt the region to which I myself devote most time .
Mrs Kinnock was , of course , talking about Ethiopia , and she was quite right to do so , for there is a problem with it in international law , one that , I might add , I am continually raising with its prime minister when I am in contact with him in the course of my work on bilateral relations , one on which , indeed , I am working on a virtually daily basis .
I carry the messages that have to be carried , particularly where political prisoners are concerned .
I also know that efforts are being made by people at a very high level to move this issue forward .
Turning to Somalia , let me say that I am astonished that it should be said that we were not saying anything to the transitional government , and I would point out that I was literally obliged to make available EUR 15 million to the Ugandan stabilisation force in Somalia , virtually without conditions attached , even though I had been completely opposed to this if the principle of inclusivity were not adhered to from the outset .
After we had made our position clear , and I had imposed that condition , President Youssouf promised us that he would organise a national congress of reconciliation .
We are still waiting for it .
Since , then , a debate such as this one is suited to this purpose , I have to tell you that if , in Somalia , things are not going well , or moving forward at a good pace , it is for two essential reasons .
The first is that the conflict in Somalia , and the issue of Somalia , are not being considered in the context of the Horn of Africa as a whole , and that Somalia , in a number of cases , has become a battlefield for conflicts between outsiders , and that is indeed the case ; the difference between Ethiopia and Eritrea touches upon the Somalia question .
Failure to move forward , failure to find a solution , is also for a second reason , of which Mrs Kinnock has given examples .
In the international community , there are two points of view .
Try as one might to pretend that there is only one , the fact of the matter is that there are two points of view to be found in the international community , the first of which tends to be held by the European Union , and the second by the United States .
Whenever one of the big players in the international community chooses , as a matter of preference , what we shall call a strategy of privileged partnership with another , and when we are invited by our own Member States to match it exactly with the other international partners - as someone has just done - we do find ourselves , in a number of cases , following behind , and so I would say that we are thus not in a position to act in a truly autonomous manner , on the basis of how we ourselves see things and relying on our own judgment .
That is the truth of the matter .
I no longer want that state of affairs to be tolerated , since it really is too easy to say to someone , ' you are not doing enough , you have to organise coordination with our partner , that is to say , with the United States . '
I am not criticising the United States - who have the right to their own strategy - but I do think that if the European Union were able , from time to time , to have greater strategic autonomy and more independence in these matters , we would , without a doubt , be much more effective .
This is what I wanted to tell you ; perhaps I might also tell you that what I have been doing over the past few months , particularly where political dialogue is concerned , has been , in essence , devoted to the Horn of Africa .
The reason why I present this strategy - by means of a report that applies it and is excellent by the way - is precisely because I think that the European Union is not entitled to refrain from taking the initiative in this matter and because I tell myself that the situation is so complex and so difficult that we have to start by trying to get all the stakeholders around one negotiating table in order to sort out the problems that they have in common , and to find common solutions , all with the object of putting them in a position where there is a prospect of dialogue - a dialogue that is something different from discussing without calling a halt to the conflicts between them .
In other words , let us open up the prospect of something being done about infrastructure , about food safety , about drought , about pastoralism , about water , about all these issues in which they have a common interest , and then , perhaps , there might be a chance of doing something about political matters .
This is what I wanted to say ; it is true that we have to coordinate our actions with the other major decision-makers .
I think that very sincerely , but I also think that we need , from time to time , to take up our own position on such matters as Somalia .
I do think that , if we had been able to take our ideas to their logical conclusion and say ' we will not give a cent for this stabilisation force until such time as the National Reconciliation Congress is up and running ' , we would have been in a much stronger position .
I will also say - and it is on this point that I will finish - that I have also sent a letter , couched in extremely precise and strong terms , to President Youssouf in order to remind him of his commitment to inclusivity in resolving this conflict .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Thursday .
Environmental protection from radiation following the crash of a military aircraft in Greenland ( debate )
The next item is the report by Diana Wallis , on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , on the public health consequences of the 1968 Thule crash ( petition 720 / 2002 ) .
rapporteur . - Madam President , Commissioner , this report follows on well from the last debate , which was on the general nature of the Euratom Treaty past , present and future .
This is an actual , specific , individual case , which clearly highlights why this Treaty needs looking at in order to ensure the future safety of Europe 's citizens in the event of nuclear incidents .
This nuclear incident and its sad after-effects for certain individuals have wider implications for the health and safety of all our citizens .
It is , of course , the strength of our petition system that it allows individuals to bring such events to our attention when the European institutions or legal framework have not assisted as they would have wished or expected .
Our citizens are telling us that the Euratom Treaty is not working , so we should listen .
Let me take you back to an Arctic night in January 1968 , still the era of the Cold War - indeed the facts of this story sound like an international thriller .
An American B-52 bomber gets into trouble , the crew scramble to safety and the plane comes down in Greenland with an enormous amount of weapons-grade plutonium on board .
Residents of Greenland working at the American base at Thule immediately set out across the ice with husky teams to get to the downed plane , the Americans desperate to get there before anyone else .
Over the weeks that follow , many Thule workers were involved in the clear-up .
They were not working in laboratory conditions .
They were not wearing any protective clothing , except against the cold - indeed the clothing that many of them wore was so contaminated by radiation that it had to be destroyed .
Over the months and years that followed , the Thule workers began to suffer all sorts of terrible health consequences .
Mr Carswell , the petitioner in this case , was one of them .
This is a long story , which has been all through the Danish courts and has been the subject of many reports , debates and discussions .
We are looking here at a very specific issue in the saga , namely the rights of the Thule workers under Council Directive 96 / 29 / Euratom of 13 May 1996 , laying down the basic safety standards for the protection of the health of workers and the general public against the dangers arising from ionising radiation .
All sorts of legal arguments have been raised against the petitioners and I do not seek to deal with those in detail here , but will merely say that they are set out and dealt with seriously in the report - the question of both the temporal and geographic application of the Treaty to Greenland and the issue of the application to military incidents .
This was not a military incident as far as the Member State involved is concerned .
The military element is from a third state , so we , following in the steps of the ECJ , argue that the Directive can indeed apply .
But this is not just some legal argument ; this is above all a political argument - an argument that could even be pursued under the European Convention on Human Rights , concerning the duty of a state to take appropriate steps to safeguard the lives of those within its jurisdiction .
However , what we are absolutely clear about is that there is a right under the Directive for medical monitoring of the survivors , proper surveillance and intervention measures - not merely statistical exercises as have been conducted to date , but proper clinical , medical monitoring that would benefit not only those survivors but also the health and safety of all Europe 's citizens in the event of such future incidents .
If this is not allowed , then it tells us that the Treaty is not working , and that is why it needs review and attention .
I am afraid that I must also urge colleagues to reject the amendments .
They are confused or refer to unspecified events not mentioned in the petition , or they try to undermine the argumentation of the report .
Therefore , on behalf of the Thule survivors , and in the hope of future work to review the Treaty , I commend the report to you , unamended .
Madam President , firstly I would like to thank the rapporteur for her work on this very important petition .
The Commission has full sympathy with the petitioners who have undergone a very difficult time following their participation in the rescue operations after the air crash in 1968 .
At the same time , I would say that over the past five years the Commission has followed this case very closely .
It has studied it carefully from the legal point of view and has cooperated with the Committee on Petitions and with its rapporteur .
The Commission reached the conclusion that the claims brought by the petitioners in this case cannot be based on Community law but solely on the basis of Danish national legislation before the Danish administration and courts .
In view of these elements , this case calls for a political , rather than a legal , solution .
I believe that the proposed European Parliament resolution could be one of the elements to help such a political solution .
In order to ensure that Euratom legislation covers future situations such as the one which originated in the petition , the Commission will examine the possibility of making a relevant provision on the application of the radiation protection requirements in situations arising from military applications .
The inclusion of such a provision could be undertaken in the framework of the forthcoming revision and recasting of Directive 96 / 29 / Euratom laying down basic safety standards for the protection of the health of workers and the general public against the dangers arising from ionising radiation .
However , the compatibility of such a provision with the case-law needs to be examined in detail .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , I will not read from my notes .
I will say what I feel , not what I ought to say .
The Commissioner offers his sympathy , but we do not need sympathy .
What is needed is the enforcement of fundamental rights , which are critical here ; the right of access to information in order for you to be completely certain that what has happened to you is not life-threatening .
The easiest thing here would be to attack the government of one of the Member States .
I do not what to do that .
I want to seek to achieve a solution on behalf of the petitioners .
Commissioner , you talk of a political solution .
Well , I wish to inform you that this is a political institution , which is why we are approaching the European Commission to help us achieve that solution .
The solution will not come through sympathy , but through the determination to ask the Danish Government , under the auspices of good and loyal cooperation , which is enshrined in the Treaties of Maastricht and Amsterdam , to acquiesce to the request for information from the petitioners and workers who formed an association and cleaned up after this tragedy .
Therefore , do not sympathise with them , but lend them the Commission 's political clout and support and enquire of the Member State as to whether it will release information that is essential to these people in terms of ensuring that they are not at risk and that their lives are safe and in good hands .
That is all we ask .
I shall detain the House no longer .
I am tiring of the Commission 's response to the effect that ' it is nothing to do with us ' .
That is the simplest way to reinforce the Euro-scepticism that is growing across the EU and which , sadly , is prevalent in Denmark .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , this is a unique report on a unique petition and Mrs Wallis has dealt with it excellently .
Legal matters aside , the petition on which the report is based raises some important points .
I shall briefly mention three of them .
Point one . Even with the greatest of safety precautions , a nuclear weapons accident is always possible .
In a way , the US B-52 crash in Greenland was very fortunate .
Imagine the effects of it happening in a highly populated area , for example near a US base in central Europe .
So anybody who claims nuclear weapons are absolutely safe in peace time is not telling the whole truth .
Point two . After a nuclear accident , well-prepared plans should immediately be put in action which would minimise the short-term and long-term effects to human health and to the environment .
It seems that the relevant authorities , in this case the US air force and the Danish Government , were ill-prepared and did not deal with the problem properly , especially as regards protecting the civilian personnel and providing them with long-term health surveillance and monitoring .
This shortfall has led to numerous premature deaths from cancer in cases where early detection could have provided a much better chance of survival , so anybody who claims that the relevant authorities can deal most adequately with the after-effects of a nuclear weapons accident is also not telling the whole truth .
Point three . After a nuclear weapons accident , one expects that the government concerned would display a spirit of transparency and cooperation in dealing with the affected population .
This was not the case with the Greenland crash , as the Danish Government refused to provide access to the relevant environmental radiation records needed to estimate the radiation doses received by affected workers .
Furthermore , the information given by the Danish authorities was dangerously misleading .
So even scientific reports issued by governments after a nuclear weapons accident cannot be trusted .
The overall message is therefore clear .
Nuclear weapons can cause death and suffering even in peace time , so the best way to deal with them is not to have them at all .
After listening to the Commissioner , my final observation would be that petitioners who have endured years of suffering and struggle seem only to receive a lot of sympathy from the EU , but no practical assistance .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , I would like to start by thanking Diana Wallis for her - as usual - excellent report , and take pleasure and satisfaction in saying that we have in this House a rapporteur who always delivers highly accurate reports , particularly from the legal point of view , which is extremely important here .
In 1968 , a US aircraft crashed with nuclear weapons on board .
The writer of a petition which reached our Committee , suffered problems with his health and believes that he was not adequately compensated .
The Committee was again the last resort for a large number of people who had nowhere else to seek justice .
This gave rise to an interesting legal aspect which Mrs Wallis dealt with excellently .
The accident took place in 1968 , while Denmark together with Greenland joined the European Union in 1973 , and in 1985 Greenland left the European Union , while the Directive establishing basic safety standards in the event of such accidents ( that is , Directive of the Council 96 / 29 / EURATOM ) , dates from 13 May 1996 .
Although from the dates themselves it appears that the author of the petition stood no chance of seeking justice here , Diana Wallis proved that according to the precedents of the ECJ , new provisions of community law are fundamentally applicable to the future outcome of events that took place before prior legislative acts came into effect , such as Greenland 's withdrawal from the European Union .

If states actually applied the relevant directives , the Committee on Petitions would have fewer problems to deal with .
I would like to recall just three cases - the Lloyds case , the Equitable Life case and the matter of local planning abuses in Spain , which were brought simply because the relevant directives were not properly implemented in the countries in question .
The injured parties are entitled to remedy for damage suffered , and we are all entitled to security in the future .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DA ) Madam President , this is a grim state of affairs .
It is absurd and quite indefensible that nuclear weapons should have been flown around in this negligent way during the Cold War .
That is what is really scandalous about the Thule case .
Unacceptable though it is to treat nuclear weapons so carelessly , that is no reason for allowing ourselves to state something that has proved to be untrue .
We have no documentation to indicate that any of the Thule workers died as a result of radiation .
Nor can we maintain that the relevant health checks were not carried out .
They were , in fact , carried out , and the results show the opposite of what the petitioner , and now also the report , assert .
That is something that we have to respect .
The amendments by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance are designed to remove errors and unwarranted assertions .
That being said , we agree with Mrs Wallis that Denmark cannot avoid the fact that the EU has powers to exercise in this matter .
What happened involving the B-52 bomber is not the only nuclear activity that has polluted the Thule area .
Every aspect needs to be looked into , and the EU should make sure that the relevant investigations take place .
If , however , the report is to have some significance , it must not contain factual errors .
If we adopt a report containing errors , all we do is damage our own credibility .
I have no interest in defending the Danish Government on this matter .
On the contrary .
It has treated Mrs Wallis badly , and it has been all too slow in forwarding the results of the many investigations to Parliament .
We nonetheless very much hope that we get the report properly adopted so that it is practical and effective enough subsequently to influence events and is not merely set aside for not having respected the real facts .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DA ) Madam President , the plane crash on 21 January 1968 in North-Western Greenland triggered not only 850 metre-high flames but also extensive radioactive pollution .
The Danish authorities wanted the matter kept under wraps .
They knew that their tacit acceptance of American aircraft armed with nuclear weapons in Greenland 's airspace was unpopular among the populations of both Denmark and Greenland .
That is why 18 years went by before the authorities began to take an interest in the health of the Greenlanders affected and of the civilian workers involved in the clean-up operation .
Even today , the people concerned have still not been given a complete picture of what happened to them .
This is partly because successive Danish governments have refused to comply with the provisions of the EURATOM Treaty , which they nonetheless signed .
In the view of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , that is the crucial point in Mrs Wallis 's proposal .
We are able to support the first four of the five amendments by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , but we shall in any case vote in favour of the proposal in the final vote .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( DA ) Madam President , for the first time in 28 years , I shall vote tomorrow in favour of criticising my own government in Denmark .
I am ashamed of the way we behaved towards the few hundred survivors of the American nuclear accident in Greenland in 1968 .
In order to conceal the fact that this accident was a nuclear one , the authorities failed to supply them with personal protection when getting them to clean up after it .
Many have since died of cancer , while animals have been born with defects , which can presumably be traced back to the accident .
Mr Carswell has raised this matter in the Committee on Petitions .
He has himself been in hospital 50 times due to the effects of the accident .
Mrs Wallis has done some detailed work for the committee over the last three years , involving hearings and visits , and now Mrs Auken comes along to the actual sitting at which we are to vote and wants to see all the work begun again from scratch .
The matter is very simple and is not about the presence or otherwise of radiation .
What it is about is the fact that , under the EURATOM Treaty , the survivors are entitled to annual health checks , however much their health may or may not have been affected , and they are entitled to have access to their own medical reports .
Denmark should now comply with those two requirements .
I should like to thank Mrs Wallis and the committee for the very responsible work they have done on this matter .
I myself took part in all the meetings , and if Mrs Auken had shown her interest when the matter was discussed , she would not have tabled amendments at the last minute .
Imagine if all the other reports from Parliament had to be debated again because Mrs Auken had not taken part in the committee reading .
I urge you to vote in favour of the report tomorrow without last-minute amendments .
The Commission now says that there is a need for a political solution .
There are some of us who have tried to obtain such a solution .
I have sent private letters to the Prime Minister in order to get this matter cleared up politically .
His attitude was sympathetic , but no solution was found because officialdom does not want to give way on this matter .
What a good thing it is , then , that people have access to a Committee on Petitions to which they can turn when officials are not disposed to listen to them .
Member of the Commission .
Madam President , honourable Members , enforcement of rights could be done on the basis of legislation .
The Commission has analysed this thoroughly .
Unfortunately I cannot add anything further , even after this very professional debate .
At the same time , I could also say that the report will be a reference document for future Community action in this field .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Thursday .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.25 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9.05 a.m. )
Documents received : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
1 .
Simplification of Community legislation ( amendments of the Rules of Procedure ) ( vote )
- Report : Reynaud
2 .
Public passenger transport services by rail and road ( vote )
- Report : Meijer
- Before the vote on Amendment 66 :
( DE ) Mr President , the oral amendment is in the name of Mr Piecyk and on behalf of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament .
Referring to the English text , which reads , ' operator shall be required to perform a major part ' , the term ' major part ' is to be replaced by ' a substantial part ' .
This is a minor alteration , but one that can help us achieve a compromise between the Council , the Commission and this House following the unofficial trilogue .
( IT ) Mr President , we cannot accept this oral amendment because it radically alters the sense of the compromise reached within the informal trialogue .
I therefore ask my colleagues to rise .
( Parliament rejected the oral amendment )
( DE ) Mr President , since this oral amendment was not adopted , I would like to ask that , when voting on Amendment 66 , we should vote on the English text , since the German and French versions do not adequately express certain nuances .
I therefore move that we vote on the English wording and that the translations be reviewed later on .
If there is no objection , the authentic text will be the English version .

rapporteur . - ( NL ) Mr President , had I been given the speaking time I had requested before Amendment 67 was put to the vote , this could have cleared up a misunderstanding .
During the negotiations between 12 and 24 April , agreement was reached with the German Presidency of the Council about the prospective use , in Amendments 66 and 67 , of the word ' significant ' as a condition for subcontracting .
The presidency offered the term ' substantial ' by way of an alternative , but the two largest groups eventually had no need for it .
They later decided , without consulting the rapporteur , to insert the word ' major ' in the amendments jointly tabled by six groups .
Although I agree with the substance of it , I have always warned that this does not form part of a closed compromise and that , in theory , it could make a third reading necessary .
Since the Christian Democrats and Social Democrats appeared certain that they could win the Council , and particularly Germany , the latter being its principal opponent , over to this amendment , I was happy to go along with them .
I now gather that they have been criticised for enforcing this , given the fact that so many people have disagreed with a vote on an oral amendment in which they would like to take all of this back .
- Before the vote on Amendments 49 and 67 :

( DE ) Mr President , here , too , I should like , on behalf of Mr Piecyk , to move that the English wording ' shall be required to perform the major part ' be replaced by ' a substantial part ' .
( Parliament rejected the oral amendment )
( DE ) Mr President , since this oral amendment was not adopted , I would like to take this opportunity to ask that , when voting on Amendment 67 , too , we should vote on the English text in view of the problems already referred to with the German and French translations .
5 .
Retrofitting of mirrors to heavy goods vehicles ( vote )
- Report : Costa
6 .
Composition of the temporary committee on climate change ( vote )
Proposals of the Conference of Presidents
7 .
EU-Russia summit ( vote )
- Motion for a resolution :
- Before the vote :
I wish to inform you that the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe has withdrawn from the joint motion for a resolution .
- Before the vote on paragraph 2 :
Mr President , I would like to move the following oral amendment on behalf of the PPE-DE Group .
' Stresses the importance of strengthening unity and solidarity among the EU Member States in their relations with Russia . Welcomes , therefore , the common line taken by the EU in the negotiations with Moscow on the lifting of Russia 's ban on Polish agricultural products ; ' .
( Parliament accepted the oral amendment )
- Before the vote on Amendment 11 :
( FR ) Ladies and gentlemen , in view of the discussion that we had yesterday , we should like to replace in the text :
' Calls on the European Union to demonstrate solidarity with Estonia in the context of recent events in Tallinn ; '
( FR ) Where Tallinn appears in the text , we would like ,
' in the context of the recent events in Moscow . '
The main problem was the way events were handled in Moscow , rather than in Tallinn , and we would therefore prefer the text to read ' the events in Moscow ' .
That would seem more appropriate .
( Parliament rejected the oral amendment )

( NL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , I should like to attempt , by means of an oral amendment , a better and more correct wording to the second part of Paragraph 11 , which would then read as follows , and I will read it out in English : ' in particular by means of enhanced dialogue over Ukraine en Belarus and joint efforts to finally resolve the frozen conflicts in Moldova en the South Caucasus ' .
' Nagorno-Karabakh and Georgia ' would therefore be deleted and replaced by ' in Moldova and the South Caucasus ' .
( Parliament rejected the oral amendment )
8 .
EU strategy for reform in the Arab world ( vote )
- Report : Rocard
- Before the vote on Amendment 19 :
( IT ) Mr President , I propose that the phrase ' full respect , including legal respect , for different sexual orientations ' , should be amended as follows : ' full respect for , and non-discrimination against , different sexual orientations ' .
( Parliament accepted the oral amendment )
- Before the vote on Amendment 14 :
( IT ) Mr President , I propose to replace the term ' Palestinian State ' with ' democratic Palestinian State ' .
( Parliament accepted the oral amendment )
( FR ) Mr President , my group does not object to the oral amendment , but we are not in favour of Amendment 14 , even when amended by the oral amendment .
- Before the vote on Amendment 20 :
( FR ) This is simply a linguistic point , given that it is the French version that is deemed authentic .
Thus the words ' secular Islamicists ' would not replace the words ' moderate Islamicists ' but would be regarded as an addition .
- Before the vote on Amendment 21 :
( FR ) Mr President , Mr Cappato has tabled an oral amendment , by means of which he is asking for the separation of Church and State more or less to be guaranteed .
We would ask to add as an oral amendment :
' as it should be in any democracy ' .
( FR ) Indeed , while Islam mixes politics and religion , in Europe , among our countries , there are also those who do not separate Church and State .
( Applause from the left )
( IT ) Mr President , Mr Cappato 's amendment deals with the separation of political and religious power .
We are talking about countries of the Arab world here , not about countries of Europe .
If the amendment relates to the countries of the Arab world , we are in agreement , because , when we speak of the church , we refer solely to the Catholic or the Protestant church .
This amendment relates to religious power and political power , and it should be made clear that we are referring only to these two elements , since I thought that I could discern in what Mrs de Keyser said an attempt to insert extraneous elements into this report .
Mrs De Keyser 's amendment introduces a phrase which is universal in scope .
It says ' in any democracy ' .
The amendment is therefore intended to be universal in scope .

( IT ) Mr President , I am personally very happy with the amendment tabled by Mrs de Keyser , which I consider to be more or less taken for granted ; if it is not , then that is all the more reason for this amendment to be put forward .
( IT ) Mr President , I believe that each of us has the right in this Parliament to speak , to express our own ideas and to have clear information in the texts that we are about to adopt .
With regard to the authentic text , the amendment by Mr Cappato says , in Italian , ' anche garantendo l 'indipendenza e la separazione delle istituzioni e del potere politico dalle autorità religiose ' - ' also guaranteeing the independence and separation of institutions and political power from the religious authorities ' .
This is the text , but we are talking about the church and the State .
The terms are ' political power ' and ' religious authorities ' .
( Parliament rejected the oral amendment )
( FR ) Mr President , I should simply like to ask my group , under these circumstances , to vote against .
9 .
EU partnership in the Horn of Africa ( vote )
- Report : Kaczmarek
10 .
Assessing Euratom ( vote )
- Report : Maldeikis
11 .
Environmental protection from radiation following the crash of a military aircraft in Greenland ( vote )
- Report : Wallis
12 .
Housing and regional policy ( vote )
- Report : Andria
13 .
Future regional policy and innovation ( vote )
- Report : Janowski
14 .
Strengthening European legislation in the field of information and consultation of workers ( vote )
- Motion for a resolution :
- Before the vote :
Mr President , this resolution has been tabled in the name of certain political groups , but the name of the PPE-DE Group does not appear .
That might give the impression that we have somehow been excluded from the process , given that we spoke out against having a resolution in the first place as we will shortly be producing a report in committee .
However , the fact is that we have been actively involved in the discussions with other groups .
We share the general desire to see this legislation reviewed and modernised and have indeed contributed significantly to the text in its final form .
I just wanted to record that although we still have certain reservations over some of the wording , I am pleased to confirm that PPE-DE Group policy will be to vote in favour of this resolution .
That concludes the vote .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
On behalf of the Socialist group I very much welcome this amendment to our Rules of Procedure , which will enable Parliament to deal much more efficiently and speedily with proposals to simplify European legislation , either through codification of existing legislation , without changes of substance , or else through recasting proposals where changes of substance are combined with the simplification of existing legislation .
More and more , European legislative proposals that we consider in this Parliament are about amending or updating existing European legislation rather than bringing forth new legislation on new subjects .
Yet few things contribute more to the opaqueness and complexity of European legislation than the habit of having sets of directives amending previous directives , without the texts as a whole ever being consolidated into a single document .
The Commission must speed up its program to codify existing Community legislation , not simply as an exercise in reducing the number of pages of the acquis communitaire , but to provide greater transparency and ease of access to all .
In amending its Rules of Procedure today , Parliament is giving a powerful signal that it is ready to assist in this process and to do so with due speed and diligence .
in writing .
( PT ) If anyone were in any doubt as to the objectives of these recommendations , one would only have to take a close look at the information provided on them by Parliament : recognition ' for the first time ' of the public authorities ' free choice of the operators of so-called road and rail passenger transport ' public services ' , be they public or private .
In other words , this is tantamount to ' the award of public service contracts ' in the framework of competition ; that is , the undermining of the concept of public services provided by the public authorities , whereby the rights of the workers and of the users of affordable high-quality public services are not affected .
Although it does contain some valuable points - such as the relevant authorities having the option to provide the services themselves , or directly to award the contract to an entity over which they have control - the adopted recommendation forms part of the policies of liberalisation and of promoting privatisations and monopolies at the expense of public funding on the basis of the forces of each country coming together .
We are very disappointed at the rejection of the proposals we tabled aimed at safeguarding workers ' rights in the sector , such as the inclusion in contracts of provisions on the protection of jobs in the event of a change of operator .
I supported these amendments to bring in new rules on public passenger transport services by rail and by road , which seek to rebalance the award of contracts for these services between the public and private sectors .
I particularly support the move to repeal old EU legislation and replace existing national rules on competition in the public transport sector with standard Europe-wide rules .
The Commission proposal dating back to 2000 , in which a duty to issue calls for tender was due to apply to the whole public transport sector , fitted into the political context of that time , when the prevalent idea was that the government should withdraw from many tasks , that taxes could be lowered as a result and that the market would be able to organise everything in an adequate manner .
This formed part of the agreements which were concluded a few months before this proposal at the summit of Heads of Government in Lisbon , in the expectation that more market and more profit would also yield greater economic growth and even better and cheaper amenities for the public .
This neo-liberal ideology has since been disproved in practice .
The Lisbon Strategy has not come up to expectation .
The market is not offering any answers , and certainly none as far as public transport , and other amenities that are both necessary and loss-making , are concerned .
It would lead to the disappearance of integrated networks , with only the busiest lines surviving .
Over the past seven years , we have had more experience of privatisation and tendering , and the disappointments experienced in that context have contributed to the growth of opposing forces .
It was partly thanks to this that my objective as rapporteur , namely retaining municipal transport companies and freedom of choice , could be achieved .
The report on public service requirements on which we voted today raises expectations of a positive conclusion at second reading of an issue that has taken decades to resolve .
The legal uncertainty of the current situation has only fomented disputes and served to hamper the development of the passenger transport public service market .
We therefore hope that this text is concluded , ensuring transparent market access conditions without the artificial restrictions that only serve to protect the status quo , in which we are burdened by bureaucracy and in which obstacles are placed in the way of better and more efficient provision of passenger transport for the people .
The proposal for a regulation on public passenger transport services by rail and by road is yet another attack on grassroots income and on the rights of the public transport workers and passengers in general .
Following the liberalisation of maritime and coastal transport under the anti-grassroots EU law in Regulation ( EEC ) No 3577 / 92 and of passenger transport by air and rail , it is now the turn of local road and rail transport to be privatised , in order to increase the profits of big business .
Big business is extending its tentacles to the daily movements of workers on trams , the underground , suburban railways and buses , with high ticket prices and a package of state subsidies in private , monopoly transport companies , with particularly negative consequences on safety and standards for those who work in and use these means of transport , the grassroots family as a whole .
The consequences of the privatisation of public transport , as proven by the experience of towns where it is already applied and by experience with the liberalisation of coastal shipping and transport by air is particularly negative for isolated areas and the poor classes of society .
The workers are also fighting against the anti-grassroots policy of the European Union in the transport sector .
We are fighting for a high standard of modern public transport , with cheap tickets , which will serve the needs of the working and grassroots classes , which is why we voted against this EU regulation .
I voted for the Council 's common position on a proposal to deregulate pack sizes for pre-packed products .
Once the legislation is implemented , it will be possible to sell many everyday consumer products in a wider range of sizes than at present .
I believe that this is an advance for consumer interests .
Current European legislation on compulsory packaging materials is 30 years old and is no longer commensurate with current patterns of consumption .
The new rules that we have approved here today in second and last reading - in complete agreement with the Council , for which I should like to give the rapporteur a huge compliment - are in keeping with the consumer demand for more diverse packaging formats .
Obstacles to competition will be removed , and innovation encouraged , right across Europe .
European manufacturers will be able to decide for themselves what packaging formats are best tailored to the requirements of their customers .
As for the possibility raised in this report of the scope of the directive on the indication of price per measuring unit being extended to certain small businesses , I should like to say , by way of expressing a reservation , that I am all in favour of consumers being properly informed , and have nothing against demanding from large distribution chains that account for the lion 's share of the market that they place the price per measuring unit on their products , but imposing this duty on SMEs or local shops as well would not be a good thing .
I will therefore fight tooth and nail for this when Parliament , as it will shortly be doing , reviews current consumer legislation .
I supported these amendments to bring in new rules on the manufacturing standards of road vehicles .
These will raise environmental and safety standards as well as making it easier for producers to sell their vehicles Europe-wide .
In particular I am glad that the legislation will take more account of the needs of disabled car users .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the Harbour report , on which we voted at second reading today , deserves this House 's wholehearted support , for , today , the green light was given for a type approval which will apply to such vehicles as buses , coaches and lorries in addition to cars .
Mutual recognition of approvals , and for a wide range of vehicles , indeed , is yet another important step towards completing the internal market .
Furthermore , the introduction of this framework directive will also benefit safety , partly because this is likely to accelerate the entry into effect of a number of safety measures for buses and coaches .
The simplification that this framework directive brings with it is a good thing for the consumer and the manufacturer , because it guarantees more internal market , increases safety and benefits the environment .
All these reasons have persuaded me to give my full backing to the rapporteur .
in writing . ( PL ) I am voting in favour of the report on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the retrofitting of mirrors to heavy goods vehicles registered in the Community
Mr Paolo Costa rightly stressed that the retrofitting of mirrors on every heavy goods vehicle registered after 2000 in order to eliminate the blind spot in the driver 's vision would save the lives of more than a thousand people by 2020 .
Without this compulsory legislation and in accordance with the 2003 directive recommending the retrofitting of lorries from 2007 onwards , vehicles without wide-angle mirrors would only be taken off the road in 2023 .
This would significantly delay the work that needs to be done .
The method of financing the additional mirrors was also aptly described .
The cost of retrofitting each vehicle should not exceed 100-150 euros , which is equivalent to one tank of petrol .
I also agree with the proposal to investigate whether other vehicles , such as vans or other delivery vehicles , should also be fitted with these mirrors .
( CS ) I welcome the fact that the majority of MEPs have distanced themselves from the parts of the resolution on the EU-Russia summit in which the Left attempted to manipulate the European public into believing that the installation of the US anti-rocket umbrella in Poland and the Czech Republic has paved the way for a new arms race .
This is a false argument on the part of the Left for two reasons : firstly , because this concerns the completion of a defence system that is meant to deter attacks from the east , from those regimes that threaten peace , and secondly , in relation to the arms race , Russia has increased military spending dramatically since Putin came to power , both in absolute terms and in terms of GDP , where the figure of 4 % is still 30 % more than the EU countries spend on defence .
The resulting resolution is a forthright political message to take to the impending summit with Russia , stating that we do not accept that country 's aggressive policies towards Chechnya , Estonia , Poland and other countries .
( PL ) Mr President , the debate we held in Parliament before the EU-Russia summit was an example of our consensus and unity .
It was stressed that the Union would defend the interests of every Member State in terms of its relations with Russia .
Estonia was most frequently used as an example and mention was also made of the Russian embargo on Polish meat products .
However , no mention was made of the fact that certain Member States are dealing with Russia on a unilateral basis , behind the backs of the other Member States of the European Union and contrary to the Union 's interests .
Instead , much criticism was levelled at Russia as a whole , with no attempt to distinguish the role played by those in power , who impose this policy , and the position of the average Russian citizen , who is subject to media manipulation .
It is in the interests of Europe , Russia and the world to persuade Russian society to support values such as freedom , human rights , democracy and international cooperation on equal terms .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the vote by the Northern League for the Independence of Padania on the motion for an EU-Russia resolution is partly motivated by the desire to express a strong protest against the extremely muted attitude taken by the European Union to the Estonian crisis .
A Member State , a small young nation , whose people have , courageously and determinedly , achieved freedom from the prison of Soviet communism , has been subjected to considerable threats by the former Soviet occupiers as a result of a domestic political decision .
Europe has in the main been content to stand by , merely stammering a vague protest about the incidents around the Estonian embassy in Moscow .
We ought to replace or , at any rate , to add to the words of empty rhetoric with which the 50th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome was celebrated with a few far firmer and more courageous words in defence of that Member State , whose freedom has been threatened .
in writing . ( SV ) As is well known , the June List believes that neither the EU nor its institutions should conduct foreign policy .
A repeated pattern in the European Parliament is one whereby relations with a third country begin at the level of trade policy .
That is something of which we approve .
The trouble begins when further policy areas , such as foreign relations , aid and fisheries , are added .
The EU should devote itself strictly to trade issues and cross-border environmental issues .
In itself , Amendment 9 from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance is commendable .
It should not , however , be dealt with by the European Parliament , because it relates to a foreign policy issue .
At the UN 's request , Mr Ahtisaari has put together a plan for Kosovo .
However , it is not the task of this House to give its opinion either on the plan or on what action Russia should take .
With regard to the problems in Russia , for example the lack of respect for human rights and for the principle of the rule of law , the increase in trade is a good thing .
When it comes to straightforward foreign policy issues , it is the national parliaments and governments , together with the UN , that should head up the work , however .
I voted for this resolution which recognises the importance of Russia for Europe , especially in energy relations , but also highlights the need for democratic values and human rights .
In particular I support the call for Russia to ' fully respect its obligations under the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations ' , guaranteeing the protection of embassies and diplomats .
Russia is an important economic and trade partner for the European Union , which ought to develop increasingly close relations with that country , partly with a view to facilitating the process of democratisation and of respect for civil and human rights .
We cannot , however , conceal our concern in connection with what has been happening in recent days in relations between Russia and the Baltic States , and Estonia in particular .
It should be stressed that it has now become a habit on the part of the Russian authorities to use economic and trade pressures against neighbouring countries with a view to obtaining geopolitical dominance in the region .
The EU must be united and unified in defending Estonia and , more generally , any of its Member States against commercial pressures and threats from any non-EU country .
The tension between Russia and Estonia requires a resolution .
It is deeply concerning how quickly this difficulty over a local Estonian decision could escalate to energy supplies being cut off by Russia .
Our dependence on Russia for our energy needs continue to worry those who have an interest in security of supply .
60 % of Russia 's oil exports go to the EU , which amounts to 25 % of our oil consumption .
In addition , 50 % of natural gas exports from Russia accounts for 25 % of the EU 's total natural gas consumption .
I hope that on 18 May when the EU-Russia summit will take place , these issues will be highlighted and addressed .
( NL ) Mr President , I have voted against the Rocard report , a document that proves once again that the European Union lacks the willingness to face the reality of the Arab world .
Whether we like it or not , the fact is that in the Arab world , there is not the slightest bit of interest in political reforms , and even less so in the cultural or intercultural dialogue that is so glorified over here .
The Rocard report should have been one great indictment of the dreadful state of the rule of law , the free expression of opinion and the freedom of religion in the Arab countries .
Instead , this House and this report have taken the so-called cultural definition of human rights to a new level .
Moreover , the fact that the European mandarins could not care less about the situation of religious minorities in Islamic countries is something we also recognise , on repeated occasions , in the European Union 's attitude towards Turkey .
Despite the hate campaigns against Christians waged by Turkish imams and those paid by the Turkish state , with all the fatal consequences that this entails , the accession process is quietly being kept on track .
It is this spineless appeasement policy against the aggressive effects of Islam that my party will continue to fight .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , during the debate and the vote , we witnessed a conflict over an amendment that we tabled , which we are very pleased was adopted .
The report makes it clear that we are seeking a commitment to religious freedom , or to the right of individuals and communities freely to profess their beliefs and to practise their faith , and the amendment stipulated ' also guaranteeing the independence and separation of institutions and political power from the religious authorities ' .
I was in agreement with the oral amendment by Mrs de Keyser making it clear that this holds good for all democracies .
I regret the fact that there was an objection to the vote , but I do not believe that this changes the nature of the amendment .
In fact , when we talk about the Arab world we are not just talking about Arab States , Arab nations or mere institutions , but about peoples and , as a result , about Arab citizens living in the European Union .
When we talk about the separation of institutions and political power from religious authorities , we are also talking about ourselves , because the problem obviously exists , in a very specific form and nature , not only in Mecca but also in Rome .
If we tackle the issue of secularity in those countries , it also means tackling it in our own countries .
I would like to conclude by expressing my satisfaction also concerning the adoption of the oral amendment on the ' democratic Palestinian State ' , because , otherwise , the national State is at risk of not being a frontier of freedom , as we wish it to be .
in writing . - ( FR ) The report by Mr Rocard on reforms in the Arab world has just been adopted by a large majority , and I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on the quality and balanced approach of his work .
This report proposes an innovative EU strategy in relation to the Arab world , based on a balanced partnership , with the aim of encouraging fundamental reforms that will involve changes in the law and the crucial involvement of civil society .
The report also has the virtue of pointing out the accommodating approach from which some regimes in this region of the world have benefited .
At the same time , it acknowledges the efforts to establish dialogue via the regional integration mechanisms , such as the Barcelona process .
Finally , the report places particular emphasis on the need for these States to insist upon the values of tolerance , respect for human rights and democratic principles if they are to guarantee their stability and prosperity .
It also highlights the close link that exists between the rise in extremist movements in the political landscape and the economic and social reality prevailing in these States .
Being in favour of this new realistic and balanced approach , I supported the adoption of this report during the final vote in plenary .
in writing . ( SV ) The European Parliament has today adopted a position on what the EU should do to bring about reforms in the Arab world .
We are strongly opposed to this because this type of issue needs to be resolved through the UN .
Amendment 20 by the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe proposes that the EU should not support ' fundamentalist and extremist nationalist ' movements .
That is obvious , but the EU should not engage in foreign policy at all by supporting movements in other parts of the world .
We have therefore voted against the amendment .
In Amendment 21 , the ALDE Group wants , furthermore , to get the Arab countries to guarantee ' the independence and separation of institutions and political power from the religious authorities ' .
As an institution , the EU must definitely not have views on another country 's system .
Because we do not consider that this is an issue for the EU , we have voted against the report as a whole in today 's vote .
I agree with the general thrust of the Rapporteur 's stance on this issue .
It is imperative that peace is brought to the Middle East , and the European Union is well placed to influence that process .
On this issue and this report I feel entitled to emphasise an idea that I have put forward on several occasions .
With the aim of promoting peace , prosperity , democracy and human rights in our neighbouring countries , on account of both the EU 's direct interests and universal values , I advocate a European project that is based on partnership with our Mediterranean neighbours , a partnership that ideally would create , in the medium term , an area of free movement in the Mediterranean as close as possible to the EU model to which surrounding countries meeting the criteria of democracy , a market economy and respect for human rights - that is to say , the core of the Copenhagen criteria - can adhere .
It would be a strongly enhanced partnership in return for reforms .
It would also have the incidental and subsidiary virtue of being a solution that , if the conclusion were drawn that the accession process had hit insurmountable obstacles , might also involve Turkey , assuming that Morocco , Israel and Tunisia were interested .
To have prosperous and democratic neighbours , attracted by the prospect of benefits and with populations that would not need to emigrate at all costs , would be a constructive European project , albeit nothing new .
During the vote on the Rocard report on reforms in the Arab world , we had to express an opinion on Amendment 21 , which calls on those Arab countries that have not yet done so to commit themselves more fully to religious freedom or to the right of individuals and communities freely to profess their beliefs and practise their faith , also guaranteeing the independence and separation of institutions and political power from the religious authorities .
An oral amendment was then tabled , the aim of which was to extend this fundamental rule to all democracies - something that I fully support .
Members of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats took a stand against this extension .
I took the view that I fully supported the content of the original text of Amendment 21 .
I therefore decided to vote in favour of this amendment , and I am delighted that it should have been accepted by 382 votes , with 222 votes against and 33 abstentions .
I voted in favour of the Kaczmarek report on the Horn of Africa : EU political regional partnership for peace , security and development , because I feel it is vital to consolidate the EU 's presence in a region that has been devastated by three major conflicts - in Sudan , Ethiopia / Eritrea and Somalia - and in which a significant proportion of the population , over 22 % , lives below the poverty line .
The partnership for peace , security and development will only succeed if a regional strategic approach is adopted , one that seeks the involvement of existing regional organisations such as the African Union , the Intergovernmental Authority on Development , along with other international partners under the scope of the UN .
Furthermore , the international community needs to support the region to increase its chances of adapting to the serious repercussions of climate change .
After all , whereas Africa is the continent that contributes least to greenhouse gas emissions , it is the continent that suffers most from global warming due to its underdevelopment and poverty .
We feel that the principles that should guide the approach to the complex situation in the Horn of Africa region should be strict compliance with international law and the United Nations Charter , peaceful conflict resolution and détente .
Any genuine solution to the problems facing the peoples and countries of the region should not form part of , nor promote , however indirectly , the imperialist agenda in the region .
Imperialism of this kind reinforces the mechanisms of interventionism and militarism , as evidenced by the recent creation of a single US military command for Africa and the installation on the continent of new military bases .
Rather than interventionism , external interference in attempts at conflict resolution and the militarisation of the continent , and in particular this region , the time has come to promote diplomatic efforts - which are far from being exhausted , witness the recent peace agreement signed between Sudan and Chad - to resolve problems that lie at the root of the current serious situation , not least the unjust distribution of access to the rich natural resources in the region .
Urgent humanitarian aid , genuine cooperation policies and development aid are also needed .
in writing .
( PL ) Mr President , I support Mr Kaczmarek 's report on the European Union 's strategy for Africa , which aims to create a regional political partnership with the European Union to foster peace , security and development in the Horn of Africa .
The rapporteur has accurately highlighted the need for solutions to stabilise the Horn of Africa , which has been torn apart by conflict .
Five out of seven of the countries in this region are at war with their neighbours .
The proposal , put forward by the rapporteur , to appoint an EU special representative to the Horn of Africa , is worthy of our support .
The representative would coordinate European Union initiatives in this region .
Another worthy initiative is addressed to the Council and the Commission , calling on them to begin consultations with other partners involved in the region , with the aim of organising a joint conference on security in all the countries in the Horn of Africa .
Mr Filip Kaczmarek stresses that focusing and coordinating initiatives , as well as cooperation in this region , could help to solve problems such as illegal refugees , border security , food security and the environment , control of the arms trade , education and infrastructure , as well as initiating a political dialogue between the countries in the Horn of Africa .
We voted for the Kaczmarek report on the Horn of Africa , which adopted four of our amendments designed to place in context the tragedy of Somalia .
While the report as a whole expresses great hopes for a political partnership between the European Union and the Horn of Africa , we wanted to stress that it is necessary to convene a global conference that is focused not only on security , but also on peace and development , tackling these issues with all the countries in the Horn of Africa .
We wanted to emphasise the fact that women and children are the ones who suffer the most during conflicts because they are the most vulnerable groups in the population , and therefore we added to the text an important reference to the United Nations resolution on women in conflicts .
We also added the statement that , in order to eradicate poverty and to promote economic development , a resolute battle must also be waged against the dreadful practice of female genital mutilation .
Finally , we tabled amendments on the importance of the principle of self-determination of the Somali people and Somaliland , the only democratic entity in the country , riven by rivalry between clans and the infiltration attempt by the Islamic courts , whose only goal is to undermine the peace efforts in the country .
( LT ) The EURATOM organisation , unlike the European Coal and Steel Community , does not foresee an end to its activities .
Even if it has not implemented all of its planned tasks or has not undertaken all of its planned activities concerning atomic energy , these tasks have been successfully accomplished by working together with other international institutions concerned with atomic energy .
The present situation in the EU and world energy markets and the effects of climatic change from using fossil fuel and organic fuel make the EURATOM organisation even more relevant .
Fifteen EU Member States have atomic energy plants , and atomic energy production is increasing in other countries of the world .
The alleged lack of safety of atomic energy is just a political issue , given the present safety control mechanisms .
The EURATOM organisation has to remain independent , which can be achieved by giving it the additional legal basis it requires .
I have voted against the convening of an Intergovernmental Conference , as it is likely to be unproductive .
As the discussions on atomic energy have shown , there is no need to increase Parliament 's powers just yet .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to say how very pleased I am with the decision this House has taken today , by which it has unmistakeably confirmed that there has been for the past 50 years a democratic deficit in the Euratom Treaty and , by a large majority , demanded the power of codecision in matters relating to it .
It really is high time that the Member States were not left alone to handle safety issues , because safety and the protection of health are matters of concern to Europe as a whole , and that is why the delegation has decided to endorse these demands .
I have abstained on this report .
While I do not want the closure of existing nuclear plants , I am not in favour of their massive expansion , with all the problems that poses for health and the environment .
It may be that the emission of CO2 and other greenhouse gases is limited but the hazards posed by radioactive release were all too graphically demonstrated by Chernobyl and the nuclear disaster in the Urals so graphically described by Roy Medvedev .
I also object to the undemocratic nature of Euratom decisions and the waste of resources in the boondoggle that is the ITER project .
I supported its location in Japan rather than France as then the Japanese would have wasted their money rather than the EU wasting ours !
Nuclear energy is a special form of energy .
It has military and strategic implications , is subject to serious constraints in terms of the environment and the security of facilities and populations and possesses a political , real and even ' emotional ' dimension .
On its own it cannot meet the energy challenges or the perceived challenges in terms of climate change that are currently facing the EU Member States , but it remains inescapable in many respects .
The Euratom Treaty now makes it possible to have some freedom of choice : those States that wish to can develop this sector and this technology , in which Europe is the leader .
Those States that do not wish to cannot be forced to provide themselves with a nuclear sector .
Furthermore , the Treaty permits the existence of a framework of cooperation for the various parties on subjects of common interest .
It is because this framework , as it operates today , seems satisfactory to us that we voted against this report .
The report recommends , in fact , that Euratom be transformed into a specialised annex to the EEC Treaty , with institutional procedures that would deprive the Member States of their freedom of choice .
Furthermore , this move would be under the influence of a Brussels-controlled energy policy , of which we deny not just the relevance , but also the legitimacy .
Energy policy must be the responsibility of the Member States , and of them alone .
in writing .
( PT ) Nuclear energy has been referred to as one of the energy sources that produces least carbon . Nuclear fission , moreover , is viewed as one of the better ways of addressing ' climate change ' , with saving and efficiency relegated to secondary importance .
We feel , however , that energy saving , energy efficiency and renewable energy sources should be at the forefront of any energy policy .
In this field we should be promoting and carrying out more public research with the aim of achieving genuinely alternative energy that responds to the people 's needs and to the demands of a sustainable development policy for our society .
The increasing liberalisation of the energy sector promoted in the EU , pandering to the interests of the large multinationals , undermines people 's right to secure energy at affordable prices .
Given the importance of this sector to the development of any country , we argue that it should be kept in the public sector and are thus opposed to its privatisation .
In addition , we are concerned about the report 's approach of promoting nuclear energy , given that the dangers associated with producing this form of energy - dangers , that is , to the environment and to the people , dangers to the safety of the plant itself and the reactors , and the dangers involved in the processing and transport of radioactive waste - are well known .
There are some salient ideas in the report .
For example , it notes that ' nuclear energy currently provides the European Union with 32 % of its electricity and that the Commission considered it ( ... ) to be one of the main CO2-free sources of energy in Europe and the third-cheapest in Europe . ' It then draws the conclusion that ' the EU , in line with the Euratom Treaty , should defend its industrial and technical leadership in the light of the vigorous revival by other actors of their nuclear activities ( Russia , USA ) and the emergence of new world actors on the nuclear stage ( China and India ) which will be the European Union 's competitors in the medium term . '
I understand and acknowledge that this is an option with well-documented problems , one that arouses negative reactions , but I feel that nuclear energy should not be ruled out when it comes to the future of energy supply , due to the costs involved , the environmental impact and technological solutions involving the fewest risks .
In my opinion , it is in diversity and technological innovation that we must find the response to the current energy challenges and issues associated with them .
in writing . ( SV ) Because the European Union is also a union of values that should safeguard the human rights of every individual within it , we have chosen to vote in favour of the present report .
We believe that , in this way , we have struck a reasonable balance between indicating the ethical policy we think a Member State needs to pursue and respecting the Member States ' sovereignty .
We believe , then , that Denmark has a duty to accept medical responsibility for those who , on the orders of the Danish state , performed work through which they may have been injured by radiation in connection with the Thule accident in 1968 .
( MT ) Thank you , Mr President .
I wanted to talk about regional and housing policy .
The Treaty does not give the European Union specific powers on housing .
However , European Regional Development Fund regulations for 2007-2013 do provide for houses to be eligible for funds in certain cases .
The pattern of votes was important for four reasons .
The first is the social dimension , involving recognition of the problem , which exists in my own country , of a lack of decent housing at reasonable prices .
Then there is the environmental aspect , which includes the strategic development of houses in cities rather than the kind of move that recently took place in Malta , with the extension of the development zones .
The environmental dimension also includes energy security and reasonable water and electricity prices .
This is also in contrast to what happens in Malta , where the prices are sky-high .
The fourth dimension is integration , that is to say an integrated process aimed at improving the quality of life , in contrast to what is currently happening in Malta in the village of Marsaskala , where they are building a recycling plant . Thank you .
in writing . ( SV ) We voted in favour of the report on housing and regional policy .
The report does well to highlight the role of housing policy in strengthening social and territorial cohesion .
Housing policy is an important tool for the Member States to use in combating segregation , and the right to a place to live is fundamental .
We believe that housing policy is an important part of the Member States ' welfare policies .
In Sweden , the public housing sector is a socially motivated form of business activity , and Swedish legislation on rented housing is designed to provide social protection .
The EU should regard the Member States ' housing policies as integral to their welfare policies and so exempt such policies from competition rules governing state aid .
We believe too that the EU 's definition of social housing should be broad enough also to include the Swedish model of housing for the benefit of everyone .
in writing . - ( FR ) The lack of decent affordable housing directly influences the lives of the citizens , restricting as it does their ability to integrate into society , as well as their choices in terms of education , training and professional development .
In my view , housing problems are not limited to construction- and land management-related issues proper .
They are also greatly influenced by poor urban planning , which results in some neighbourhoods that are affected by environmental damage - air and water pollution , noise , waste , congestion , etc . - and by problems when it comes to public services , accessibility and security becoming less and less attractive and sinking into impoverishment .
Faced with problems of poor housing , it is local authorities that are more often than not on the front line .
However , this power is still not sufficiently taken into account at European level .
The local and European levels must therefore begin to cooperate in practice .
As a French member of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , it is crucial to me that all Europeans have good access to social services , health care and training , as well as to trade and to public administration .
It is their right .
in writing . British Conservatives have abstained on the final vote on the Andria report .
We support many of the aims of this report and , in particular , we approve the sharing of best practice in construction and technology of housing as a way to encourage energy efficiency .
However , we are insistent that housing and housing policy be subject to the principle of subsidiarity and that therefore such issues are , and must remain , an exclusive competence of the nation states .
We welcome the inclusion of our proposals , which highlight the importance of social housing and which attach priority to resolving the ' homeless ' problem in the housing policies of the Member States .
Investment in social housing plays a crucial role in making housing available to many who would not otherwise have access to the property market , people who normally see their path to housing blocked .
Social housing is a way of combating property speculation , of ensuring the construction of social facilities and of promoting sustainable urban planning .
In this context , support from the Structural Funds and regional policy could prove significant .
We therefore register our disappointment that our proposal to support housing cooperatives was not included .
The model laid down in the report regrettably continues to be that of promoting public-private partnerships to the detriment of the cooperative sector .
That being said , the prioritisation of the ' homeless ' issue in housing policy is vital in guaranteeing decent housing for all , and in combating effectively this growing form of social exclusion .
As regards the idea of establishing European level quality indicators defining the notion of ' adequate housing ' , we need to ' aim high ' .
I take a positive view of the fact that the European Parliament is interested in this major issue of housing in the European Union .
This is a first step , but one that is far from addressing the main issue : guaranteeing the right to housing to all those who live in the European Union .
This right needed to be confirmed in the Charter of Fundamental Rights which , today , makes it possible at least for the Member States to give aid to the very poor .
This is a restrictive view of the right to housing - a right that ought to become universal and effective for all .
What is more , the principle of having widespread competition in the single market has harmful effects on the completion of social housing , which is crucial in all of our countries .
I am particularly worried about the fact that the collection of the Livret A - a system that guarantees ongoing funding for low-cost housing - in France is being called into question .
I therefore believe that this report calls for a new stage and that we need to go further in terms of ensuring that housing policies cater for specific circumstances .
This report addresses the key question of housing .
While the EU 's competencies in this sphere are not extensive , it should intervene wherever possible , such as through the ERDF , to ensure that decent housing is provided .
in writing . ( SV ) We in the European Parliament have today voted on a report describing the need for decent housing to be available to everyone in return for reasonable rents .
For me as a Liberal , it is of course very important that people should have a roof over their heads , but this is an issue that should be dealt with locally or regionally rather than at EU level .
That is why I abstained from voting today .
If we want to make the quality of life in Europe really sustainable , ( social ) housing is an important lever in this .
The Andria report on housing policy and regional policy is right to set the subject against the backdrop of the European Social Model , of energy policy , employment , urban development and the internal market .
All these areas overlap , albeit with the friction that this inevitably entails .
After all , poor housing and poverty go hand in hand , and poverty is still on the increase .
The housing market has been undergoing major changes in recent years , due to supply and demand , but also due to social and demographic changes in our society .
The lack of social housing is massive , even though accommodation is not only a fundamental right but also a fundamental aspect of regional development , both urban and rural .
The report makes explicit reference to the social component of housing , the energy poverty that often goes hand in hand with it , and employment that can generate sound , environmentally-friendly houses .
It also deals with the need for an integrated approach and support of local governments in more depth .
Although housing is , and will always be , a national issue , the pre-conditions could be guaranteed at European level .
This is what this report is aiming at and that is why it receives my full support .
The Andria report is important to place the subject of housing on the European political agenda .
With more and more people finding themselves excluded from the housing market , we must do all that we can to find solutions to the housing shortage .
That is why learning from each other across the 27 Member States , sharing best practice and finding common solutions can help us tackle the growing problem .
The issue of region